Appletons' Cyclopaedia of American Biography, Vol. 4 (James Grant Wilson and John Fiske, 1888)
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/appletonscyclo04wilsrich): the 1888 New York (D. Appleton) first edition, vol. 4 of 6 (Lodge–Pickens), ed. Wilson & Fiske — complete through END OF VOLUME IV.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

APPLETONS'

CYCLOPEDIA  OF  AMERICAN  BIOGRAPHY


VOL.  IV.
LODGE-PICKENS


APPLETONS'


CYCLOPAEDIA  OF  AMERICAN
BIOGRAPHY


EDITED BY

JAMES GRANT WILSON

AND

JOHN FISKE


As  it  is  the  commendation  of  a  good  huntsman  to  find  game  in  a  wide  wood,
so  it  is  no  imputation  if  he  hath  not  caught  all.  PLATO.


VOLUME  IV.
LODGE-PICKENS


NEW YORK
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

1,  3  AXD  5  BOND  STREET

1888


COPYRIGHT,  1888,
BY  D.  APPLETON  AND  COMPANY.


LONGFELLOW,  HENRY  WADSWORTH
MCCLELLAN,  GEORGE  BRINTON
MACDONALD,  JOHN  ALEXANDER
MADISON,  JAMES
MARSHALL,  JOHN
MONROE,  JAMES
MORSE,  SAMUEL  F.  B.
PEABODY,  GEORGE
PEDRO  II.,  DOM
PEXN.  WILLIAM


ARTIST

Warren

ENGRAVER

Hollyer

PAGE

Frontispiece

Brady

Girsch

Face  79

Not  man

Hollyer

102

Stuart

Hall

165

Inman

Jackman

222

Vanderlyn

Hall

358

Sarony

Hall

424

Gurney

Knight

688

Bogardus

Hall

698

Kneller

Hall

712

470353


SOME  OF  THE  CHIEF  COXTKIBUTOKS
TO  APPLETOXS' CYCLOPAEDIA  OF  AMERICAN BIOGRAPHY.


Adams,  Charles  Kendall.

President  of  Cornell  University.
Agassiz,  Alexander,
Author  and  Professor.

Allan,  Col.  William,

Aide-de-Camp  to  ••  Stonewall  "  Jackson.
Allibone,  S.  Austin,

Author  ;l  Dictionary  of  Authors."

Amory,  Thomas  C.,

Author  "  Life  of  General  Sullivan,'1  etc.

Bancroft,  George,

Author  "  History  of  the  United  States.'

Bayard,  Thomas  F.,

Secretary  of  State.
Beehler,  William  H.,

Lieutenant  U.  S.  Navy.

Bigelow,  John,

Author  "  Life  of  Franklin,''  etc.

Boker,  George  H.,

Poet,  late  Minister  to  Russia.
Bradley,  Joseph  P.,

Justice  United  States  Supreme  Court.
Brooks,  Phillips,

Author  "Sermons  in  English  Churches."
Browne,  Junius  Henri,

Author  and  Journalist.
Carter,  Franklin,

President  of  Williams  College.

Chandler,  William  E.,

Ex-Secretary  of  the  Navy.

Clarke,  James  Freeman,

Author  "Ten  Great  Religions."  etc.
Cooper,  Miss  Susan  Fenimora,
Author  ••  Rural  Hours,"  etc.

Conway,  Moncure  D.,
Miscellaneous  Writer.

Coppee,  Henry,

Professor  in  Lehigh  University.  Pa.

Coxe,  Arthur  Cleveland,

P.  E.  Bishop  of  Western  New  York.
Courtenay,  William  A.,
Mayor  of  Charleston,  S.  C.

Cullum,  Gen.  George  W.,  U.  S.  A.,

Author  "  Register  of  West  Point  Graduates,"  e(c.
Curtis,  George  Ticknor,

Author  "  Life  of  James  Buchanan."  etc.
Curtis,  George  William,

Author  and  Editor.
Ouster,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  B.,

Author  "  Tenting  on  the  Plains."
Daniel,  John  W.,

United  States  Senator  from  Virginia.
De  Lancey,  Edward  F.,

Ex-President  Genealogical  and  Biographical  Society.

Didier,  Eugene  L.,

Author  "  Life  of  Edgar  Allan  Poe."


Dix,  Morgan,

Rector  of  Trinity  Church,  New  York.
Doane,  William  C.,

P.  E.  Bishop  of  Albany.

Drake,  Samuel  Adams,

Author  ''Historic  Personages  of  Boston,"  etc.

Draper,  Lyman  C.,

Secretary  of  Wisconsin  Historical  Society.
Dupont,  Col.  Henry  A.,

Of  Delaware,  late  U.  S.  Army.

Eggleston,  George  Gary,

Editor  New  York  ••  Commercial  Advertiser."

Fiske,  John,

Author  and  Professor.

Frothingham,  Octavius  B.,

Author  "  Life  of  George  Ripley."

Gayarre,  Charles  E.  A.,

Author  "  Histor}-  of  Louisiana."
Gerry,  Elbridge  T.,

Member  of  New  York  Bar.

Gilman,  Daniel  C.,

President  of  Johns  Hopkins  University.

Gilmore,  James  B.,

Author  "  Rear-Guard  of  the  Revolution,"  etc.

Gleig,  George  Robert,

Ex-C'haplain-General  British  Army.

Goodwin,  Daniel,

Member  of  Illinois  Bar.

Greely,  Gen.  Adolphus  W.,  U.  S.  A.,

Author  "  Three  Years  of  Arctic  Sen-ice."

Green,  William  Mercer,

Late  P.  E.  Bishop  of  Mississippi.

Greene,  Capt.  Francis  Vinton,
United  States  Engineer  Corps.

Hale,  Edward  Everett,

Author  "  Franklin  in  France,"  etc.

Hart,  Charles  Henry,

Member  Pennsylvania  Bar.

Hay,  Col.  John,

Author  "Life  of  Lincoln."  etc.
Henry,  William  Wirt,

Of  the  Virginia  Historical  Society.

Higginson,  Col.  Thomas  W.,

Author  "  History  of  the  United  States,"  etc.
Hilliard,  Henry  W..

Late  Minister  to  Brazil.
Holmes,  Dr.  Oliver  Wendell,

Author  and  Poet.
Hoppin,  Prof.  James  M..

Of  Yale  College.

Howe,  Mrs.  Julia  Ward,

Author  "  Later  Lyrics."  etc.
Huntington,  William  R.,

Rector  of  Grace  Church,  New  York.

Jay,  John,

Late  Minister  to  Austria.


Vlll


SOME  OP  THE  CHIEF  CONTRIBUTORS.


Johnson,  Gen.  Bradley  T.,

Member  of  Maryland  Bar.
Johnson,  Rossiter,

Author  "  History  of  the  War  of  1812,"  etc.
Johnston,  William  Preston,

President  of  Tulane  University.

Jones,  Horatio  Gates,

Vice-President  of  Pennsylvania  Historical  Society.

Jones,  John  William,

Secretary  of  Southern  Historical  Society.

Jones,  William  Alfred,

Author  ''  Character  and  Criticism,"  etc.
Lathrop,  George  Parsons,

Author  "  A  Study  of  Hawthorne,"  etc.
Latrobe,  John  H.  B.,

Member  of  Maryland  Bar.

Leach,  Col.  J.  Granville,

Member  of  the  Philadelphia  Bar.
Lincoln,  Robert  T.,

Ex-Secretary  of  War.
Lodge,  Henry  Cabot,

Author  "Life  of  Hamilton."

Long,  Col.  Charles  Chaille,

Late  of  the  Egyptian  Army.

Lowell,  James  Russell,

Late  Minister  at  Court  of  St.  James.
MacVeagh,  Wayne,

Ex-Attorney-General,  U.  S.
Mathews,  William,

Author  "  Orators  and  Oratory,"  etc.
McMaster,  John  Bach,

Author  "  History  of  the  People  of  the  United  States."

Mitchell,  Donald  G.,

Author  "  Reveries  of  a  Bachelor,"  etc.

Norton,  Charles  Eliot,

Professor  in  Harvard  University.
O'Connor,  Joseph,

Editor  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  "Post-Express."

O'Neal,  Edward  A.,

Governor  of  Alabama.

Parker,  Cortlandt,

Member  of  New  Jersey  Bar.

Parkman,  Francis,

Author  "  Frontenac,"  "  French  in  Canada,"  etc.
Parton,  James,

Miscellaneous  Writer.
Phelan,  James,  M.  C.,

Editor  Memphis,  Tenn.,  "  Avalanche."

Phelps,  William  Walter,

Member  of  Congress  from  New  Jersey.

Pierrepont,  Edwards,

Ex-Attorney-General  United  States.

Porter,  David  D.,

Admiral  United  States  Navy.

Porter,  Gen.  Horace,

Late  of  Gen.  Grant's  Staff.

Preston,  Mrs.  Margaret  J.,

Author  and  Poet.


Puron,  Dr.  Juan  G.,

Spanish  Author  and  Editor.

Read,  Gen.  J.  Meredith,

Late  Minister  to  Greece.

Reid,  Whitelaw,

Editor  New  York  "  Tribune."
Ricord,  Judge  Frederick  W.,

New  Jersey  Historical  Society.
Robinson,  Ezekiel  G.,

President  of  Brown  University.

Romero,  Mattias,

Mexican  Minister  to  the  United  States.

Scharf,  Col.  J.  Thomas,

Of  the  Confederate  Army.

Schurz,  Carl,

Ex-Secretary  of  the  Interior.

Sherman,  William  T.,

Late  General  of  United  States  Army.
Smith,  Charles  Emory,

Editor  Philadelphia  "  Press."
Spencer,  Jesse  Ames,

Author  and  Professor.

Stedman,  Edmund  C.,

Author  "  Poets  of  America,"  etc.
Stiles,  Henry  R.,  M.  D.,

Author  "  History  of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y."
Stoddard,  Richard  Henry,

Author  "Songs  of  Summer,"  etc.

Stone,  William  L.,

Author  "  Life  of  Red  Jacket,"  etc.
Strong,  William,

Ex -Justice  United  States  Supreme  Court.
Stryker,  William  S.,

Adjutant-General  of  New  Jersey.
Tenner,  William  Christian,

Graduate  of  the  University  of  Paris.
Tucker,  J.  Randolph,

Member  of  Congress  from  Virginia.
Waite,  Morrison  R.,

Chief  Justice  United  States  Supreme  Court.

Warner,  Charles  Dudley,

Author  and  Editor.

Washburne,  Elihu  B.,

Late  Minister  to  France.

Welling,  James  C.,

President  of  Columbian  University.
Whittier,  John  Greenleaf,
Author  and  Poet.

Wilson,  Gen.  Jas.  Grant,

President  Genealogical  and  Bi' graphical  Society.
Winter,  William,

Poet  and  Theatrical  Critic.
Winthrop,  Robert  C.,

Ex-United  States  Senator.

Wright,  Gen.  Marcus  J.,

Of  the  Confederate  Army.

Young,  John  Russell,

Miscellaneous  Writer.


To  this  list  other  names  will  be  added  as  the  work  progresses.


Among  the  Contributors  to  the  fourth  volume  of  "Appleton?  Cyclopaedia  of  American  Biogra
phy  "are  the  following :


Richard  Meade  Bache.
MEADE,  GEORGE  GORDON,  AND  FAMILY.

Henry  Carey  Baird.
MERCHANT,  CHARLES  SPENCER,
MULLANY,  JAMES  ROBERT  MADISON.

Prof.  William  M.  Baskervill.

LONGSTREET,  AUGUSTUS  BALDWIN,

McFERRiN,  JOHN  BERRY.

Lieut.  William  H.  Beehler,  U.  S.  N.
ARTICLES  ON  U.  S.  NAVAL  OFFICERS.

Prof.  Henry  Augustin  Beers.
MITCHELL,  DONALD  GRANT.

Marcus  Benjamin,  F.  C.  S.
MORSE,  SAMUEL  F.  B.,
PENN,  WILLIAM.

Samuel  G.  W.  Benjamin,  M.  A.
ARTICLES  ON  PAINTERS  AND  SCULPTORS.

Arthur  Elmore  Bostwick,  Ph.  D.

MINUIT,  PETER,
PEMBERTON,  JOHN  CLIFFORD.

Joseph  P.  Bradley,  LL.  D.
MARSHALL,  JOHN.

Junius  Henri  Browne.
PERKINS,  JAMES  HANDASYD.

Rev.  James  Buckley,  D.  D.
ARTICLES  ON  BISHOPS  OF  THE  METHODIST  EPISCO
PAL  CHURCH.

Mrs.  Isa  Carrington  Cabell.
MANN.  HORACE.
THE  NELSON  FAMILY  OF  VIRGINIA.

Prof.  Henry  Coppee,  LL.  D.
McC'LELLAN,  GEORGE  BRINTON,  AND  FAMILY.

Edward  Floyd  De  Lancey.
THE  NICOLL  FAMILY  OF  LONG  ISLAND,
NICOLLS,  SIR  RICHARD.

Eugene  Lemoine  Didier.
MAGRUDER,  JOHN  BANKHEAD,
NEAL,  JOHN.

William  Henry  Egle,  M.  D.
MONTGOMERY,  JOHN,
NEAD,  BENJAMIN  MATTHIAS.

Prof.  John  Fiske.
MADISON,  JAMES,
MARION,  FRANCIS,
OTIS,  JAMES,  AND  FAMILY.

Rev.  Octavius  Brooks  Frothingham.
PARKER,  THEODORE.


Elbridge  Thomas  Gerry.
NOYES,  WILLIAM  CURTIS.

Daniel  Coit  Oilman,  LL.  D.
MONROE,  JAMES.

James  Roberts  Gilmore.
MCGILLIVRAY,  ALEXANDER,
OVERTON,  JOHN.

Rev.  George  Robert  Gleig.
PAKENHAM,  SIR  EDWARD  MICHAEL.

Rt.  Rev.  William  Mercer  Green,  D.  D.
OTEY,  JAMES  HERVEY.

Capt.  Francis  Vinton  Greene.

McPHERSON,  JA31ES  BlRDSEYE.

Rev.  William  Elliot  Griffis,  D.  D.
PERRY,  MATTHEW  CALBRAITH,
PERRY,  OLIVER  HAZARD.

Reuben  Aldridge  Guild,  LL.  D.
MANNING,  JAMES.

George  J.  Hagar.
PALMER,  RAY,
PEABODY,  ANDREW  PRESTON.

Jacob  Henry  Hager.
LOGAN,  JOHN  ALEXANDER,
THE  MASON  AND  MORRIS  FAMILIES.

Charles  Henry  Hart.
MALBONE.  EDWARD  GREENE,
NEAGLE,  JOHN.

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes,  M.  D.
MOTLEY,  JOHN  LOTHROP.

Cecil  H.  C.  Howard.

PENHALLOW,  SAMUEL,
PHELPS,  JOHN  WOLCOTT.

Frank  Huntington.
LYON,  NATHANIEL,
MOTT,  VALENTINE.

Abram  S.  Isaacs,  Ph.  D.
ARTICLES  ON  HEBREW  CLERGYMEN.

Gen.  Bradley  T.  Johnson.
LONGSTREET.  JAMES,
MURDOCH,  WILLIAM.

Col.  William  Preston  Johnston.
MARMADUKE,  JOHN  SAPPINGTON,
MAXEY,  SAMUEL  BELL.

Horatio  Gates  Jones,  D.  C.  L.
MORGAN,  ABEL.  AND  FAMILY,
OWEN,  GORONWY.


CONTRIBUTORS  TO  THE  FOURTH  VOLUME.


William  Alfred  Jones.
MATHEWS,  CORNELIUS.

Charles  Penrose  Keith.
PALMER,  ANTHONY,
ARTICLES  ON  THE  PENN  FAMILY.

Rev.  James  Ryland  Kendrick,  D.  D.
ARTICLES  ON  BAPTIST  CLERGYMEN.

Rufus  King.
ARTICLES  ON  THE  ODELL  FAMILY.

Samuel  Archer  King.
ARTICLES  ON  AERONAUTS.

Charles  Lanman.
PERINCHIEF,  OCTAVIUS.

Col.  Josiah  Granville  Leach.
ARTICLES  ON  NOTED  PENNSYLVANIANS.

Col.  Charles  Chaille-Long.
LORING,  WILLIAM  WING,
MOTT,  THADDEUS  PHELPS.

Neil  Macdonald.
ARTICLES  ON  CANADIAN  STATESMEN.

Gabriel  Edward  Manigault,  M.  D.
ARTICLES  ON  THE  MANIGAULT  FAMILY.

Frederick  Gregory  Mather.
ARTICLES  ON  THE  MATHER  FAMILY.

William  Mathews,  LL.  D.
PAINE,  HENRY  W.

Prof.  Charles  Eliot  Norton.

LONGFELLOW,  HENRY  WADSWORTH,
NORTON,  JOHN.

Rev.  S.  E.  Ochsenford.
ARTICLES  ON  LUTHERAN  CLERGYMEN.

Joseph  O'Connor.
McC-LosKEY,  JOHN,
MOORE,  EDWARD  MOTT.

Mrs.  Jenny  Marsh  Parker.
MILLER,  WILLIAM.

Prof.  Francis  Parkman.
MONTCALM,  MARQUIS  DE.

Frederick  Eugene  Pond.
MCLELLAN,  ISAAC.

Rev.  Alfred  P.  Putnam,  D.  D.
ARTICLES  ON  THE  Low  FAMILY.

Whitelaw  Reid.
PHELPS,  WILLIAM  WALTER.


Eugene  Coleman  Savidge.
PAGE,  SAMUEL  DAVIS,
PANCOAST,  JOSEPH.

Col.  J.  Thomas  Scharf.
MALLORY,  STEPHEN  RUSSELL,
MAURY,  MATTHEW  FONTAINE.

Rt.  Rev.  Edmund  de  Schweinitz,  D.  D.
ARTICLES  ON  MORAVIAN  CLERGYMEN.

Miss  Esther  Singleton.

MlANTONOMO,

PAINE,  ROBERT  TREAT.

Prof.  T.  O'Conor  Sloane,  Ph.  D.
O'CoNOR,  CHARLES,
O'CONOR,  THOMAS.

Rev.  Jesse  Ames  Spencer,  D.  D.
ARTICLES  ON  CLERGYMEN  OF  THE  PROTESTANT
EPISCOPAL  CHURCH.

George  Stewart,  D.  C.  L.
MACDONALD,  SIR  JOHN  ALEXANDER,
MACNAB,  SIR  ALLAN  NAPIER,  BART.

William  Leete  Stone.
McCREA,  JANE.
MARKHAM,  JARED  CLARK.

William  Christian  Tenner.
MURAT,  NAPOLEON  ACHILLE,
PEDRO  II.

William  H.  Walter,  Mus.  D.
ARTICLES  ON  ORGANISTS.

Charles  Dudley  Warner.
LOWELL.  JAMES  RUSSELL.

John  William  Weidemeyer.
MACREADY,  WILLIAM  CHARLES,
PHILIP,  KING.

Frank  Weitenkampf.

ARTICLES  ON  ARTISTS  AND  MUSICIANS.

Everett  P.  Wheeler.
PEPPERRELL,  SIR  WILLIAM.

Gen.  Jas.  Grant  Wilson.
PAULDING,  JAMES  KIRKE,
PAYNE,  JOHN  HOWARD,
PEABODY,  GEORGE.

John  Laird  Wilson.
MORRIS,  ROBERT,
OGLETHORPE,  JAMES.

Gen.  Marcus  J.  Wright.
PEGRAM,  JOHN,
PENDER,  WILLIAM  DORSEY.

John  Russell  Young.
MACKAY,  JOHN  WILLIAM.


APPLETONS'

CYCLOPEDIA  OF  AMERICAN  BIOGRAPHY.


LODGE

LODGE,  Giles  Henry,  translator,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  13  March,  1805.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1825,  and  at  the  medical  school  in
1828,  and  has  passed  his  life  in  Boston,  Mass.  He
is  an  enthusiastic  student  of  the  Greek  language
and  art,  and  has  published  translations  of  Johann
Wincklemann's  "  History  of  Ancient  Art  among
the  Greeks  "  (4  vols.,  Boston,  1849-'73),  and  Baron
von  Steinberg's  "  Breughel  Brothers  "  (1854).  He
is  the  author  of  several  medical  essays,  and  has  in
manuscript  a  "  Dictionary  of  Aristophanes." — His
nephew.  Henry  Cabot,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  12  May,  1850,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1871,  and  at  "the  law-school  in  1874,  and  in  1875
was  given  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  for  his  thesis  on

the  "  Land  Law  of
Anglo-Saxons"  (Bos
ton,  1877).  He  was
university  lecturer
on  American  history
in  1876-'9,  edited  the
"  North  American
Review  "  in  1873-'6,
and  the  "  Interna
tional  Review "  in
1879-'81,  and  served
two  terms  in  the
Massachusetts  legis
lature  in  1880-'!.  He
was  a  delegate  to  the
Republican  national
conventions  of  1880
and  1884,  and  was

<ZS/  /* / ,  for  two  years  chair-

_/~~-y •  (.  CXitrz*-^- man  of  the  Republi
can  state  committee.

He  was  unsuccessful  as  a  candidate  for  congress  in
1884,  but  was  elected  in  1886.  Mr.  Lodge  has  been
^n  overseer  of  Harvard  since  1884,  and  is  a  mem
ber  of  various  scientific  and  historical  societies.
He  was  vice-president  of  the  commission  that  su
perintended  the  celebration  of  the  framing  of  the
\J.  S.  constitution,  in  1887.  He  has  published  "  Life
and  Letters  of  George  Cabot"  (Boston,  1877);
"Short  History  of  English  Colonies  in  America"
•(New  York,  1881);  lives  of  Alexander  Hamilton
(Boston,  1882)  and  Daniel  Webster  (1883)  in  the
"  American  Statesmen  "  series :  and  "  Studies  in
History  "  (1884).  He  has  edited  two  series  of  "  Pop
ular  Tales  "  and  a  volume  of  selected  "  Ballads  and
Lyrics"  (Boston,  1881),  and  "The  Works  of  Alex
ander  Hamilton,"  including  his  private  corre-
VOL.  iv. — 1


LOEWENTHAL

spondence  and  many  hitherto  unpublished  docu
ments,  with  an  introduction  and  notes  (9  vols.,
New  York,  1885).

LOEFLING,  Peter,  Spanish-American  botanist,
b.  in  Tollsforsbro,  Sweden,  31  Jan.,  1729 :  d.  in  the
mission  of  Amaracure,  South  America,  22  Feb.,  1756.
He  was  a  pupil  of  Linnaeus,  and,  when  the  Spanish
ambassador  requested  the  latter  to  select  a  botanist
for  service  in  the  American  colonies,  the  professor
at  once  named  Loefling,  who  left  Stockholm  in
1751.  He  remained  two  years  in  Spain,  and  then
embarked  with  other  scientists  for  South  America
in  February,  1754.  He  had  entire  charge  of  the
department  of  natural  history,  and  was  assisted
by  two  young  Spanish  doctors.  His  premature
death  was  considered  a  great  loss  to  natural  history,
and  especially  to  botany.  Linna?us  believed  the
loss  irreparable.  The  manuscripts  of  Loefling,
which  were  found  after  his  death,  were  preserved
by  his  two  assistants.  The  work  that  gives  an
account  of  his  scientific  labors  in  Spanish  America
is  entitled  "Iter  hispanicum  "  (Stockholm,  1758;
Swedish  translation  by  Linnams ;  German  transla
tion  by  Kolpin.  Berlin.  17(36;  English  translation
by  J.  G.  A.  Forster,  1771).  Linnaeus  gave  the
name  Loeflingia  to  a  plant  of  the  caryophillaceous
family,  one  species  of  which  grows  in  Spain  and
the  other  in  Spanish  America.

LOEWENSTERN,  Isidore,  Austrian  traveller,
b.  in  Vienna  in  1807 ;  d.  in  Constantinople,  6  May,
1856.  After  completing  his  studies  in  Germany,
he  travelled  extensively  in  the  United  States,
Mexico,  and  the  West  Indies,  and  on  his  return  to
Europe  published  "  Les  Etats-Unis  et  la  Ha  vane,
souvenirs  d'un  voyageur"  (Paris,  1842),  and  "Le
Mexique,  souvenirs  d'un  voyageur  "  (1843).

LOEWENTHAL,  Isidor,  missionary,  b.  in  Po-
sen,  Prussian  Poland,  in  1826 ;  d.  in  Peshawur.  In
dia.  27  April,  1864.  He  was  educated  in  the  Jewish
faith,  and.  after  completing  his  studies  in  the  gym
nasium  of  Posen,  entered  a  mercantile  establish
ment  as  a  clerk.  In  consequence  of  a  political
poem  that  he  published  he  was  compelled  to  flee
the  country.  He  arrived  in  New  York  in  the  au
tumn  of  1846,  and  attracted  the  attention  of  a
clergyman  in  Wilmington,  Del.,  through  whose
efforts  he  was  appointed  professor  of  German  in
Lafayette  college.  He  quickly  mastered  the  Eng
lish  language,  entered  the  senior  class  in  the  fol
lowing  year,  acting  at  the  same  time  as  tutor  of
French,  German,  and  Hebrew,  and  was  graduated
in  1848.  He  then  taught  for  four  years  at  Mount


LOGAN


LOGAN


Holly  collegiate  school,  N.  J.,  while  pursuing  philo
logical  studies,  which  he  afterward  continued  in
connection  with  theology  at  Princeton  seminary,
where  he  obtained  a  scholarship  in  1852.  After
graduation  in  1855  he  offered  his  services  to  the
Presbyterian  board  of  missions,  was  ordained  an
evangelist  in  New  York,  and  departed  for  India  in
August,  1856,  with  the  object  of  establishing  a  mis
sion  among  the  Afghans  of  the  Punjaub.  He  ac
quired  with  readiness  the  Pushtu  or  Afghan  lan
guage,  and  learned  to  preach  also  in  Persian,  Arabic,
and  Hindustani.  In  the  seven  years  of  his  mission
ary  life  at  Peshawur  he  published  a  translation  of
the  New  Testament  in  Pushtu,  and  nearly  com
pleted  a  dictionary  of  that  language.  He  contrib
uted  to  American  and  British  quarterlies,  collected
a  valuable  library  of  oriental  literature,  and  ac
quired  such  acquaintance  with  the  life  and  man
ners  and  the  religious  and  political  sentiments  of
the  peoples  of  northern  India  that  his  services  were
sometimes  solicited  by  the  Indian  government.  He
was  accidentally  slain,  in  his  garden  at  night,  by
an  attendant,  who  mistook  him  for  a  robber.

LOUAN,  Benjamin,  pioneer,  b.  in  Augusta
county,  Va.,  about  1752 ;  d.  in  Shelby  county,  Ky.,
11  Dec.,  1802.  He  was  the  son  of  Irish  parents
who  had  removed  to  Virginia  from  Pennsylvania.
His  father  died  intestate  when  the  son  was  fourteen
years  old,  and  left  the  family  to  his  care.  He  was
the  eldest  son,  and  by  the  laws  of  England,  which
were  then  in  force  in  Virginia,  was  heir  to  the
entire  estate ;  but  he  divided  it  with  his  mother,
brothers,  and  sisters.  He  then  went  westward,
purchased  and  cultivated  a  farm  on  Holston  river,
and  soon  afterward  married.  When  twenty-one
years  old  he  accompanied  Col.  Henry  Bouquet  as
sergeant  in  his  expedition  against  the  northern
Indians,  and  in  1774  he  served  in  the  Dunmore
war.  In  1775  he  joined  Daniel  Boone  and  others,
who  were  then  on  their  way  to  Kentucky.  When
they  were  near  their  destination,  Logan  separated
from  the  main  party  and  began  the  construction
of  the  stockade  that  was  known  afterward  as  Lo
gan's  Fort,  whither  in  1776  he  removed  his  family.
It  was  one  mile  east  of  Stanford,  Ky.,  and  its  site
is  styled  to-day  St.  Asaph's  Spring.  On  20  May,
1777,  Logan's  Fort  was  invested  by  Indians  in  am
bush,  and  at  the  morning's  milking  the  men  who
stood  guard  were  fired  upon,  and  one  killed  and
one  mortally  and  a  third  helplessly  wounded.
The  others  escaped  with  the  women  to  Fort  Harri
son.  The  third  wounded  man  was  rescued  by
Logan,  who  took  him  in  his  arms  and  bore  him
within  the  walls,  amidst  a  shower  of  bullets.  The
garrison  was  thirty-five — men,  women,  and  children
— and  the  defence  was  now  but  twelve  guns.  The
siege  lasted  for  weeks,  and  the  ammunition  ran
low.  Logan  selected  two  trusty  comrades,  crept
out  of  the  fort  at  nightfall,  leaving  but  nine
guns  to  defend  it,  and,  pursuing  unbeaten  paths
through  the  forest,  reached  Holston,  150  miles  dis
tant,  where  he  obtained  supplies.  At  last,  in
September,  a  re-enforcement  of  100  well  -  armed
mounted  men  raised  the  siege.  Afterward  Logan
repeatedly  led  his  men  in  pursuit  of  predatory
bands  of  savages  in  his  vicinity.  On  one  occasion
his  right  arm  was  broken  by  a  bullet,  and  he  barely
escaped  with  his  life.  Logan  was  second  in  com
mand  under  Col.  John  Bowman  of  an  expedition
against  the  Shawnees,  and  with  150  men  invested
the  town  of  Chillicothe  on  one  side,  while  Bow
man,  with  an  equal  number,  was  to  attack  the
opposite  side.  After  waiting  all  night  for  the
signal,  Logan's  party  assaulted  the  village  in  the
morning ;  but  at  this  moment,  when  victory  seemed


assured,  a  messenger  arrived  from  Col.  Bowman
with  orders  to  retreat.  Logan's  men  were  soon
found,  and  united  themselves  to  Bowman's  party,
who,  from  some  strange  panic  of  their  commander,
had  stood  all  night  near  the  spot  where  Logan  had
left  them.  By  great  exertions  some  degree  of
order  was  restored  and  the  retreat  begun.  The
Indians  surrounded  and  assailed  them  furiously  on
all  sides.  Logan  and  his  aides  formed  the  men  in
a  large  hollow  square,  and  after  several  combats
drove  off  the  savages.  A  part  of  Chillicothe,  with
much  property,  was  destroyed,  and  160  horses
brought  away.  The  next  important  affair  in
which  Gen.  Logan  engaged  was  to  lead  the  main
body  of  volunteer  re-enforcements  to  the  relief
of  Bryan's  station,  and  the  pursuit  of  the  savages
under  Simon  Girty.  The  haste  of  the  advanced
guard  in  not  waiting  for  Logan's  party  led  to  the
fatal  battle  of  the  Blue  Licks.  In  1788  Logan  led  a
force  of  600  men  against  the  northwestern  Indian
towns,  engaged  in  several  skirmishes,  and  destroyed
many  houses  and  large  fields  of  growing  crops.
For  the  remainder  of  his  life  he  quietly  pursued
his  favorite  occupation  of  farming  in  Shelby
county,  where  he  had  removed.  He  took  an  active
interest  in  public  affairs,  and  was  a  member  of  the
conventions  that  framed  the  first  constitution  of
1792  and  that  of  1799.  He  repeatedly  held  a  seat
in  the  legislature.  Logan  is  described  as  six  feet
two  or  three  inches  in  height,  powerfully  framed,
of  iron  nerves  and  will,  and  great  courage. — His
brother,  John,  for  years  his  comrade  and  friend,
was  a  leader  in  the  military  events  of  his  day,
several  times  a  legislator,  and  secretary  of  state
of  Kentucky. —  Benjamin's  eldest  son,  William,
jurist,  b.  in  Harrod's  Fort,  Ky.,  8  Dec.,  1776;  d.  in
Shelby  county,  Ky.,  8  Aug.,  1822,  was  probably  the
first  white  child  born  in  Kentucky.  Gen.  Logan  had
brought  out  his  wife  from  Logan's  Fort  but  a  few
months  before  the  birth  of  William,  and  placed  her
at  the  safer  station.  He  removed  with  his  father's
family  in  early  life  from  Lincoln  to  Shelby  county,
where  he  resided  until  his  death.  At  twenty-three
he  was  a  member  of  the  second  Constitutional  con
vention  of  1799.  He  was  educated  at  the  best  schools
of  the  country,  prepared  himself  by  a  course  of  study
for  the  practice  of  law,  and  rapidly  attained  emi
nence  in  the  profession.  He  was  a  legislator  from
Shelby  county,  and  twice  appointed  judge  of  the
appellate  court  of  Kentucky,  under  the  powers
conferred  on  the  governor  before  the  adoption  of
the  present  constitution  in  1849.  In  1820  he  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  but  resigned  before  his
term  expired  to  accept  a  nomination  for  governor,
in  which  contest  he  was  defeated  by  John  Adair.

LOGAN,  Cornelius  Ambrosius,  dramatist,  b.
in  Baltimore,  Md.,  4  May,  1806 ;  d.  on  Ohio  river
near  Wheeling,  Va.,  23  Feb.,  1853.  He  was  of  Irish
parentage,  and  was  educated  for  the  priesthood  at
St.  Mary's  college,  but  entered  a  shipping-house,
made  several  trips  to  Europe  as  supercargo,  and
subsequently  assisted  Paul  Allen  in  editing  th&
"  Baltimore  Morning  Chronicle."  Afterward  he
became  connected  with  William  Leggett  in  an  un
successful  attempt  to  establish  a  penny  paper  in
New  York  city,  and  then  became  a  dramatic  critic
in  Philadelphia.  Soon  afterward  he  adopted  the
stage  as  a  profession,  appearing  in  tragedy  in  Phila
delphia  in  July,  1835,  but  later  preferred  comedy,
which  he  played  in  the  first  Bowery  theatre,  New
York,  in  1828,  and,  after  appearing  in  Canada,  was
called  to  Philadelphia  after  the  death  of  Jefferson
to  fill  his  place.  He  built  here  a  theatre,  which
was  destroyed  by  fire.  He  then  removed  to  Cin
cinnati  in  1840,  where  he  became  a  pioneer  theatri-


LOGAN


LOGAN


cal  manager,  residing  there  until  his  death.  He
was  a  bold  defender  of  the  stage  against  pulpit
attacks,  and  his  reply  to  a  sermon  by  Lyman
Beecher  was  widely  copied.  He  wrote  several  suc
cessful  plays,  including  "Yankee  Land"  (1834);
"The  Wag  of  Maine"  (1835);  "The  Wool-Dealer,"
written  for  Dan  Marble ;  "  Removing  the  Depos
its,"  "  Astarte,"  an  adaptation  of  Shelley's  "  Cenci,"
"A  Hundred  Years  Hence,"  a  burlesque,  and  a
comedy  entitled  "Chloroform."  He  also  wrote
various  tales  and  poems,  one  of  which.  "  The  Mis
sissippi,"  attracted  favorable  notice. — His  daugh
ter,  Eliza,  actress,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  18  Aug.,
1829 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  15  Jan.,  1872,  was  edu
cated  at  Lancaster,  Pa.,  and  made  her  debut  at
the  age  of  eleven  in  Philadelphia.  In  1850  she  ap
peared  in  New  York  as  "  Pauline  "  in  "  The  Lady
of  Lyons."  In  1859  she  married  George  Wood,  a
theatrical  manager,  bought  Wood's  theatre,  Cincin
nati,  Ohio,  and,  retiring  from  the  stage,  removed  to
that  city.  Subsequently  Mr.  Wood  bought  Wood's
museum  in  New  York. — Plis  son,  Cornelius  Am
brose,  physician,  b.  in  Deerfield,  Mass.,  6  Aug.,
1836,  was  educated  at  Auburn  academy,  and  served
as  medical  superintendent  of  St.  John's  hospital  in
Cincinnati,  and  subsequently  as  professor  in  the
hospital  in  Leavenworth,  Kan.  In  1873  he  was  ap
pointed  U.  S.  minister  to  Chili,  and  he  was  after
ward  minister  to  Guatemala,  and  again  to  Chili  in
1881,  remaining  there  until  1883.  He  was  editor
of  the  "  Medical  Herald,"  Leavenworth,  Kan.,  for
twelve  years,  and  he  has  edited  the  works  of  Gen.
John  A.  Logan  (1886),  and  contributed  to  the  Lon
don  "  Lancet."  His  publications  are  "  Report  on
the  Sanitary  Relations  of  the  State  of  Kansas "
(Lawrence,  1866) ;  "  On  the  Climatology  of  the
Missouri  Valley";  and  "Physics of  Infectious  Dis
eases  "  (Chicago,  1878). — Another  daughter,  Celia,
journalist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17  Dec.,  1839,
acted  with  her  sister  Eliza  at  an  early  age,  and  was
subsequently  educated  in  London.  She  became  a
correspondent  of  American  journals  and  wrote  for
magazines.  During  the  civil  war  of  1861-'5  she
resided  in  Milan,  Italy,  translating  the  war  news
for  newspapers.  Afte'rward  she  settled  in  Wash
ington,  where  she  became  associate  editor  of  "  The
Capital."  She  has  written  several  dramas,  includ
ing  "  An  American  Marriage  "  (1884).  In  1872
she  married  James  F.  Connelly. — Another  daugh
ter.  Olire,  actress,  b.  in  Elmira,  N.  Y.,  16  April.
1841,  made  her  debut  in  Philadelphia  in  1854,  and
went  to  England  in  1857,  where  she  was  graduated
at  a  female  college.  She  married  Henry  A.  Delille
in  April,  1857,  but  was  divorced  in  December,  1865.
She  reappeared  in  New  York  at  Wallack's  theatre
in  1864  in  "  Eveleen,"  a  play  of  which  she  was  the
author.  She  retired  in  1868,  and  since  then  has
been  a  lecturer,  principally  on  woman's  rights  and
other  social  topics,  and  has  contributed  largely  to
newspapers.  After  her  retirement  from  the  stage
she  married  William  Wirt  Sikes  in  1871,  who  died
in  1883,  and  while  he  was  U.  S.  consul  at  Cardiff,
Wales,  corresponded  with  American  periodicals  un
der  her  maiden  name.  She  has  written  plays,  lec
tures,  and  books,  the  latter  including  "Chateau
Frissac  "  (New  York,  1860) ;  •'  Photographs  of  Par
is  "  (London.  1860) ;  "  Women  and  Theatres  "  (New
York,  1869) ;  and  "  Before  the  Footlights  and  Be
hind  the  Scenes :  a  Book  about  the  Show  Busi
ness"  (Cincinnati,  1870).

LOGAN,  George,  surgeon,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.
C.,  4  Jan.,  1778 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  13  Feb.,  1861.
He  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1802,  and  for  fifty  years  practised
his  profession  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,"  where  he  was


<#£tyct-t^

/ /


appointed  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  21  April,  1810,
and  resigned,  16  June,  1829.  He  served  as  hospital
surgeon  to  the  navy-yard.  He  was  the  author  of
a  popular  work  on  diseases  of  children.

LOGAN,  James,  statesman,  b.  in  Lurgan.  County
Armagh,  Ireland,  20  Oct.,  1674;  d.  near  German-
town,  Pa,,  31  Oct.,  1751.  He  was  of  Scotch-Irish
parentage,  and  descended  from  Logan  of  Restalrig,
Scotland,  whose  estates  were  confiscated  for  connec
tion  with  the  Gowrie  conspiracy  against  James  VI.
Before  the  age  of
thirteen  he  had  ac
quired  Latin,  Greek,
and  Hebrew,  and  he
afterward  studied
mathematics  and
modern  languages.
He  was  sent  to  Lon
don,  and  apprenticed
to  a  linen  -  draper,
but,  the  campaign
that  ended  in  the
battle  of  the  Boyne
having  begun,  he
was  recalled  to  ac
company  his  parents
in  their  flight  to
Edinburgh.  Subse
quently  they  settled
in  Bristol,  England,
where  James  resumed  his  studies  and  assisted  his
father  in  his  school.  He  engaged  in  commerce  in
1698,  and  in  1699  came  to  this  country  with  Will
iam  Penn,  as  his  secretary,  arriving  in  Philadelphia
in  December,  1699.  He  resided  with  Penn  in  "  the
slate-roof  house  "  on  Second  street,  and  continued
there  after  Penn  returned  to  England  in  1701.  He
became  provincial  secretary,  commissioner  of  prop
erty,  and  receiver-general,  and  was  the  business
agent  for  the  Penn  family,  and  the  champion  of
their  interests  in  the  colony.  In  1702  he  entered
the  provincial  council,  of  which  body  he  was  a  mem
ber  until  1747.  In  1704-'5  he  became  embroiled  in
Gov.  John  Evans's  disputes  with  the  assembly.  In
October,  1705,  he  visited  the  Indians  at  Conestoga,
and  in  subsequent  embassies  gained  their  esteem
and  confidence,  and  as  a  testimony  of  their  regard
the  chief,  Logan,  was  named  for  him.  On  26  Feb.,
1707,  he  was  impeached  by  the  assembly,  which
charged  him,  among  other  things,  with  illegally
inserting  in  the  governor's  commission  certain
clauses  contrary  to  the  royal  charter,  and  with  il
legally  holding  two  incompatible  offices,  the  sur
veyor-generalship  and  the  secretaryship.  Logan's
answer  was  filled  with  personal  abuse,  and  on  25
Nov.,  when  he  was  preparing  to  sail  for  England,
the  house  ordered  that  he  should  be  detained  in  the
county  jail  until  he  should  make  satisfaction  for  his
reflections  on  sundry  members ;  but  the  sheriff  re
fused  to  obey,  and  Logan  sailed  a  few  days  after
ward,  returning  in  1712.  In  1715  he  was  com
missioned  a  justice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,
quarter  sessions,  and  orphan's  court,  and  in  1723
became  presiding  judge  of  the  common  pleas.  In
1723  he  became  mayor  of  Philadelphia,  and  at  the
close  of  his  term  went  abroad  again  to  consult  with
Hannah  Penn.  From  1731  till  1739  he  filled  the
office  of  chief-justice  of  the  supreme  court,  and  as
president  of  the  council,  after  the  death  of  Gov.
Gordon  in  1736,  acted  as  governor  for  two  years.
The  latter  years  of  his  life  were  spent  in  retire
ment  at  his  country-seat  "  Stenton,"  now  in  Phila
delphia,  devoted  to  science  and  literature.  He  cor
responded  with  many  scientists,  and  Linnaeus  gave
the  name  Logan  to  a  class  of  plants  in  his  honor.


LOGAN


He  was  one  of  the  founders,  and  a  member  of  the
first  board  of  trustees  (1749),  of  the  college  in  Phila
delphia,  now  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  In
1725  he  became  involved  'in  a  controversy  with
Gov.  Keith,  and,  in  support  of  his  part,  published
"  The  Antidote  "  (Philadelphia,  1725) ;  "  A  Memo
rial  from  James  Logan,  in  Behalf  of  the  Proprie
tor's  Family  and  of  Himself,  Servant  to  the  said
Family  "  (1725) ;  and  also,  in  the  same  year,  "  A  Dia
logue  showing,  What's  therein  to  be  Found,"  this
being  an  answer  to  Rawle's  "  Ways  and  Means."  In
1735  he  communicated  to  Peter  Collinson,  of  Lon
don,  an  account  of  his  experiments  on  maize,  with
a  view  of  investigating  the  sexual  doctrine.  This
was  printed  in  "  Philosophical  Transactions,"  and
afterward  enlarged  and  printed  in  a  Latin  essay
entitled  "  Experimenta  Meletemata  de  Plan  tar  um
Generatione  "  (Leyden,  1739  ;  London,  1747).  He
was  also  the  author  of  "  Epistola  ad  Virum  Clarissi-
mum  Joannem  Albertum  Fabricium  "  (Amsterdam,
1740) ;  "  Demonstrationes  de  Radiorum  Lucis  in
Superficies  sphericus  ab  Axe  incidentium  a  primario
Foco  Aberrationibus  "  (Leyden,  1741);  and  an  an
notated  translation  of  Cicero's  "  De  Senectute,"
with  notes  and  a  preface  by  Dr.  Benjamin  Frank
lin  (Philadelphia,  1744;  London,  1750).  The  first
edition  of  this  was  printed  by  Franklin,  and  is  re
garded  as  the  finest  production  of  his  press.  It
was  reprinted  at  Glasgow  in  1751  and  1758,  at  Lon
don  in  1750  and  1778,  and  at  Philadelphia  in  1758
and  1812,  with  Franklin's  name  falsely  inscribed
on  the  title-page  of  the  last-mentioned  edition,  lie
also  rendered  Gate's  "  Distichs  "  into  English  verse,
wrote  numerous  essays  on  ethics  and  philosophy,
and  left  translations  of  Greek  authors  in  manu
script.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Society  of
Friends,  and  addressed  a  letter  to  that  body  dur
ing  the  war  between  Spain  and  Great  Britain,  ad
vising  it  not  to  procure  the  election  of  its  mem
bers  to  the  assembly,  which  letter  was  not  allowed
to  be  read.  The  following  is  an  extract  from  his
will  bequeathing  to  the  city  of  Philadelphia  a  li
brary  of  over  2.000  volumes  :  "  In  my  library,  which
I  have  left  to  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  for  the  ad
vancement  and  facilitating  of  classical  learning,
are  above  one  hundred  volumes  of  authors,  in  fo
lio,  all  in  Greek,  with  mostly  their  versions ;  all
the  Roman  classics  without  exception ;  all  the
Greek  mathematicians,  viz.,  Archimedes,  Euclid,
Ptolemy,  both  his  '  Geography '  and  '  Almagest,'
which  I  had  in  Greek  (with  Timon's  '  Commentary,'
in  folio,  about  seven  hundred  pages)  from  my
learned  friend  Fabricius,  who  published  fourteen
volumes  of  his  '  Bibliotheque  Grecque,'  in  quarto,
in  which,  after  he  had  finished  his  account  of
Ptolemy,  on  my  inquiring  from  him,  at  Hamburg,
how  I  should  find  it,  having  long  sought  for  it  in
vain  in  England,  he  sent  it  to  me  out  of  his  own
library,  telling  me  it  was  so  scarce  that  neither
price  nor  prayers  could  purchase  it.  Besides  these
are  many  of  the  most  valuable  Latin  authors,  and
a  great  number  of  modern  and  ancient  mathemati
cians,  with  all  the  editions  of  Newton,  Dr.  Watts,
Halley,  etc."  This  collection  was  annexed  in  1792
to  the  library  that  was  established  by  Franklin.
It  has  been  kept  separate  under  the  name  of  the
Loganian  library,  and  received  in  1828  an  acces
sion  of  5,000  volumes  by  the  bequest  of  William
Mackenzie.  See  "  Memoirs  of  Logan,"  by  W.  Ar-
mistead. — His  son,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  14  May,  1718  ;  d.  there," 28  Oct.,  1776,  was
sent  at  the  age  of  twelve  to  his  uncle.  Dr.  William
Logan,  in  Bristol,  England,  and  on  his  return  to
this  country  became  attorney  for  the  Penn  family,
with  his  father,  upon  whose  death  he  became  owner


of  "  Stenton,"  and  devoted  his  life  to  agriculture.
He  was  a  councilman  of  Philadelphia  from  1743
till  1776,  when  the  meetings  of  the  corporation
were  discontinued.  He  received  Indians  at  his
house,  gave  the  aged  a  settlement  on  his  land,  and
educated  the  young  with  his  own  means.  He  took
no  active  part  in  the  Revolutionary  war.  With
his  brother  he  deeded  the  library  property  to  Israel
Pembertpn,  Jr.,  William  Allen,  Richard  Peters,
and  Benjamin  Franklin,  to  be  with  William  Logan
and  his  brother,  James  Logan,  the  trustees  or  man
agers;  and  acted  as  librarian  until  his  death.  He
added  to  the  collection  the  books  bequeathed  to
him  by  his  uncle,  about  1,300  volumes. — William's
son,  George,  senator,  b.  in  Stenton,  Pa.,  9  Sept.,
1753;  d.  there,  9  April,  1821,  went  abroad  and
studied  three  years  at  the  medical  school  of  Edin
burgh,  where  he  received  his  degree  in  1779.  He
then  travelled  on  the  continent,  and  on  his  return
to  this  country  in  the  autumn  of  1780  devoted  him
self  to  scientific  agriculture.  He  served  several
terms  in  the  legislature,  and  in  June,  1798,  went  to
France  on  his  own  responsibility  for  the  purpose
of  averting  war  between  that  country  and  the
United  States.  He  persuaded  the  French  govern
ment  to  annul  the  embargo  on  American  shipping,
and  prepared  the  way  for  a  negotiation  that  ter
minated  in  peace.  On  his  return  lie  was  denounced
by  the  Federalists,  who  procured  the  passage  in
congress  of  the  so-called  "  Logan  act,"  making  it  a
high  misdemeanor  for  an  individual  citizen  to  take
part  in  a  controversy  between  the  United  States
and  a  foreign  power.  He  vindicated  himself  in  a
letter  dated  12  Jan..  1799.  He  was  elected  U.  S.
senator  from  Pennsylvania  as  a  Democrat  in  place
of  Peter  Muhlenberg,  resigned,  serving  from  7  Dec.,
1801,  till  3  March,  1807.  In  1810  he  went  to  Eng
land  as  a  self-constituted  agent  to  attempt  a  recon
ciliation  between  Great  Britain  and  the  United
States,  but  was  unsuccessful.  Dr.  Logan  was  a
member  of  the  American  philosophical  society.
He  was  probably  the  only  strict  member  of  the
Society  of  Friends  that  ever  sat  in  the  U.  S.  senate.
He  published  ''  Experiments  on  Gypsum,"  and  "  Ro
tation  of  Crops"  (1797),  and  was  also  the  author  of
other  pamphlets  on  agricultural  subjects.

LOGAN,  James  Tenable,  clergyman,  b.  in
Scott  county,  Ky.,  11  July,  1835.  After  gradua
tion  at  Centre  college  in  1854  and  at  Danville  the
ological  seminary  in  1800,  he  was  called  to  the
pastorate  of  the  Presbyterian  church  at  Harrods-
burg,  where  he  remained  for  eight  years.  For  a
short  time  afterward  he  edited  the  4i  Free  Christian
Commonwealth,"  and  since  then  he  has  identified
himself  with  Central  university,  Richmond,  Ky.
In  1873  he  was  elected  to  the  chair  of  metaphysics,
and  in  1879  to  that  of  ethics.  The  following  year
he  was  made  president,  in  which  otlice  he  contin
ues  (1887)  to  serve.  He  was  active  in  founding  the
institution,  and  contributed  $10.000  toward  it.

LOGAN,  John,  Indian  chief,  b.  about  1725;
killed  near  Lake  Erie  in  the  summer  of  1780.  He
was  the  son  of  Shikellamy,  chief  of  the  Cayugas,
and  bore  the  Indian  name  of  Tah-gah-jute,  but
was  given  an  English  name  taken  from  that  of
William  Penn's  secretary,  James  Logan,  who  was  a
friend  of  the  Indians.  Logan  was  brought  up  on
Shamokin  creek,  near  the  Moravian  settlement,
and  lived  in  familiar  and  friendly  intercourse  with
the  whites.  In  his  early  manhood  he  was  known
throughout  the  frontier  of  Virginia  and  Pennsyl
vania  for  his  fine  presence  and  his  engaging  quali
ties.  He  lived  for  many  years  near  Reedsville,  Pa.,
where  he  supported  his  family  by  killing  wild  ani
mals  in  the  mountains  and  dressing  the  skins  in


LOGAN


LOGAN


the  Indian  fashion  to  be  sold  to  the  whites.  He
was  there  chosen  by  the  Mingoes  as  their  chief.
About  1770  he  removed  to  the  banks  of  the  Ohio,
where  he  became  addicted  to  drinking.  In  the
spring  of  1774  his  family  were  massacred  by  set
tlers  on  the  Ohio  while  carousing  in  the  cabin  of
a  trader.  Logan  sent  a  declaration  of  war  to  Mi
chael  Cresap,  whom  he  supposed,  though  wrong
fully,  to  have  ordered  the  massacre,  and  then  at
once  instigated  a  war  against  the  scattered  settlers
of  the  far  west,  and  for  several  months  fearful
barbarities  were  perpetrated  upon  men,  women,
and  children.  He  himself  took  thirty  scalps  in
the  course  of  the  war,  which  terminated  after  a
severe  defeat  of  the  Indians  at  the  mouth  of  the
Great  Kanawha.  He  disdained  to  appear  among
the  chiefs  who  subsequently  sued  for  peace.  Lord
Dunmore,  the  governor  of  Virginia,  sent  John  Gib
son  as  his  messenger  to  invite  the  old  chief  to  at
tend  the  council ;  but  the  latter  took  Gibson  into
the  woods,  and,  after  tearfully  recounting  the  story
of  his  wrongs,  sent  back  the  following  message :
u  I  appeal  to  any  white  man  to  say  if  ever  he  en
tered  Logan's  cabin  hungry,  and  he  gave  him  not
meat;  if  ever  he  came  cold  and  naked,  and  he  ,
clothed  him  not.  During  the  course  of  the  last  j
long  and  bloody  war  Logan  remained  idle  in  his  i
cabin,  an  advocate  for  peace.  Such  was  my  love
for  the  whites  that  my  countrymen  pointed  as  they
passed  and  said  :  '  Logan  is  the  friend  of  the  white
men.'  I  had  even  thought  to  have  lived  with  you
but  for  the  injuries  of  one  man.  Col.  Cresap,  the
last  spring,  in  cold  blood  and  unprovoked,  mur
dered  all  the  relations  of  Logan,  not  even  sparing
my  women  and  children.  There  runs  not  a  drop
of  my  blood  in  the  veins  of  any  living  creature.
This  called  on  me  for  revenge.  I  have  sought  it ;
I  have  killed  many ;  I  have  fully  glutted  my  ven
geance.  For  my  country  I  rejoice  at  the  beams  of
peace.  But  do  not  harbor  a  thought  that  mine  is
the  joy  of  fear;  Logan  never  felt  fear.  He  will
not  turn  on  his  heel  to  save  his  life.  Who  is  there
to  mourn  for  Logan  ?  Not  one."  His  habits  of
intemperance  grew  upon  him  after  this,  and  while
frenzied  with  liquor  he  felled  his  wife  by  a  sudden
blow.  Thinking  that  he  had  killed  her  he  fled,
and  while  traversing  the  wilderness  between  De
troit  and  Sandusky  was  overtaken  by  a  party  of
Indians.  Supposing  his  avengers  at  hand,  he  pre
pared  to  attack  them,  and  was  killed  by  a  nephew
in  self-defence.  Logan's  pathetic  speech  was  re
peated  by  Gibson  to  Lord  Dunmore.  It  was  writ
ten  down  by  an  officer,  printed  in  the  "  Virginia
Gazette,"  and  has  been  preserved  by  Thomas  Jef
ferson  in  his  •'  Notes  on  Virginia."  See  "  Ta-gah-
jute,  or  Logan,  the  Indian,  and  Captain  Michael
Cresap,"  by  Brantz  Mayer  (New  York,  1867).

LOGAN,  John  Alexander,  statesman,  b.  in
Jackson  county,  111.,  9  Feb.,  1826 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C.,  26  Dec.,  1886.  His  father,  Dr.  John  Logan,
came  from  Ireland  when  a  young  man  and  set
tled  in  Maryland,  but  removed  to  Kentucky,  thence  I
to  Missouri,  and  finally  to  Illinois.  He  served  '
several  terms  in  the  "legislature,  having  been  !
chosen  as  a  Democrat,  and  held  several  county  offi
ces.  The  son  was  educated  at  a  common  school  and
under  a  private  tutor.  This  instmction  was  sup
plemented,  in  1840,  by  attendance  at  Shiloh  col
lege.  When  war  with  Mexico  was  declared,  he
volunteered  as  a  private,  but  was  soon  chosen  a
lieutenant  in  the  1st  Illinois  infantry.  He  did  good
service  as  a  soldier,  and  for  some  time  was  act
ing  quartermaster  of  his  regiment.  After  his  re
turn  from  Mexico  he  began  the  study  of  law  with
his  uncle,  Alexander  M.  Jenkins,  and  in  1849  was


elected  clerk  of  Jackson  county,  but  resigned  to
continue  the  study  of  law.  In  1851  he  was  gradu
ated  at  Louisville  university,  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  became  his  uncle's  partner.  He  soon  grew
popular,  and  his  forcible  style  of  oratory,  pleasing
address,  and  fine  voice,  secured  his  election  to  the
legislature  in  1852  and  again  in  1856.  At  the  end
of  his  first  term  he  resumed  practice  with  such  suc
cess  that  he  was
soon  chosen  prose
cuting  attorney  for
the  '3d  judicial  dis
trict.  In  1852  he
removed  to  Benton,
Franklin  co.,  111.
He  was  a  presiden
tial  elector  in  1856
on  the  Buchanan
and  Breckinridge
ticket.  In  1858  he
was  elected  to  con
gress  from  Illinois
as  a  Douglas  Dem
ocrat,  and  was  re-
elected  in  1860.  In
the  presidential
campaign  of  that
year  he  earnestly  advocated  the  election  of  Stephen
A.  Douglas ;  but,  on  the  first  intimation  of  coming
trouble  from  the  south,  he  declared  that,  in  the
event  of  the  election  of  Abraham  Lincoln,  he
would  "  shoulder  his  musket  to  have  him  inaugu
rated.''  In  July,  1861,  during  the  extra  session  of
congress  that  was  called  by  President  Lincoln,  he
left  his  seat,  overtook  the  troops  that  were  march
ing  out  of  Washington  to  meet  the  enemy,  and
fought  in  the  ranks  of  Col.  Richardson's  regiment
in  the  battle  of  Bull  Run,  being  among  the  last  to
leave  the  field.  Returning  home  in  the  latter  part
of  August,  he  resigned  his  seat  in  congress,  organ
ized  the  31st  Illinois  infantry,  and  was  appointed
its  colonel,  13  Sept.  At  Belmont  in  November  he
led  a  successful  bayonet-charge  and  a  horse  was
shot  under  him.  He  led  his  regiment  in  the  at
tack  on  Fort  Henry,  and  at  Fort  Donelson,  while
gallantly  leading  the  assault,  received  a  wound
that  incapacitated  him  for  active  service  for  some
time.  After  he  had  reported  for  duty  to  Gen.  Grant
at  Pittsburg  Landing,  he  was  made  a  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  5  March,  1862.  He  took  an
important  part  in  the  movement  against  Corinth,
and  subsequently  was  given  the  command  at  Jack
son,  Tenn.,  with  instructions  to  guard  the  railroad
communications.  In  the  summer  of  1862  his  con
stituents  urged  him  to  become  a  candidate  for  re
election  to  congress,  but  he  declined,  saying  in  his
letter :  "  I  have  entered  the  field  to  die,  if  need  be,
for  this  government,  and  never  expect  to  return  to
peaceful  pursuits  until  the  object  of  this  war  of
preservation  has  become  a  fact  established."  Dur
ing  Grant's  northern  Mississippi  campaign  Gen.
Logan  commanded  the  3d  division  of  the  17th
army  corps  under  Gen.  McPherson,  and  was  pro
moted  major-general  of  volunteers,  to  date  from
26  Nov.,  1862.  He  participated  in  the  battles  of
Port  Gibson,  Raymond,  Jackson,  and  Champion
Hills.  In  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  he  commanded
McPherson's  centre,  and  on  25  June  made  the  as
sault  after  the  explosion  of  the  mine.  His  column
was  the  first  to  enter  the  captured  city,  and  he  was
appointed  its  military  governor.  He  succeeded
Gen.  Sherman  in  the  command  of  the  loth  army
corps  in  November,  1863.  In  May,  1864,  he  joined
Sherman's  army,  which  was  preparing  for  its
march  into  Georgia,  led  the  advance  of  the  Army


6


LOGAN


LOGAN


of  the  Tennessee  in  the  fight  at  Resaca,  repulsed
Hardee's  veterans  at  Dallas,  and  drove  the  enemy
from  his  line  of  works  at  Kenesaw  Mountain.
Gen.  Sherman  says  in  his  report  of  the  battle  of
Atlanta,  speaking  of  Gen.  McPherson's  death:
"  Gen.  Logan  succeeded  him  and  commanded  the
Army  of  the  Tennessee  through  this  desperate  bat
tle  with  the  same  success  and  ability  that  had
characterized  him  in  the  command  of  a  corps  or
division."  In  fact  it  was  mainly  his  skill  and  de
termination  that  saved  Sherman's  army  from  a
serious  disaster  during  that  engagement.  After
the  fall  of  Atlanta,  1  Sept.,  1864,  he  went  home
and  took  an  active  part  in  the  presidential  cam
paign  of  that  year.  He  rejoined  his  troops,  who
had  accompanied  Gen.  Sherman  in  his  famous
"  march  to  the  sea,"  at  Savannah,  and  remained  in
active  service  with  Sherman's  army  till  the  sur
render  of  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  26  April,  1865.
On  23  May  he  was  appointed  to  the  command  of
the  Army' of  the  Tennessee  ;  but,  as  soon  as  active
service  in  the  field  was  over,  he  resigned  his  com
mission,  saying  that  he  did  not  wish  to  draw  pay
when  not  on  active  duty.  He  was  appointed  min
ister  to  Mexico  by  President  Johnson,  but  de
clined.  In  1866  he  was  elected  a  representative
from  Illinois  to  the  40th  congress  as  a  Republican,
and  served  as  one  of  the  managers  in  the  impeach
ment  trial  of  President  Johnson.  He  was  re-
elected  to  the  41st  congress,  and  did  good  service
as  chairman  of  the  committee  on  military  affairs
in  securing  the  passage  of  an  act  for  the  reduction
of  the  army.  He  was  re-elected  to  the  42d  con
gress,  but  before  that  body  convened  he  was  chosen
by  the  Illinois  legislature  U.  S.  senator  for  the
term  beginning  4  March,  1871.  He  succeeded
Vice-President  Wilson  as  chairman  of  the  senate
committee  on  military  affairs  at  the  beginning  of
the  third  session  of  the  42d  congress,  2  Dec..  1872.
After  the  expiration  of  his  term  of  service,  3  March,
1877,  he  resumed  the  practice  of  law  in  Chicago.
He  was  again  returned  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  and
took  his  seat  on  the  convening  of  that  body  in  ex
tra  session,  18  March,  1879.  Both  in  the  house
and  senate  he  maintained  his  reputation  for  brill
iancy  and  success.  While  a  representative  his  more
important  speeches  were  "  On  Reconstruction,"  12
July,  1867 ;  "  On  the  Impeachment  of  President
Johnson,"  22  Feb.,  1868 ;  "  Principles  of  the  Demo
cratic  Party,"  16  July.  1868 ;  and  "  Removing  the
Capitol,"  22  Jan.,  1870.  In  the  senate  he  spoke  in
"  Vindication  of  President  Grant  against  the  At
tack  of  Charles  Sumner,"  3  June,  1872  ;  in  reply  to
Senator  Gordon  on  the  "  Ku-klux  in  Louisiana,"
13  Jan.,  1875 ;  "  On  the  Equalization  of  Bounties
of  Soldiers,  Sailors,  and  Marines  of  the  late  War
for  the  Union,"  2  March,  1875  ;  and  "  On  the  Pow
er  of  the  Government  to  enforce  the  United  States
Laws,"  28  June,  1879.  On  6  June,  1880,  he  deliv
ered  an  able  speech  on  the  Fitz-John  Porter  case,
maintaining,  as  he  always  had  done,  that  Gen.
Porter  had  been  justly  condemned  and  should  not
be  restored  to  his  rank  in  the  army.  At  the  Re
publican  national  convention  in  Chicago  in  June,
1884,  on  the  first  ballot  for  a  candidate  for  presi
dent,  Gen.  Logan  received  63^  votes  against  334£
for  James  G.  Blaine,  278  for  Chester  A.  Arthur,
and  93  for  George  F.  Edmunds.  After  the  subse
quent  nomination  of  Mr.  Blaine,  Gen.  Logan  was
nominated  for  vice-president.  When  Gen.  Logan's
sudden  death  was  announced  to  him,  James  G.
Blaine  thus  briefly  summarized  his  character :
"  Gen.  Logan  was  a  man  of  immense  force  in  a
legislative  body.  His  will  was  unbending,  his
courage,  both  moral  and  physical,  was  of  the  high


est  order.  I  never  knew  a  more  fearless  man.  He
did  not  quail  before  public  opinion  when  he  had
once  made  up  his  mind  any  more  than  he  did  be
fore  the  guns  of  the  enemy  when  he  headed  a
charge  of  his  enthusiastic  troops.  In  debate  he
was  aggressive  and  effective.  ...  I  have  had  occa
sion  to  say  before,  and  I  now  repeat,  that,  while
there  have  been  more  illustrious  military  leaders  in
the  United  States  and  more  illustrious  leaders  in
legislative  halls,  there  has,  I  think,  been  no  man
in  this  country  who  has  combined  the  two  careers
in  so  eminent  a  degree  as  Gen.  Logan."  His  per
sonal  appearance  was  striking.  He  was  of  medium
height,  with  a  robust  physical  development,  a
broad  and  deep  chest,  massive  body,  and  small
hands  and  feet.  He  had  fine  and  regular  feat
ures,  a  swarthy  complexion,  long  jet-black  hair,  a
heavy  moustache  and  dark  eyes.  Gen.  Logan  pub
lished  "  The  Great  Conspiracy,"  a  large  volume  re
lating  to  the  civil  war  (New  York,  1886),  and  "  The
Volunteer  Soldier  of  America "  (Chicago,  1887).
See  "  Life  and  Services  of  John  A.  Logan,"  by
George  Francis  Dawson  (Chicago,  1887). — His  wife,
Mary  Siinmerson  Cunningham,  daughter  of
John  M.  Cunningham,  b.  in  Petersburg,  Boone  co..
Mo.,  15  Aug.,  1838,  lived  amid  the  hardships  of
frontier  life,  and  was  subsequently  sent  to  the  Con
vent  of  St.  Vincent  in  Kentucky.  On  leaving  that
institution  she  assisted  in  preparing  the  papers
that  were  needed  by  her  father,  who,  on  his  re
turn  from  the  Black  Hawk  and  Mexican  wars,
had  been  elected  sheriff  and  county  clerk  of  Will
iamson  county,  and  appointed  register  of  the  land
office  at  Shawneetown,  Gallatin  co.,  111.,  by  Presi
dent  Pierce.  Blank  forms  for  any  legal  docu
ments  were  then  rare,  and  Miss  Cunningham,
through  her  industry  in  her  father's  case,  supplied
the  deficiency.  While  thus  engaged  she  met  Gen.
Logan,  who  was  at  that  time  prosecuting  attorney.
She  was  married,  27  Nov.,  1855,  and  was  identified
with  her  husband's  career,  becoming  his  best  ad
viser  in  the  gravest  crises  of  political  and  civil  life.

LOGAN,  John  Henry,  b.  in  Abbeville  dis
trict,  S.  C.,  5  Nov.,  1822 ;  d.  in  Atlanta,  Ga.,  28
March,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at  South  Carolina
college  in  1844,  and  at  Charleston  medical  college
a  few  years  later.  After  practising  for  some  time
and  teaching  at  Abbeville,  S.  C.,  he  served  as  a
surgeon  in  a  Confederate  regiment,  and  at  its  con
clusion  removed  to  Talladega  county,  Ala.  He
subsequently  became  professor  of  chemistry  in  the
Atlanta,  Ga.,  medical  college.  Dr.  Logan  is  the  au
thor  of  a  "  History  of  the  Upper  Country  of  South
Carolina  "  (vol.  i.,  Charleston,  1859).  only  the  first
volume  of  which  was  finished,  and  the  "  Student's
Manual  of  Chemico-Physics  "  (Atlanta,  1879).

LOGAN,  John  Wesley,  bishop  of  the  Zion
M.  E.  church,  b.  in  North  Carolina  about  1810 ;  d.
in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  23  Sept.,  1872.  He  was  a  slave
until  the  age  of  twenty,  when  he  ran  away  to  Can
ada.  In  the  anti-slavery  days  he  was  a  zealous  and
active  agent,  with  Gerrit  Smith,  Lewis  Tappan,
Putnam,  Wright,  and  others,  in  the  "  Underground
railroad."  He  settled  in  Syracuse  in  1847,  where
he  became  a  minister  of  the  Zion  Methodist  Epis
copal  church,  and  ultimately  a  bishop.

LOGAN,  Stephen  Trigg,  jurist,  b.  in  Franklin
county,  Ky.,  24  Feb.,  1800 ;  d.  in  Springfield,  111.,  17
July,  1880.  He  was  educated  at  Frankfort,  Ky.,
and  when  only  thirteen  years  of  age  was  employed
as  a  clerk  in  the  office  of  the  secretary  of  state.
He  went  to  Glasgow,  Ky.,  in  1817,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  before  he  was  twenty-one,
but  did  not  at  once  engage  in  practice.  Subse
quently  he  was  appointed  commonwealth's  attor-


LOGAN


LOHER


ney,  and  followed  his  profession  for  ten  years  in
Barren  and  the  adjoining  counties.  Becoming  pe
cuniarily  embarrassed,  he  emigrated  in  1832  to
Sangammon  county,  111.,  and  in  the  following
spring  opened  a  law-office  in  Springfield,  where  he

soon  won  reputa
tion  throughout
the  state.  In  1885
he  was  elected
judge  of  the  1st  ju
dicial  circuit  of  the
state,  and  in  1842
he  was  chosen  to
the  legislature,  and
again  in  1844  and
1846.  In  1847  he
was  a  delegate  to
the  convention  that
framed  the  Illinois
constitution.  His
efforts,  both  in  the
legislature  and  in
the  convention,
were  specially  directed  to  securing  economy  in  the
public  expenditures,  and  to  making  adequate  pro
vision  for  the  payment  of  the  state  debt.  For  the
next  six  years  he  devoted  himself  exclusively  to  his
profession,  and  from  1841  till  1844  had  as  his  law-
partner  Abraham  Lincoln.  In  1854  he  was  elected
for  the  fourth  time  to  the  lower  branch  of  the  gen
eral  assembly.  In  1860  he  was  a  delegate  from  the
state  at  large  to  the  Chicago  Republican  national
convention,  and  early  in  February,  1861,  he  was
appointed  by  the  governor  of  Illinois  one  of  five
commissioners  to  represent  the  state  in  the  National
peace  convention  at  Washington,  in  which  he  took
an  active  part.  This  was  Judge  Logan's  last  ap
pearance  on  any  great  public  occasion.  He  retired
soon  afterward  from  politics,  and  gradually  with
drew  from  the  pursuit  of  his  profession,  but  main
tained  his  interest  in  current  events.  As  an  advo
cate  he  stood  at  the  head  of  the  bar  in  his  adopted
state.  Judge  David  Davis  has  said  of  him:  "In
all  the  elements  that  constitute  a  great  '  nisi  prius  '
lawyer,  I  have  never  known  his  equal."  See  "  Me
morials  of  the  Life  and  Character  of  Stephen  T.
Logan  "  (Springfield,  111.,  1882).

LOGAN,  Thomas  Muldrup,  physician,  b.  in
Charleston.  S.  C.,  31  Jan.,  1808.  He  was  graduated
at  Charleston  medical  college  in  1828,  and  sub
sequently  acted  as  co-editor  of  a  work  on  surgery.
Removing  to  the  Pacific  coast  he  turned  his  atten
tion  to  the  meteorology  and  climatic  conditions  of
that  part  of  the  country.  In  1873  he  was  chosen
president  of  the  American  medical  association,  and
in  1875  he  was  secretary  to  the  California  board  of
health.  He  is  the  author  of  "  The  Topography  of
California," and  "  Climate  of  California"  and  "  Me
teorological  Observations  at  Sacramento  "  in  re
ports  of  the  Smithsonian  institution  (1855-7).  He
has  also  contributed  largely  to  the  "  Transactions
of  the  American  Medical  Association."

LO(xAN,  Sir  William  Edmond,  Canadian  ge
ologist,  b.  in  Montreal,  20  April,  1798  ;  d.  in  Wales,
22  June,  1875.  His  grandfather,  James  Logan,
a  native  of  Stirling,  Scotland,  settled  in  Montreal
with  his  family  in  1784.  After  attending  a  pub
lic  school  in  that  city,  William,  in  1814,  attended
the  high-school  of  Edinburgh,  and  afterward  Edin
burgh  university,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1817.
In  1818  he  entered  the  mercantile  office  of  his
uncle,  Hart  Logan,  of  London,  and  later  became  a
partner  in  the  firm.  After  a  short  visit  to  Canada,
where  his  attention  had  been  directed  to  the  geo
logical  characteristics  of  the  country,  he  went  to


Swansea,  South  Wales,  as  manager  of  copper-smelt
ing  and  coal-mining  operations,  in  which  his  uncle
was  interested.  He  remained  in  charge  until
shortly  after  his  uncle's  death  in  1838.  During
the  seven  years  that  he  spent  in  South  Wales  he
devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  the  coal-fields  of
that  region,  and  his  minute  and  accurate  maps  and
sections  were  adopted  by  the  ordnance  geological
survey,  and  published  by  the  government.  He
was  the  first  to  demonstrate  that  the  stratum  of
clay  that  underlies  coal-beds  was  the  soil  in  which
the  coal  vegetation  grew,  and  thereby  refuted  the
drift  theory  of  the  origin  of  coal.  In  1841  he
visited  the  coal-fields  of  Pennsylvania  and  Nova
Scotia,  and  communicated  several  valuable  memoirs
on  the  subject  to  the  Geological  society  of  London.
At  this  time  he  began  the  examination  of  the  older
palaeozoic  rocks  of  Canada,  and  in  1842  he  was
soon  placed  at  the  head  of  the  geological  survey  of
Canada,  after  refusing  a  highly  advantageous  offer
of  a  similar  place  in  India.  In  the  course  of  his
investigations  upon  the  rocks  of  the  eastern  town
ships  of  Lower  Canada,  which  are  a  continuation
of  those  of  New  England,  Sir  William  showed  that,
instead  of  being  primitive  azoic  rocks,  as  had  been
supposed. they  are  altered  and  crystallized  palaeozoic
strata.  This  fact,  which  is  the  key  to  the  geology
of  northeastern  America,  had  been  before  sus
pected,  but  had  not  been  demonstrated.  The
rocks  that  form  the  Laurentian  and  Adirondack
mountains,  previously  regarded  as  unstratified,
he  found  to  be  disturbed  and  altered  sedimen
tary  deposits  of  vast  thickness.  In  1851  Sir
\Villiam  represented  Canada  in  the  great  exhibi
tion  in  London,  and  had  charge  of  the  geological
collection  that  had  been  made  by  himself,  or  under
his  immediate  direction.  He  was  also  a  commis
sioner  from  Canada  at  the  industrial  exhibition  in
Paris  in  1855,  when  he  received  from  the  imperial
commission  the  grand  gold  medal  of  honor,  and
was  created  a  knight  of  the  Legion  of  honor.
After  the  accession  of  the  maritime  provinces  to
the  Dominion  of  Canada,  he  made  an  elaborate
study  of  the  coal-fields  of  Pictou,  Nova  Scotia.
The  results  of  his  labors  will  be  found  in  the  re
ports  of  the  geological  survey  of  Canada,  and  in
a  very  complete  map  of  northeastern  America,

B'epared  by  him  with  the  aid  of  Prof.  James
all.  He  was  knighted  in  1856,  and  in  the  same
year  received  from  the  London  geological  socie
ty  the  Wollaston  palladium  medal.  He  afterward
received  the  Copley  medal  from  the  Royal  so
ciety  of  London,  of  which  and  of  many  other
learned  societies  he  was  long  a  member.  Sir
William  was  also  for  many  years  one  of  the  cor
poration  of  the  University  "of  McGill  college  in
Montreal,  from  which  he  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.,  and  in  which  he  had  endowed  the  chair  of
geology.  He  communicated  numerous  articles  to
the  Geological  society  of  London  and  to  the
'•  American  Journal  of  Science  and  Arts."  His
works  are  found  in  his  "Annual  Reports  of  the
Progress  of  the  Canadian  Survey,"  in  the  "  Pro
ceedings  of  the  British  Association,"  and  in  those
of  the  Geological  society.  He  also  contributed  to
the  Geological  survey  of  Great  Britain.

LOHER,  Franz  von,  German  author,  b.  in
Paderborn,  Westphalia.  15  Oct.,  1818.  He  studied
law,  history,  natural  science,  and  art  at  Halle,  Mu
nich,  Freiburg,  and  Berlin,  and  travelled  exten
sively  in  Europe.  Canada,  and  the  United  States  in
1846-?7.  On  his  return  he  took  an  active  part  in
the  political  uprising  in  Germany  in  1848.  He
founded  the  "  Westphalische  Zeitung,"  and  was
imprisoned  by  the  government  for  political  agita-


8


LOMAX


LONG


tion,  but  was  shortly  afterward  acquitted  after  a
trial.  In  1849  he  became  assessor  of  the  court  of
appeal  in  Paderborn,  and  was  afterward  professor
in  the  universities  of  Munich  and  Gottingen.
Among  his  works  are  "  Geschichte  der  Deutschen
in  Amerika"  (1848)  and  "Land  und  Leute  in  der
alten  und  neuen  Welt "  (3  vols.,  1857-'8).

LOMAX,  John  Tayloe,  jurist,  b.  in  Port  To
bago,  Caroline  co.,  Va.,  in  January,  1781 ;  d.  in
Fredericksburg.  Va.,  10  Oct.,  1862.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  St.  John's  college,  Annapolis,  in  1797,
studied  law,  and  began  practice  at  Port  Royal,
Va.  He  removed  to  Fredericksburg  in  1805,  and
in  1809  to  Menokin,  Richmond  co.,  Va.,  where  he
remained  nine  years.  In  1818  he  returned  to
Fredericksburg,  and  in  1826  was  appointed  pro
fessor  of  the  school  of  law  in  the  University  of
Virginia.  He  resigned  that  office  in  1830  to  accept
a  seat  on  the  bench  of  the  general  court  of  the
state  as  associate  justice,  to  which  he  was  unani
mously  elected  by  the  legislature.  Under  the  con
stitution  of  1851  he  was  again  chosen  for  a  term
of  eight  years  by  vote  of  the  people  of  the  cir
cuit.  The  convention  that  framed  this  constitu
tion  had  adopted  a  clause  disqualifying  any  person
over  seventy  years  of  age  from  holding  the  office
of  judge ;  but  at  the  request  of  members  of  the
bar  this  provision  was  cancelled  so  as  not  to  ex
clude  Judge  Lomax.  He  continued  on  the  bench
until  1857,  when  he  retired  to  private  life.  Pie
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Harvard  in
1847.  He  is  the  author  of  a  "  Digest  of  the  Laws
respecting  Real  Property  generally  Adopted  and
in  Use  in  the  United  States"  (3  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1839;  2d  ed.,  revised  and  enlarged,  Richmond,
1856),  and  a  "  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Executors
and  Administrators  generally  in  Use  in  the  United
States"  (2  vols.,  1841 ;  2d  ed.,  Richmond,  1856).

LOMBARD,  French  missionary,  d.  after  1744.
He  was  a  Jesuit,  and  the  most  successful  of  all  the
missionaries  in  converting  the  Indians  of  French
Guiana.  He  came  to  that  country  in  1705,  and
was  still  engaged  in  missionary  work  in  1744.
In  1730  he  founded  a  Christian  village  that  con
tained  over  600  Indians,  at  the  mouth  of  Kuru
river,  and  in  1744  he  established  another  at  Sina-
mary.  Condamine  mentions  in  his  "  Relation
abregee  "  that  on  setting  out  for  Surinam  he  was
furnished  by  the  missionary  with  several  Indian
cancers.  His  works  on  two  "  Relations,"  which  are
dated  at  Kuru,  23  Feb.,  1730,  and  11  April,  1733,
and  published  in  the  "  Lettres  edifiantes  "  (Paris,
1843).  They  contain  an  interesting  account  of  the
Kuru,  Ouyapoc,  and  Galabi  tribes.  There  is  also
another  narrative  addressed  to  his  brother  from
Kuru,  and  dated  1723,  which  is  inserted  in  the
"  Voyage  de  chevalier  de  Marchais "  of  Labat,
where  it  fills  sixty-four  pages  (Paris,  1730).  He
also  wrote  a  grammar  and  dictionary  of  the  lan
guage  of  the  Galabis,  on  which  he  was  engaged
for  more  than  thirty  years.

LOMBARDINI,  Manuel  Maria  (lom-bar-de  -
ne),  Mexican  soldier,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in
1802 ;  d.  there,  22  Dec.,  1853.  He  received  his  early
education  in  his  native  city,  and  in  1814  entered
the  bureau  of  artillery  as  an  apprentice.  When  the
plan  de  Iguala  was  proclaimed  in  1821,  he  joined
the  revolutionary  forces  as  a  cadet,  but  during  the
reign  of  Iturbide  he  retired  into  private  life.  The
party  strife  between  the  Yorkist  and  Scotch  fac
tions  in  1826  brought  him  again  to  the  front,  and
he  joined  the  former  party.  In  1830  he  was  a  lieu
tenant,  and  in  April,  1832,  pronounced  in  Lermafor
the  plan  of  Vera  Cruz.  At  the  end  of  that  year  he
was  promoted  to  captain,  and  was  taken  under  the


protection  of  his  relative,  Gen.  Valencia,  on  whose
recommendation  m  1841  Santa-Anna  made  him  a
brigadier.  He  took  part  in  the  war  against  the
United  States  in  1846-7,  and  was  wounded  in  the
battle  of  Angostura.  After  Santa-Anna's  banish
ment  he  continued  to  sympathize  with  that  gen
eral,  and  took  part  in  several  pronunciamentos
against  the  government.  He  favored  the  plan  de
Jalisco,  and  was  banished,  2  Jan.,  1853,  by  Presi
dent  Arista,  but  soon  returned  at  the  head  of  a
revolutionary  force,  and  was  appointed  by  the
president  of  the  supreme  court,  Ceballos,  com-
mander-in-chief  of  the  forces  in  the  capital.  When
Ceballos  resigned  the  executive,  Lombardini  was
chosen  by  the  commanders  of  the  three  divisions  of
the  revolutionary  troops  provisional  president,  8
Feb.,  1853.  Though  a  clear-headed  and  well-mean
ing  man,  he  had  no  ability  as  a  statesman,  and
when  Santa-Anna,  who  had  been  recalled  by  con
gress,  arrived  in  Mexico,  Lombardini  gladly  de
livered  the  executive  to  him  on  20  April.  Santa-
Anna  appointed  him  commander-in-chief  of  the
forces  in  the  capital,  but  he  died  in  a  few  months.

LONG,  Arnustead  Lindsay,  soldier,  b.  in  Camp
bell  county,  Va,,  3  Sept.,  1827.  He  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  1  July,  1850,  assigned
to  the  2d  artillery,  and  promoted  ist  lieutenant,  1
July,  1854.  He  resigned,  10  June,  1861,  and  the
following  month  was  appointed  nmjor  in  the  Con
federate  army.  He  was  promoted  colonel  and
military  secretary  to  Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee  in  April,
1862,  and  brigadier- general  of  artillery  in  Septem
ber,  1863,  taking  part  in  all  of  Gen.  Lee's  cam
paigns.  Gen.  Long  is  the  author  of  "  Memoirs  of
Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee"  (New  York,  1886).

LONG,  Charles  <  haillr.  soldier,  b.  in  Prin
cess  Anne,  Somerset  co.,  Md.,  2  July,  1842.  He
was  educated  at  Washington  academy,  Md.,  and
in  1862  he  enlisted  in  the  1st  Maryland  infantry
in  the  National  service,  and  at  the  close  of  the
civil  war  had  attained  the  rank  of  captain.  He
was  appointed  a  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  Egyptian
army  in  the  autumn  of  1869,  was  first  assigned  to
duty  as  professor  of  French  in  the  military  acade
my  at  Abbassick,  and  later  as  chief  of  staff  to  the
general-in-chief  of  the  army.  Early  in  1872  he
was  transferred  to  Gen.  Loring's  corps  at  Alexan
dria.  On  20  Feb.,  1874,  he  was  assigned  to  duty  as
chief  of  staff  to  Gen.  Charles  George  Gordon,  then
lieutenant -colonel  in  the  British  army,  who  had
been  appointed  by  the  khedive  governor-general  of
the  equatorial  provinces  of  Egypt.  On  24  April  he
set  out  toward  the  equator  on  a  secret  diplomatic
and  geographical  mission  inspired  by  Ismail  Pacha,
the  khedive.  He  was  accompanied  only  by  twa
soldiers  and  his  servants,  and  arrived  at  the  capi
tal  of  Nyanda  on  20  June,  1874,  being  the  only
white  man  save  Capt.  Speke  that  had  ever  visited
that  place,  and  secured  a  treaty  by  which  King
M'Tse  acknowledged  himself  a  vassal  of  Egypt.
He  then  turned  north  to  trace  the  unknown  part
of  the  Nile  that  still  left  the  question  of  its  source
in  doubt.  In  descending  the  river  at  M'roole  he
was  attacked  by  the  king  of  Unyoro  Kaba-Rega
with  a  party  of  warriors  in  boats  and  a  numerous
force  on  shore.  Chaille-Long,  with  his  two  soldiers,
armed  with  breech-loading  rifles  and  explosive
shells,  sustained  the  attack  for  several  hours,  and
finally  beat  off  the  savages.  He  was  promoted  to
the  full  rank  of  colonel  and  bey,  and  decorated
with  the  cross  of  the  commander  of  the  Medjidieh.
In  January,  1875,  he  fitted  out  and  led  an  expe
dition  southwestward  of  the  Nile  into  the  Niam-
Niam  country,  subjected  it  to  the  authority  of  the
Egyptian  government,  and  dispersed  the  slave-


LONG


LONG


9


trading  bands.  On  his  return  in  March,  1875,  he
was  ordered  to  go  to  Cairo,  where,  with  orders  from
the  khedive,  he  organized  an  expedition  ostensibly
to  open  an  equatorial  road  from  the  Indian  ocean
along  Juba  river  to  the  central  African  lakes.  The
expedition  sailed  from  Sury  on  19  Sept.,  1875,  took
possession  of  the  coast  and  several  fortified  towns,
and  occupied  and  fortified  Comf,  on  Juba  river.
On  1  Sept.,  1877,  Chaille-Long  resigned  his  com
mission  in  the  Egyptian  army,  on  account  of  fail
ing  health,  returning  to  New  York,  where  he  stud
ied  law  at  Columbia.  He  was  graduated  and  ad
mitted  to  practice,  and  in  1882  returned  to  Egypt
to  practise  in  the  international  courts.  The  insur
rection  of  Arabi  culminated  in  the  terrible  mas
sacre  at  Alexandria  of  11  June,  1882,  the  U.  S.  con
sul-general  remained  away  from  his  post  at  this
juncture,  and  the  U.  S.  consular  agents  fled  from
Egypt.  Chaille-Long  assisted  the  refugees,  hun
dreds  of  whom  were  placed  on  board  of  the  Ameri
can  ships,  and  after  the  burning  of  the  city,  he  re
established  the  American  consulate,  and,  aided  by
160  American  sailors  and  marines,  restored  order,
and  arrested  the  fire.  Col.  Chaille-Long  removed
to  Paris  in  October,  1882,  and  opened  an  office  for
the  practice  of  international  law.  In  March,  1887,
he  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul-general  and  secre
tary  of  legation  in  Corea.  He  has  published  "  Cen
tral  Africa :  Naked  Truths  of  Naked  People  "  (New
York,  1877)  and  -'The  Three  Prophets— Chinese
Gordon,  the  Mahdi,  and  Arabi  Pacha"  (1884).

LONG,  Clement,  theologian,  b.  in  Hopkinton,
N.  H.,  1  Dec.,  1806 ;  d.  in  Hanover,  N.  H.,  14  Oct.,
1861.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1828,
studied  at  Andover  seminary  in  1831-'3,  and  was
ordained  to  the  Presbyterian  ministry  in  Ohio  in
1836.  He  was  professor  of  philosophy  in  Western
Reserve  college  from  1834  till  1844,  and  of  the
ology  from  the  latter  year  till  1852.  He  was  then
called  to  the  chair  of  theology  at  Auburn  theologi
cal  seminary,  where  he  remained  until  1854.  He
was  also  lecturer  on  intellectual  philosophy  and
political  economy  at  Dartmouth  in  1851-'2,  and
was  professor  of  the  same  from  1854  until  his
death,  also  lecturing  on  moral  and  mental  philoso
phy  at  Western  Reserve  in  1860-'61.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Dartmouth  in  1849,  and
that  of  LL..D.  from  Western  Reserve  in  1860.
He  was  a  contributor  to  the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra."

LONG,  Crawford  W.,  physician,  b.  in  Daniels-
ville,  Madison  co.,  Ga.,  1  Nov.1,  1815 ;  d.  in  Ath
ens,  Ga.,  16  June,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at
Franklin  college,  Pa.,  in  1835,  and  at  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1839.  He  then  practised  in  Jefferson,  Jackson
co.,  Ga.,  until  1851,  when  he  removed  to  Athens,
Ga.  He  claimed  that  he  performed  on  30  March,
1842,  the  first  surgical  operation  with  the  patient
in  a  state  of  anaesthesia  from  the  inhalation  of
ether.  In  his  history  of  the  discovery  of  anaesthe
sia,  Dr.  J.  Marion  Sims  says  that  Dr.  Long  was  the
first  "  to  intentionally  produce  anaesthesia  for  sur
gical  operations,"  and  that  this  was  done  with  sul
phuric  ether ;  that  he  did  not  by  accident  "  hit
upon  it,  but  that  he  reasoned  it  out  in  a  philosophi
cal  and  logical  manner  "  ;  that  "  Horace  Wells,
without  any  knowledge  of  Dr.  Long's  labors,  de
monstrated  in  the  same  philosophic  way  (in  his  own
person)  the  great  principle  of  anaesthesia  by  the  use
of  nitrous-oxide  gas  in  December,  1844,  thus  giving
Long  the  priority  over  Wells  by  two  years  and
eight  months,  and  over  Morton,  who  followed
Wells  in  1846."  He  was  named,  with  William  T.
G.  Morton,  Charles  T.  Jackson,  and  Wells,  in  a
bill  before  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1854  to  reward  the


probable  discoverers  of  practical  ana?sthesia.  Dr.
Long's  contributions  to  medical  literature  relate
chiefly  to  his  discovery.

LONG},  Edward,  English  author,  b.  in  Cornwall,
England,  in  1734 ;  d.  in  1813.  He  became  a  bar
rister,  and  in  1757  emigrated  to  Jamaica,  where
he  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  vice-admiralty
court.  After  his  return  to  England  in  1769,  he
published,  among  other  works,  a  "  History  of  Ja
maica"  (3  vols.,  London,  1774);  "Letters'  on  the
Colonies"  (1775) ;  and  "The  Sugar  Trade"  (1782).

LONG,  Eli,  soldier,  b.  in  Woodford  county,  Ky.,
16  June.  1837.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Frank
fort,  Ky.,  military  school  in  1855,  and  in  1856  ap
pointed  2d  lieutenant  in  the  1st  U.  S.  cavalry.
Prior  to  1861,  when  he  was  promoted  1st  lieuten
ant  and  captain,  he  served  with  his  regiment  main
ly  against  hostile  Indians.  Throughout  the  civil
war  he  was  actively  engaged  in  the  west  at  Tul-
lahoma,  Murfreesboro,  Chickamauga,  and  in  the
Atlanta  campaign,  as  colonel  of  the  4th  Ohio  cav
alry,  and  subsequently  in  command  of  a  brigade  of
cavalry.  He  was  brevetted  major,  lieutenant-
colonel,  and  colonel  for  "  gallant  and  meritorious
services "  at  Farmington  and  Knoxville,  Tenn.,
and  Lovejoy's  Station,  Ga.,  respectively.  On  13
March,  1865.  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  for  gallantry  at  Selma,  Ala.,  where  he
led  his  division  in  a  charge  upon  the  intrench-
ments  that  resulted  in  the  capture  of  that  place.
He  was  severely  wounded  in  the  head  in  the  action.
For  his  services  during  the  war  he  was  also  bre
vetted  major-general  in  the  regular  army  and  ma
jor-general  of  volunteers,  and  having  been  mus
tered  out  of  the  volunteer  service,  15  Jan.,  1866,  he
was  retired  with  the  rank  of  major-general  in  Au
gust,  but  was  reduced  to  brigadier-general  through
the  operation  of  the  act  of  3  March,  1875.

LONG,  Gabriel,  soldier,  b.  in  1751 ;  d.  in  Cul-
peper  county,  Va.,  3  Feb.,  1827.  He  was  an  officer
in  the  Revolutionary  army,  fought  at  Hampton
and  Norfolk  in  1775,  served  as  captain  in  Morgan's
rifle  regiment  in  1776,  and  ultimately  rose  to  the
rank  of  major.  He  led  the  advance  at  Saratoga
and  began  the  battle.  He  was  also  present  at
Yorktown,  and  took  part  in  eighteen  engagements.

LONG,  John  Collins,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Ports
mouth,  N.  H.,  in  1795 ;  d.  in  North  Conway,  N.  H.,
2  Sept.,  1865.  He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman,
18  June,  1812,  and  served  in  the  "  Constitution  "  in
her  action  with  the  "  Java."  He  was  promoted
lieutenant,  5  March,  1817,  commander,  25  Feb.,
1838,  captain,  2  March,  1849,  and  commodore  on
the  retired  list,  16  July,  1862.  He  was  assigned
the  duty  of  bringing  Louis  Kossuth  to  this  coun
try,  but  would  not  allow  him  to  deliver  revolu
tionary  harangues  at  Marseilles,  which  so  an
noyed  the  Hungarian  patriot  that  he  left  the  ship
at  Gibraltar.  Commodore  Long  was  fifty-three
years  in  the  service.

LONG,  John  Davis,  legislator,  b.  in  Buckfield,
Oxford  co.,  Me.,  27  Oct.,  1838.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1857,  taught  until  1859,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1861,  practised  in  Buck-
field,  and  settled  in  Boston  in  1862.  In  1869  he
removed  to  Hingham,  but  retained  his  office  in
Boston.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts
house  of  representatives  in  1875-'8,  and  served  the
last  three  years  as  its  speaker.  In  1879  he  was
lieutenant-governor,  and  governor  in  1880-'2.  He
was  elected  as  a  Republican  to  the  48th  congress,
and  re-elected  to  the  49th,  serving  from  3  Dec.,
1883,  till  4  March,  1887.  He  was  again  elected  to
the  50th  congress.  Gov.  Long  has  published  a
translation  of  Virgil's  "  ^Eneid  "  (Boston,  1879).


10


LONG


LONGFELLOW


LONG,  Pierse,  legislator,  b.  in  Portsmouth,
N.  H.,  in  1739 ;  d.  there,  3  April,  1789.  He  was
the  son  of  Pierse  Long,  who  was  born  in  Limerick,
Ireland,  but  came  to  this  country  and  engaged  in
the  shipping  business  in  Portsmouth.  The  son
entered  his  father's  counting-room  and  was  taken
into  partnership.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Provin
cial  congress  of  his  native  state  in  1775,  and  served
in  the  Revolutionary  army  as  colonel  of  the  1st
New  Hampshire  regiment.  In  the  retreat  from
Ticonderoga  his  command  was  overtaken  by  the
9th  British  foot,  which  he  turned  upon  and  de
feated.  He  was  a  volunteer  at  the  battle  of  Sara
toga,  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress  in
1784-'6,  a  state  councillor  in  178G-'9,  a  member  of
the  Constitutional  convention  in  1788,  and  was  ap
pointed  by  President  Washington  collector  of  cus
toms  at  Portsmouth  in  January,  1789.  He  dis
charged  the  duties  of  the  office  until  the  following
April,  when  he  died.

LONG,  Robert  Carey,  architect,  b.  about
1819;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  July,  1849.  He
studied  architecture,  and  practised  his  profession
for  several  years  in  Baltimore.  While  in  that  city
he  was  intrusted  with  designing  and  building  the
Athemeum,  occupied  by  the  Maryland  historical
society  and  the  Baltimore  library  company.  He
removed  to  New  York  city  in  1848,  and  was  rapid
ly  acquiring  a  reputation  when  his  career  was  cut
short  by  cholera.  He  contributed  a  series  of  arti
cles  entitled  "  Architectonics  "  to  the  "  New  York
Literary  World,"  and  read  a  paper  before  the  New
York  historical  society  on  "  Aztec  Architecture,"
which  was  printed  in  its  "  Transactions."  He  was
also  the  author  of  "Ancient  Architecture  of
America  "  (New  York.  1849).

LONG,  Stephen  Harriman,  engineer,  1).  in
Hopkinton.  N.  H.,  30  Dec.,  1784;  d.  in  Alton,  111.,
4  Sept.,  1804.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1809,  and  after  teaching  for  some  time  entered  the
U.  S.  army  in  December,  1814,  as  a  lieutenant  in
the  corps  of  engineers.  After  discharging  the
duties  of  assistant  professor  of  mathematics  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  until  April,  1816,  he  was
transferred  to  the  topographical  engineers,  with  the
brevet  rank  of  major.  From  1818  till  1823  he  had
charge  of  explorations  between  Mississippi  river
and  the  Rocky  mountains,  and  of  the  sources  of
the  Mississippi  in  1823-'4,  receiving  the  brevet  of
lieutenant-colonel.  The  highest  summit  of  the
Rocky  mountains  was  named  Long's  peak  in  his
honor.  He  was  engaged  in  surveying  the  Balti
more  and  Ohio  railroad  from  1827  till  1830,  and
from  1837  till  1840  was  engineer-in-chief  of  the
Western  and  Atlantic  railroad  in  Georgia,  in  which
capacity  he  introduced  a  system  of  curves  in  the
location  of  the  road  and  a  new  kind  of  truss  bridge,
which  was  called  by  his  name,  and  has  been  gener
ally  adopted  in  the  United  States.  On  the  organi
zation  of  the  topographical  engineers  as  a  separate
corps  in  1838,  he  became  major  in  that  body,  and
in  18G1  chief  of  topographical  engineers,  with  the
rank  of  colonel.  An  account  of  his  first  expedition
to  the  Rocky  mountains  in  1819-'20  from  the  notes
of  Maj.  Long  and  others,  by  Edwin  James,  was
published  in  Philadelphia  in  1823,  and  in  1824
appeared  "  Long's  Expedition  to  the  Source  of  St.
Peter's  River,  Lake  of  the  Woods,  etc.,"  by  Will
iam  H.  Keating  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia).  Col.  Long
was  retired  from  active  service  in  June,  1863,  but
continued,  charged  with  important  duties,  until
his  death.  He  was  a  member  of  the  American
philosophical  society,  and  the  author  of  a  "  Rail
road  Manual "  (1829),  which  was  the  first  original
treatise  of  the  kind  published  in  this  country.


LONGACRE,  James  Barton,  engraver,  b.  in
Delaware  county,  Pa.,  11  Aug.,  1794:  d.  in  Phila
delphia,  1  Jan.,  1869.  He  was  descended  from  an
early  Swedish  colonist  on  the  Delaware,  whose
name  was  originally  Longker.  He  served  his  ap
prenticeship  as  an  engraver  in  Philadelphia,  and
from  1819  till  1831  illustrated  some  of  the  best
works  that  were  published  in  this  country.  With
James  Herring,  of  New  York,  and  afterward  alone,
he  issued  the  "  National  Portrait  Gallery  of  Dis
tinguished  Americans,"  in  which  many  of  the  en
gravings  were  from  sketches  by  his  own  hand
(3  vols.,  New  York,  1834-'9).  From  1844  till  his
death  he  was  engraver  to  the  U.  S.  mint,  and  de
signed  all  the  new  coins  that  were  struck  during
this  time,  including  the  double-eagle,  the  three-
dollar  piece,  and  the  gold  dollar.  He  was  after
ward  employed  by  the  Chilian  government  to  re
model  the  entire  coinage  of  that  country,  and  had
completed  the  work  shortly  before  his  death.

LONGFELLOW,  Stephen,  lawyer,  b.  in  Gor-
haro,  Me.,  23  June,  1775  ;  d.  in  Portland,  Me.,  2
Aug.,  1849.  He  was  of  the  fourth  generation  in
lineal  descent  from  William  Longfellow,  who  had
emigrated  from  Yorkshire  to  Massachusetts  and
settled  in  Newbury  about  1675,  and  in  1676  mar
ried  a  sister  of  Judge  Samuel  Sewall.  Stephen
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1798,  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1801,  and  practised  successfully  in
Portland.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Hartford
convention  in  1814,  and  was  subsequently  elect
ed  to  the  18th  congress  as  a  Federalist,  serving
from  1  Dec.,  1823,  till  3  March,  1825.  In  1834
he  was  president  of  the  Maine  historical  society,
having  previously  been  its  recording  secretary.  In
1828  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Bow-
doin.  lie  compiled  sixteen  volumes  of  Massachu
setts  and  twelve  volumes  of  Maine  "  Reports."
He  married  the  daughter  of  Gen.  Peleg  Wads-
worth,  an  officer  in  the  Revolution. — Their  son,
Henry  Wadsworth,  poet.  b.  in  Portland,  Me..  27
Feb.,  1807;  d.  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,
24  March,  1882,
was  the  second  son
in  a  family  that
included  foursons
and  four  daugh
ters.  His  birth
place,  on  Fore
street,  is  shown  in
the  engraving  on
page  11.  He  was
named  fora  broth
er  of  his  moth
er,  who,  a  youth
of  nineteen,  late
ly  commissioned
lieutenant  in  the
U.  S.  navy,  and
serving  before
Tripoli  under  Com.  Preble,  had  perished  in  the
fire-ship  "  Intrepid,"  which  was  blown  up  in  the
night  of  4  Sept.,  1804.  The  boyhood  of  the  poet
was  happy.  A  sweeter,  simpler,  more  essentially
human  society  has  seldom  existed  than  that  of  New
England  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  century,  and
the  conditions  of  life  in  Portland  were  in  some
respects  especially  pleasant  and  propitious.  The
beautiful  and  wholesome  situation  of  the  town  on
the  sea-shore  ;  the  fine  and  picturesque  harbor  that
afforded  shelter  to  the  vessels  by  which  a  mod
erate  commerce  with  remote  regions  was  carried  on,
giving  vivacity  to  the  port  and  widening  the  scope
of  the  interests  of  the  inhabitants ;  the  general


3  V.Vvi  O&  ^YY&A*^


LONGFELLOW


LONGFELLOW


11


diffusion  of  comfort  and  intelligence;  the  tradi
tional  purity  and  simplicity  of  life;  the  absence  of
class  distinctions :  the  democratic  kindliness  of
spirit ;  the  pervading  temper  of  hopefulness  and
content — all  made  Portland  a  good  place  in  which
to  be  born  and  grow  up.  Like  the  rest  of  New
England  it  was  provincial,  it  had  little  part  in  the
larger  historic  concerns  of  the  world,  it  possessed
no  deep  wells  of  experience  or  of  culture,  and  no
memorials  of  a  distant  past  by  which  the  imagina
tion  might  be  quickened  and  nurtured ;  it  was  a
comparatively  new  place  in  a  comparatively  new
country.  The  sweetness  of  Longfellow's  disposi
tion  showed  itself  in  his  earliest  years.  He  was  a
gentle,  docile,  cheerful,  intelligent,  attractive  child :
"  one  of  the  best  boys  in  school  "  was  his  teacher's
report  of  him  at  six  years  old.  He  was  fond  of
books,  and  his  father's  library  supplied  him  with
the  best  in  English.  He  was  sensitive  to  the  charm  !
of  style  in  literature,  and  a  characteristic  glimpse  ]
of  his  taste,  and  of  the  influences  that  were  shap-  ;
ing  him.  is  afforded  by  svhat  he  said  in  later  life  in
speaking  of  Irving :  "  Every  boy  has  his  first  book  ;
I  mean  to  say,  one  book  among  all  others  which  in
early  youth  first  fascinates  his  imagination,  and  at
once  excites  and  satisfies  the  desires  of  his  mind.
To  me  this  first  book  was  the  '  Sketch-Book '  of
Washington  Irving.  I  was  a  school-boy  when  it
was  published  [in  1819],  and  read  each  succeeding
number  with  ever-increasing  wonder  and  delight,
spell-bound  by  its  pleasant  humor,  its  melancholy
tenderness,  its  atmosphere  of  reverie.  .  .  .  The
charm  remains  unbroken,  and  whenever  I  open  the
pages  of  the  '  Sketch-Book,'  I  open  also  that  mys
terious  door  which  leads  back  into  the  haunted
chambers  of  youth."  Already,  when  he  was  thir
teen  years  old,  he  had  begun  to  write  verses,  some
of  which  found  place  in  the  poet's  corner  of  the
local  newspaper.  In  1821  he  passed  the  entrance
examinations  for  Bowdoin,  but  it  was  not  until
1822  that  Longfellow  left  home  to  reside  at  the
college.  Among  his  classmates  was  Nathaniel
Hawthorne,  with  whom  he  speedily  formed  an
acquaintance  that  was  to  ripen  into  a  life-long
friendship.  His  letters  to  his  mother  and  father
during  his  years  at  college  throw  a  pleasant  light
upon  his  pursuits  and  his  disposition  ;  they  display
the  fearly  maturity  of  his  character ;  the  traits
that  distinguished  him  in  later  years  are  already
clearly  defined ;  the  amiability,  the  affectionate-
ness,  the  candor,  and  the  cheerful  spirit  of  the
youth  are  forecasts  of  the  distinguishing  qualities
of  the  man.  His  taste  for  literary  pursuits,  and
his  strong  moral  sentiment  and  purpose,  are  already
developed.  A  few  sentences  from  his  letters  will
serve  to  exhibit  him  as  he  was  at  this  time.  "  I
am  in  favor  of  letting  each  one  think  for  himself,
and  I  am  very  much  pleased  with  Gray's  poems.
Dr.  Johnson  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding."
"  I  have  very  resolutely  concluded  to  enjoy  myself
heartily  wherever  I  am."  "  Leisure  is  to  me  one  of
the  sweetest  things  in  the  world."  "  I  care  but  little
about  politics  or  anything  of  the  kind."  "  I  ad
mire  Horace  very  much  indeed."  "  I  conceive  that
if  religion  is  ever  to  benefit  us.  it  must  be  incor
porated  with  our  feelings  and  become  in  every
degree  identified  with  our  happiness."  "  What
ever  I  study  1  ought  to  be  engaged  in  with  all  my
soul,  for  I  will  be  eminent  in  something."  "  I  am
afraid  you  begin  to  think  me  rather  chimerical
in  many  of  my  ideas,  and  that  I  am  ambitious  of
becoming  a  rara  avis  in  terris.  But  you  must  ac
knowledge  the  usefulness  of  aiming  high  at  some
thing  which  it  is  impossible  to  overshoot,  perhaps
to  reach."  He  was  writing  much,  both  verse  and


prose,  and  his  pieces  had  merit  enough  to  secure
publication,  not  only  in  the  Portland  paper,  but
in  more  than  one  of  the  magazines,  and  especially
in  the  "  United  States  Literary  Gazette,"  published
in  Boston,  in  which  no  fewer  than  sixteen  poems  by
him  appeared  in  the  course  of  the  year  1824-'5.
Very  few  of  these  were  thought  by  their  author
worth  reprinting  in  later  years,  and  though  they
all  show  facile  versification  and  refined  taste,  none
of  them  exhibit  such  original  power  as  to  give
assurance  of  his  future  fame.  Several  of  them  dis
play  the  influence
of  Bryant  both  in
form  and  thought.
Long  afterward,  in
writing  to  Bryant.
Longfellow  said  :
"  Let  me  acknowl
edge  how  much  I
owe  to  you,  not  only
of  delight  but  of
culture.  When  I
look  back  upon  my
earlier  verses,  I  can
not  but  smile  to  see
how  much  in  them
is  really  yours."  He

owed  much  also  to  others,  and  in  these  youthful
compositions  one  may  find  traces  of  his  favorite
poets  from  Gray  to  Byron.

As  the  time  for  leaving  college  drew  near,  it  be
came  necessary  for  him  to  decide  on  a  profession,
He  was  averse  to  the  ministry,  to  medicine,  and,  in
spite  of  his  father's  and  grandfather's  example,  to
the  law.  In  1824  he  writes  to  his  father  :  "  I  am
altogether  in  favor  of  the  farmer's  life."  But  a
few  months  later  he  says :  "  The  fact  is,  I  most
eagerly  aspire  after  future  eminence  in  literature.
My  whole  soul  burns  most  ardently  for  it,  and
every  earthly  thought  centres  in  it."  .  .  .  Surely
there  never  was  a  better  opportunity  offered  for
the  exertion  of  literary  talent  in  our  own  country
than  is  now  offered.  .  .  .  Nature  has  given  me  a
very  strong  predilection  for  literary  pursuits,  and
I  am  almost  confident  in  believing  that,  if  I  can
ever  rise  in  the  world,  it  must  be  by  the  exercise  of
my  talent  in  the  wide  field  of  literature."  In  reply
to  these  ardent  aspirations  his  father  wisely  urged
that,  though  a  literary  life  might  be  very  pleasant
to  one  who  had  the  means  of  support,  it  did  not
offer  secure  promise  of  a  livelihood,  and  that  it  was
necessary  for  his  son  to  adopt  a  profession  that
should  afford  him  subsistence  as  well  as  reputa
tion  ;  but  he  gave  his  consent  readily  to  his  son's
passing  a  year  in  Cambridge,  after  leaving  college,
in  literary  studies  previous  to  entering  on  the  study
of  a  profession.

Before  the  time  for  this  arrived  a  new  prospect
opened,  full  of  hope  for  the  young  scholar.  He
had  distinguished  himself  in  college  by  his  studi
ous  disposition,  his  excellent  conduct,  and  his  ca
pacity  as  a  writer,  and  when  their  rank  was  as
signed  to  the  members  of  his  class  at  graduation,
he  stood  upon  the  list  as  the  fourth  in  general
scholarship  in  a  class  of  thirty-eight.  Just  at  this
time  the  trustees  of  the  college  determined  to  es
tablish  a  professorship  of  modern  languages,  and,
not  having  the  means  to  obtain  the  services  of  any
one  that  was  already  eminent  in  this  department,
they  determined  to  offer  the  post  conditionally  to
the  young  graduate  of  their  own  college,  who  had
already  given  proof  of  character  and  abilities  that
would'enable  him  after  proper  preparation  to  fill
the  place  satisfactorily.  The  proposal  was  accord
ingly  made  to  him  that  he  should  go  to  Europe  for


12


LONGFELLOW


LONGFELLOW


the  purpose  of  fitting  himself  for  this  chair,  with
the  understanding  that  on  his  return  he  should  re
ceive  the  appointment  of  professor.  It  was  a  re
markable  testimony  to  the  impression  that  Long
fellow  had  made  and  to  the  confidence  he  had  in
spired.  Nothing  could  have  been  more  delightful
to  him  than  the  prospect  it  opened.  It  settled  the
question  of  his  career  in  accordance  with  the  de
sire  of  his  heart,  and  his  father  gladly  approved.  _

After  passing  the  autumn  and  winter  of  1825-'6
in  preparatory  studies  at  home  in  Portland,  Long
fellow  sailed  for  Havre  in  May,  1826.  The  dis
tance  of  Europe  from  America,  measured  by-
time,  was  far  greater  then  than  now.  Communi
cation  was  comparatively  infrequent  and  irregular ;
the  interval  of  news  was  often  months  long;  the
novelty  of  such  an  experience  as  that  on  which
Longfellow  entered  was  great.  "  Madam,"  said  a
friend  to  his  mother,  "  you  must  have  great  confi
dence  in  your  son."  "It  is  true,  Henry,"  she
wrote,  "  your  parents  have  great  confidence  in  your
uprightness  and  in  that  purity  of  mind  which  will
instantly  take  alarm  on  coming  in  contact  with  any
thing  vicious  or  unworthy.  W.e  have  confidence ;  but
you  must  be  careful  aiid  watchful."  Sixty  years
ago  Europe  promised  more  to  the  young  American
of  poetic  temperament  than  it  does  to-day,  and
kept  its  promise  better.  Longfellow's  character
was  already  so  mature,  his  culture  so  advanced,
and  his  temperament  so  happy,  that  no  one  could


be  better  fitted  than  he  to  profit  by  a  visit  to  the
Old  World.  A  voyage  to  Europe  is  often  a  voyage
of  discovery  of  himself  to  the  young  American  ;  he
learns  that  he  possesses  imagination  and  sensibili
ties  that  have  not  been  evoked  in  his  own  land  and
for  which  Europe  alone  can  provide  the  proper
nurture.  So  it  was  with  Longfellow.  He  passed
eight  months  in  Paris  and  its  neighborhood,  steadi
ly  at  work  in  mastering  the  language,  and  in  study
ing  the  literature  and  life  of  France.  In  the  spring
of  1827  he  went  from  France  to  Spain,  and  here  he
spent  a  like  period  in  similar  occupations.  It  was
a  period  of  great  enjoyment  for  him.  At  Madrid
he  had  the  good  fortune  to  make  acquaintance
with  Irving,  who  was  then  engaged  in  writing  his
"  Life  of  Columbus,"  of  Alexander  Everett,  the  U.  S.
minister,  and  of  Lieut,  Alexander  Slidell,  U.  S.  navy
(afterward  honorably  known  as  Com.  Slidell-Mac-
kenzie),  who  in  his  "  Year  in  Spain "  pleasantly
mentions  and  gives  a  characteristic  description  of
the  young  traveller.  In  December,  1827,  Longfel
low  left  Spain  for  Italy,  where  he  remained  through
a  year  that  was  crowded  with  delightful  experi
ence  and  was  well  employed  in  gaining  a  rich
store  of  knowledge.  His  "studies  were  constant
and  faithful,  and  his  genius  for  language  was  such
that  when  he  went  to  Germany  at  the  end  of  1828
he  had  a  command  of  French,  Spanish,  and  Italian
such  as  is  seldom  gained  by  a  foreigner.  He  estab


lished  himself  at  Gottingen  in  February,  1829,  and
was  pursuing  his  studies  there  when  he  was  called
home  by  letters  that  required  his  return.  He  reached
the  United  States  in  August,  and  in  September,
having  received  the  appointment  of  professor  of
modern  languages  at  Bowdoin  college,  with  a  sala
ry  of  $800,  he  took  up  his  residence  at  Brunswick.
He  was  now  twenty-two  years  old,  and  probably,
with  the  exception  of  Mr.  George  Ticknor.  was  the
most  accomplished  scholar  in  this  country  of  the
languages  and  literatures  of  modern  Europe.  He
devoted  himself  zealously  to  teaching,  to  editing
for  his  classes  several  excellent  text-books,  and  to
writing  a  series  of  lectures  on  the  literatures  of
France.  Spain,  and  Italy.  The  influence  of  such  a
nature  and  such  tastes  and  learning  as  his  was  of
the  highest  value  in  a  country  college  remote  from
the  deeper  sources  of  culture.  "His  intercourse
with  the  students,"  wrote  one  of  his  pupils,  "was
perfectly  simple,  frank,  and  manly.  They  always
left  him  not  only  with  admiration,  but  guided,
helped,  and  inspired."  In  addition  to  his  duties  as
professor  he  performed  those  of  librarian  of  the
college,  and  in  April.  1831,  he  published  in  the
"  North  American  Review "  the  first  of  a  series  of
articles,  which  were  continued  at  irregular  inter
vals  for  several  years,  upon  topics  that  were  con
nected  with  his  studies.  His  prose  style  was  al
ready  formed,  and  was  stamped  with  the  purity
and  charm  that  were  the  expression  of  his  whole
nature,  intellectual  and  moral.  Poetry  he  had  for
the  time  given  up.  Of  those  little  poetic  attempts
dating  from  his  college  years  he  wrote,  that  lie  had
long  ceased  to  attach  any  value  to  them.  "  I  am
all  prudence  now,  since  lean  form  a  more  accurate
judgment  of  the  merit  of  poetry.  If  I  ever  pub
lish  a  volume,  it  will  be  many  years  first."

In  September,  1831,  he  married  Miss  Mary  Potter,
of  Portland.  It  was  a  happy  marriage.  About,  the
same  time  he  began  to  publish  in  the  "  New  Eng
land  Magazine  "  the  sketches  of  travel  that  after
ward  were  collected,  and,  with  the  addition  of  some
others,  published  under  the  title  of  "Outre  Mer;
a  Pilgrimage  .beyond  the  Sea"  (New  York,  1835).
This  was  his  earliest  independent  contribution  to
American  literature,  and  in  its  pleasant  mingling
of  the  record  of  personal  experience,  with  essays
on  literature,  translations,  and  romantic  stories,
and  in  the  ease  and  grace  of  its  style,  it  is  a  worthy
prelude  and  introduction  to  his  later  more  impor
tant  work.  The  narrowness  of  the  opportunities
that  were  afforded  at  Bowdoin  for  literary  culture
and  conversation  prevented  the  situation  there
from  being  altogether  congenial  to  him,  and  it  was
with  satisfaction  that  he  received  in  December,
1834,  an  invitation  to  succeed  Mr.  George  Ticknor
in  the  Smith  professorship  of  modern  languages  at
Harvard,  with  the  suggestion  that,  before  entering
on  its  duties,  he  should  spend  a  year  or  eighteen
months  in  Europe  for  study  in  Germany.  He  ac
cordingly  resigned  the  professorship  at  Bowdoin,
which  he  had  held  for  five  years  and  a  half,  and  in
April,  1835,  he  set  sail  with  his  wife  for  England.
In  June  he  went  to  Denmark,  and,  after  passing
the  summer  at  Copenhagen  and  Stockholm  study
ing  the  Danish.  Swedish,  and  Finnish  languages,
he  went  in  October  to  Holland  on  his  way  to  Ger
many.  At  Amsterdam  and  Rotterdam  he  was  de
tained  by  the  serious  illness  of  Mrs.  Longfellow,
and  employed  his  enforced  leisure  in  acquiring  the
Dutch  language.  Near  the  end  of  November  his
wife  died  at  Rotterdam.  The  blow  fell  heavily
upon  him ;  but  his  strong  religious  faith  afforded
him  support,  and  he  was  not  overmastered  by  vain
grief.  He  soon  proceeded  to  Heidelberg,  and


LONGFELLOW


LONGFELLOW


13


sought  in  serious  and  constant  study  a  relief  from
suffering,  bereavement,  and  dejection.  For  a  time
he  was  cheered  by  the  companionship  of  Bryant,
whom  he  met  here  for  the  first  time.  In  the  spring
he  made  some  excursions  in  the  beautiful  regions
in  the  neighborhood  of  the  Rhine,  and  he  spent
the  summer  in  Switzerland  and  the  Tyrol.  In
September  he  was  at  Paris,  and  in  October  he
returned  home.

In  December,  1836,  he  established  himself  at
Cambridge,  and  entered  upon  his  duties  as  pro
fessor.  For  the  remainder  of  his  life  Cambridge
was  to  be  his  home.  Lowell,  in  his  delightful  es
say,  "  Cambridge  Thirty  Years  Ago,"  has  preserved
the  image  of  the  village  much  as  it  was  at  this
period.  The  little  town  was  not  yet  suburbanized ;
it  was  dominated  by  the  college,  whose  professors,
many  of  them  men  of  note,  formed  a  cultivated  and
agreeable  society.  Limited  as  were  its  intellectual
resources  as  compared  with  those  that  it  has  since
acquired,  its  was  the  chief  centre  in  New  England
of  literary  activity  and  cultivated  intelligence.
Longfellow  soon  found  friends,  who  speedily  be
came  closely  attached  to  him,  both  in  Boston  and
Cambridge,  alike  of  the  elder  and  younger  genera
tion  of  scholars,  chief  among  whom  were  George
Ticknor,  William  H.  Prescott,  Andrews  Norton,
John  G.  Palfrey,  Cornelius  C.  Felton,  Charles  Sum-
ner,  George  S.  Hillard,  and  Henry  R.  Cleveland.
His  delightful  qualities  of  heart  and  mind,  his  so
cial  charm,  his  wide  and  elegant  culture,  his  refine
ment,  the  sweetness  of  his  temper,  the  openness  of
his  nature,  and  his  quick  sympathies,  made  him  a
rare  acquisition  in  any  society,  and  secured  for  him
warm  regard  and  affection.  He  employed  himself
busily  in  instruction  and  the  writing  of  lectures,
and  in  1837  he  began  once  more  to  give  himself
to  poetry,  and  wrote  the  poems  that  were  to  be  the
foundation  of  his  future  fame.  In  the  autumn
of  this  year  he  took  up  his  residence  at  Craigie
House,  a  fine  old  colonial  mansion,  consecrated  by
memories  of  Washington's  stay  in  it,  which  was
thenceforward  to  be  his  abode  for  life.  Here,  in
1837,  he  wrote  "  The  Reaper  and  the  Flowers,"
and  in  June,  1838,  "  The  Psalm  of  Life,"  which,  on
its  publication  in  the  "Knickerbocker  Magazine"
for  October,  instantly  became  popular,  and  made
its  author's  name  well  known.  It  was  the  sound
of  a  new  voice,  a  most  musical  and  moving  one,  in
American  poetry.  In  February,  1838,  he  was  lec
turing  on  Dante ;  in  the  summer  of  that  year  his
course  was  on  "  The  Lives  of  Literary  Men."  He
was  writing  also  for  the  "  North  American  Re
view,"  and  during  the  year  he  began  his  "  Hype
rion."  It  was  a  busy  and  fruitful  time.  "Hyperion"
was  published  in  New  York  in  1839.  It  was  a  ro
mance  based  upon  personal  experience.  The  scene
was  laid  among  the  sites  he  had  lately  visited  in
Europe ;  the  characters  were  drawn  in  part  from
life.  He  put  into  his  story  the  pain,  the  passion,
and  the  ideals  of  his  heart.  It  was  a  book  to  touch
the  soul  of  fervent  youth.  It  had  much  beauty  of
fancy,  and  it  showed  how  deeply  the  imagination
of  the  young  American  had  been  stirred  by  the
poetic  associations  of  Europe,  and  enriched  by  the
abundant  sources  of  foreign  culture.  It  was  hardly
out  of  press  before  it  was  followed  by  the  publica
tion,  in  the  late  autumn,  of  his  first  volume  of
poems,  "  Voices  of  the  Night."  This  contained,  in
addition  to  his  recent  poems,  a  selection  of  seven
of  his  early  poems — all  that  he  wished  to  preserve
— and  numerous  translations  from  the  Spanish,
Italian,  and  German.  The  little  volume  of  144
pages  contained  poems  that  were  stamped  with
the  impress  of  an  original  genius  whose  voice


was  of  a  tone  unheard  before.  "  The  Psalm  of
Life,"  "  The  Reaper  and  the  Flowers,"  "  The  Foot
steps  of  Angels,"  "  The  Beleaguered  City,"  speed
ily  became  popular,  and  have  remained  familiar  to
English  readers  from  that  day  to  this.  "  Nothing
equal  to  some  of  them  was  ever  written  in  this
world — this  western  world,  I  mean,''  wrote  his
friend  Hawthorne.  Before  a  year  was  out  the  vol
ume  had  come  to  a  third  edition.  From  this  time
Longfellow's  fame  grew  rapidly.  Success  and  repu
tation  were  to  him  but  stimulants  to  new  exertions.
Essentially  modest  and  simple,  praise  or  flattery
could  do  him  no  harm.  His  genial  and  sound  na
ture  turned  all  experience  to  good.

During  the  next  two  or  three  years,  while  his
laborious  duties  as  instructor  were  faithfully  and
successfully  discharged,  he  still  found  time  for
study,  and  his  vein  of  poetry  was  in  full  flow.  In
1841  his  second  volume  of  poems  was  published ;  it
was  entitled  "  Ballads  and  other  Poems,"  and  con
tained,  among  other  well-known  pieces,  "  The  Wreck
of  the  Hesperus,"  "  The  Village  Blacksmith,"  and
"  Excelsior."  It  confirmed  the  impression  that  had
been  made  by  the  "  Vpices  of  the  Night,"  and  hence
forth  Longfellow  stood  confessedly  as  the  most
widely  read  and  the  best  beloved  of  American  poets.
In  the  spring  of  1842,  his  health  having  been  for
some  time  in  an  unsatisfactory  state,  he  received
leave  of  absence  for  six  months  from  the  college,
and  went  abroad.  After  a  short  stay  in  Paris  he
made  a  journey,  abounding  in  interest  and  poetic
suggestions,  through  Belgium,  visiting  Bruges,
Ghent,  Antwerp,  and  Brussels,  and  proceeded  to
Marienberg-on-the  Rhine,  where  he  spent  a  quiet
but  pleasant  summer  at  a  water-cure  establishment.
Here  he  made  acquaintance  with  the  German  poet
Freiligrath,  and  the  cordial  friendship  then  formed
with  him  was  maintained  by  letters  until  Freili-
grath's  death,  more  than  thirty  years  afterward.
In  October  he  passed  some  delightful  days  in  Lon
don,  as  the  guest  of  Charles  Dickens,  with  whom
he  had  come  into  very  cordial  relations  in  America
early  in  the  same  year,  and  in  November  he  was
again  at  home  engaged  in  his  familiar  pursuits.
On  the  return  voyage  he  wrote  "  Poems  on  Sla
very,"  which  were  published  in  a  thin  pamphlet  be
fore  the  end  of  the  year.  They  were  the  expression
not  so  much  of  poetic  emotion  as  of  moral  feeling.
They  attracted  much  attention,  as  the  testimony
of  a  poet,  by  nature  disinclined  to  censure,  against
the  great  national  crime  of  which  the  worst  evil
was  its  corrupting  influence  upon  the  public  con
science.  It  was  to  that  conscience  that  these  poems
appealed,  and  they  were  received  on  the  one  hand
with  warm  approval,  on  the  other  with  still  warmer
condemnation.  In  June,  1843,  he  married  Frances
Appleton,  daughter  of  the  Hon.  Nathan  Appleton.
of  Boston.  He  had  been  attached  to  her  since  their
first  meeting  in  Switzerland  in  1836,  and  something
of  his  feeling  toward  her  had  been  revealed  in  his
delineation  of  the  character  of  Mary  Ashburton  in
"  Hyperion."  She  was  a  woman  whose  high  and
rare  qualities  of  character  found  harmonious  ex
pression  in  beauty  of  person  and  nobility  of  pres
ence.  Seldom  has  there  been  a  happier  marriage.
From  this  time  forward  for  many  years  Longfellow's
life  flowed  on  as  peacefully  and  with  as  much  joy
as  ever  falls  to  man.  His  fortunes  were  prosperous.
His  books  were  beginning  to  bring  him  in  a  con
siderable  income ;  his  wife's  dowry  was  such  as  to
secure  to  him  pecuniary  ease ;  Craigie  House,  with
the  pleasant  fields  in  front  of  it  reaching  to  the
river  Charles,  was  now  his  own,  and  his  means  en
abled  him  to  gratify  his  taste  for  a  refined  hospi
tality  no  less  than  to  satisfy  the  generous  impulses


14


LONGFELLOW


LONGFELLOW


of  his  liberal  disposition,  and  to  meet  the  multitude
of  appeals  for  help  that  came  to  him  from  the  poor
and  suffering,  who,  though  they  might  be  remote
and  unknown  to  him,  felt  confident  of  his  sym
pathy.  The  general  character  of  these  years  and
of  their  influence  on  him  is  reflected  in  his  work.
His  genius  found  in  them  the  moment  of  its  fullest
expansion  and  happiest  inspiration.  In  the  year
of  his  marriage  "  The
Spanish  Student"  was
published  in  a  volume.
It  had  been  mainly  writ
ten  three  years  before,
and  was  first  printed  in
"  Graham's  Magazine  "
in  1842.  In  1846  "  The
Belfry  of  Bruges  and
other  Poems"  appeared;
among  the  "other  Po
ems  "  were  "  The  Old
Clock  on  the  Stairs"
and  "The  Arsenal  at
Springfield."  This  was
followed  by  "  Evange-
line"  (1847),  of  which
Hawthorne  wrote  to
him :  "  I  have  read  it
with  more  pleasure  than
it  would  be  decorous  to
express,"  and  which
thousands  upon  thou
sands  have  read,  and
will  read,  with  hearts

touched  and  improved  by  its  serene  and  pathetic
beauty.  Then  appeared  "  Kavanagh,"  a  tale  in
prose  (1849) ;  "  The  Seaside  and  the  Fireside,"  con
taining  "  The  Building  of  the  Ship,''  "  Resigna
tion,"  "The  Fire  of  Driftwood,"  and  twenty  other
poems  (1850) ;  and  "  The  Golden  Legend  "  (1851).

During  all  these  years  he  had  continued  to  dis
charge  the  active  duties  of  his  professorship,  but
they  had  gradually  become  irksome  to  him,  and
in  1854,  after  nearty  eighteen  years  of  service  at
Harvard,  he  resigned  the  place.  "  I  want  to  try,
he  wrote  to  Freiligrath,  "  the  effect  of  change  on
my  mind,  and  of  freedom  from  routine.  House
hold  occupations,  children,  relatives,  friends,  stran
gers,  and  college  lectures  so  completely  fill  up  my
days  that  I  have  no  time  for  poetry ;  and,  conse
quently,  the  last  two  years  have  been  very  unpro
ductive  with  me.  I  am  not,  however,  very  sure  or
sanguine  about  the  result."  But  he  was  hardly
free  from  the  daily  duties  of  instruction  before  he
was  at  work  upon  "  Hiawatha,"  and  in  the  course
of  the  year  he  wrote  many  snorter  pieces,  among
his  best,  such  as  "  The  Rope- Walk,"  "  My  Lost
Youth,"  and  "The  Two  Angels."  "Hiawatha"
was  published  in  1855,  and  in  1858  appeared  "  The
Courtship  of  Miles  Standish,"  with  about  twenty
minor  poems.

But  the  days  of  joyful  inspiration  and  success
were  drawing  to  their  close.  In  July,  1861,  an  in
expressible  calamity,  by  which  all  his  later  life  was
shadowed,  fell  upon  him,  in  the  sudden  and  most
distressing  death  of  his  wife  by  fire.  His  recovery
from  its  immediate,  shattering  effect  was  assisted
by  the  soundness  of  his  nature,  the  strength  of  his
principles,  and  the  confidence  of  his  religious
faith,  but  it  was  long  before  he  could  resume  his
usual  occupations,  or  find  interest  in  them.  After
several  months,  for  the  sake  of  a  regular  pursuit
that  might  have  power  more  or  less  to  engage  his
thought,  he  took  up  the  translation  of  the  '•  Divine
Comedy."  He  found  the  daily  task  wholesome,
and  gradually  he  became  interested  in  it.  For  the


next  three  or  four  years  the  translation,  the  revis
ion  of  it  for  the  press,  and  the  compilation  of  the
notes  that  were  to  accompany  it,  occupied  much  of
his  time.  The  work  was  published  in  1867,  arid
took  rank  at  once  as  the  best  translation  in  English
of  Dante's  poem.  The  accomplishment  of  this
task  had  not  only  been  a  wholesome  restorative
of  intellectual  calm,  but  had  been  the  means  of
bringing  about  in  a  natural  and  simple  way  the
renewal  of  social  pleasures  and  domestic  hospitali
ties.  In  the  revision  of  the  work,  Longfellow  had
called  to  his  aid  his  friends,  James  Russell  Lowell
and  the  present  writer;  and  the  "Dante  Club"
thus  formed  met  regularly  at  Craigie  House  one
evening  every  week  for  two  or  three  winters.
Other  friends  often  joined  the  circle,  and  the  even
ings  ended  with  a  cheerful  supper.  Thus,  by  de
grees,  with  the  passing  of  time,  the  current  of  life
began  once  more  to  run  on  in  a  tranquil  course,
and  though  without  a  ray  of  the  old  sunlight,
equally  without  a  shadow  of  gloom.  At  the  end
of  1863  he  published  "Tales  of  a  Wayside  Inn,"
a  volume  in  which  there  was  no  lowering  of
tone,  no  utterance  of  sorrow,  but  full  vigor  and
life  in  such  poems  as  "  Paul  Revere's  Ride,"  "  The
Birds  of  Killingworth,"  "  The  Children's  Hour,"
and  others.  The  printing  of  the  translation  of  the
"  Divine  Comedy  "  was  begun  about  the  same  time,
and  the  text  of  the  "  Inferno  "  was  completed  in
season  to  send  to  Florence  the  volume,  not  yet
published,  as  an  offering  in  honor  of  Dante,  on  oc
casion  of  the  celebration  in  that  city  of  the  sixth
centenary  of  the  poet's  birth  in  May,  1865.  The
whole  translation,  with  its  comment,  was  finally
published  in  1867.  In  the  same  year  appeared  a
little  volume  of  original  poems,  entitled  "  Flower
de  Luce,"  and  in  succeeding  years,  at  irregular
intervals,  he  wrote  and  published  "  The  New  Eng
land  Tragedies  "  (1868) ;  "  The  Divine  Tragedy  "
(1871);  "Three  Books  of  Song"  (1872);  "After
math  "  (1874) ;  "  The  Masque  of  Pandora  "  (1875) ;
"Keramos"  (1878);  and  "Ultima  Thuie"  (1880).
A  little  volume  containing  his  last  poems  was  pub
lished  in  1882,  after  the  poet's  death,  with  the  title
of  "  In  the  Harbor."

These  years  had  been  marked  by  few  striking
events  in  his  external  life.  They  had  been  spent
for  the  most  part  at  Cambridge,  with  a  summer
residence  each  year  at  Nahant.  His  interests  were
chiefly  domestic  and  social ;  his  pursuits  were  the
labors  and  the  pleasures  of  a  poet  and  a  man  of
letters.  His  hospitality  was  large  and  gracious,
cordial  to  old  friends,  and  genial  to  new  acquaint
ances.  His  constantly  growing  fame  burdened  him
with  a  crowd  of  visitors  and  a  multitude  of  letters
from  "  entire  strangers."  They  broke  in  upon  his
time,  and  made  a  vast  tax  upon  his,  good  nature.
He  was  often  wearied  by  the  incessant  demands,
but  he  regarded  them  as  largely  a  claim  of  human
ity  upon  his  charity,  and  his  charity  never  failed.
He  had  a  kind  word  for  all,  and  with  ready  sacri
fice  of  himself  he  dispensed  pleasure  to  thousands.
In  1868  and  1869.  accompanied  by  his  daughters,
he  visited  Europe  for  the  last  time,  and  enjoyed  a
delightful  stay  in  England,  in  Paris,  and  especially
in  Italy.  Fame  and  the  affection  that  his  poems
had  awakened  for  him,  though  personally  un
known,  in  the  hearts  of  many  in  the  Old  World
not  less  than  in  the  New,  made  his  visit  to  Europe
a  series  of  honors  and  of  pleasures.  But  he  re
turned  home  glad  to  enjoy  once  more  its  compara
tive  tranquillity,  and  to  renew  the  accustomed
course  of  the  day.  His  last  years  were  the  fitting
close  of  such  a  life.  In  1875  he  read  at  Bruns
wick,  on  the  fiftieth  anniversary  of  his  graduation,


LONGFELLOW


LONGINGS


15


the beautiful poem "  Morituri Salutamus." It
ended  with  the  characteristic  verse —

"  For  age  is  opportunity  no  less
Than  youth  itself,  though  in  another  dress,
And  as  the  evening  twilight  fades  away,
The  sky  is  filled  with  stars,  invisible  by  day."

On  his  seventy-fourth  birthday,  27  Feb.,  1881,
he  wrote  in  his  diary :  "  I  am  surrounded  by  roses
and  lilies.  Flowers  everywhere —

'  And  that  which  should  accompany  old  age,
As  honor,  love,  obedience,  troops  of  friends.'  "

But  he  had  had  already  warnings  of  declining
health,  and  in  the  course  of  this  year  he  suffered
greatly  from  vertigo,  followed  by  nervous  pain
and  depression.  The  serenity  of  his  spirit  was  un
affected.  On  the  18th  he  suffered  a  chill,  and  be
came  seriously  ill.  On  the  24th  he  sank  quietly  in
death.  The  lines  given  in  fac-simile  were  the  last
written  by  the  poet,  15  March,  1882,  and  are  from
the  closing  stanza  of  the  "  Bells  of  San  Bias."

No  poet  was  ever  more  beloved  than  he ;  none  was
ever  more  worthy  of  love.  The  expressions  of  the
feeling  toward  him  after  death  were  deep,  affect
ing,  and  innumerable.  One  of  the  most  striking
was  the  placing  of  his  bust  in  the  Poet's  Corner  in
Westminster  Abbey  in  March,  1884,  It  was  the


;  passing  through  various  hands,  it  was  purchased
|  on  1  Jan.,  1798,  by  Andrew  Craigie,  who  built  the
I  west  wing. Mr.  Craigie  had  made  a  fortune  as
j  apothecary-general  to  the  Continental  army,  and
;  he  entertained  in  the  house  with  lavish  hospitality.
!  After  his  death  his  widow,  whose  income  had  be-
j  come  reduced, let  rooms to  various  occupants,
i  among  whom were Jared Sparks and Edward
Everett. Finally  the  house  passed  into  Longfel
low's  hands,  as  is  related  above. It  is  now  (1887)
occupied  by  his  eldest  daughter. His  study  remains
j  unaltered  as  he  left  it. Mr.  Longfellow  had  two
!  sons  and  three  daughters,  by  his  second  wife. His
eldest  son,  CHARLES,  entered  the  National  service
in  1861,  and  was  badly  wounded  at  Mine  Run.
His  daughters,  as  children,  were  the  subjects  of  a
celebrated portrait  group  by  Thomas  Buchanan
Read. — Henry  Wadsworth's  brother,  Samuel,  cler
gyman,  b.  in  Portland,  Me.,  18  June.  1819,  was  grad
uated  at  Harvard  in  1839  and  at  the  divinity-school
there  in  1846. He  first  accepted  a  call  to  a  church
at  Fall  River  in  1848,  but  in  1853  became  the  pastor
of  a  Unitarian  congregation  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. In
1860  he  resigned  his  charge  and  went  abroad. On
his  return  he  resided  at  Cambridge,  Mass..  continu
ing  to  preach,  but  having  no  pastoral  charge  till  in


first  instance  of  such  an  honor  being  paid  to  an
American  poet. His  bust  stands  near  the  tomb  of
Chaucer,  between  the  memorials  to  Cowley  and
Dryden. (See  illustration  on  page  14.) On  this
occasion  Mr.  Lowell,  then  U.  S.  minister  in  Eng
land,  said :  "  Never  was  a  private  character  more
answerable  to public  performance  than  that  of
Longfellow. Never  have  I  known  a  more  beauti
ful  character." A  bronze  statue  of  Longfellow,  by
Franklin Simmons,  was erected  in Portland in
September,  1888. His  "Life"  has  been  written
by  his  brother  Samuel,  in  three  volumes  (Boston,  •
1886-'?). This work,  mainly compiled  from  the  !
poet's  diaries  and  letters,  is  a  full  and  satisfactory
picture  of  the  man. In  this  life  there  is  a  bib
liography  of  his  works. The  meadow,  across  the
street,  in  front  of  the  poet's  home,  stretching  down
to  the  river  Charles,  so  often  commemorated  in
his  verse,  was  given  by  his  children  shortly  after  ,
his  death  to  the  Longfellow  memorial  association,  i
on  condition that it should be kept open for-  <
ever,  and  properly  laid  out  for  public  enjoyment.  |
The  view  over  the  river,  of  the  hills  of  Brigh
ton  and  Brookline,  as  seen  from  the  windows  of
Longfellow's  study,  will  thus  be  kept  open,  and
associated  with  his  memory.

The  vignette  on  page  10  is  from  a  portrait  made
in  1856  by  Samuel  Laurence ;  the  frontispiece  on
steel  is  a  copy  of  one  of  the  latest  photographs  of
the  poet.  The  illustration  on  page  12  represents
Longfellow's  home,  Craigi^  House.  It  was  built
by  Col.  John  Vassall  in  1759,  and  on  his  flight  to
England,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  was
confiscated.  It  served  as  Washington's  headquar-  j
ters  till  the  evacuation  of  Boston,  and  then,  after  ;


1878  he  became  the  minister  of  a  church  in  Ger-
mantown,  Pa.  In  1882  he  again  returned  to  Cam
bridge.  In  addition  to  writing  several  essays  that
appeared  in  the  "  Radical "  (1866-'71),  and"  many
hymns  that  have  a  place  in  other  collections  than
his  own,  he  compiled,  in  association  with  Rev.  Sam
uel  Johnson,  "  A  Book  of  Hymns  "  (Boston,  1846 ;
revised  ed.,  entitled  "  Hymns  of  the  Spirit,"  1864).
He  published  "  A  Book  of  Hymns  and  Tunes,"  for
congregational  use  (1859),  and  a  small  volume  for
the  vesper  service  that  he  had  instituted.  He  is
also  the  editor,  in  connection  with  Thomas  W.  Hig-
ginson,  of  "  Thalatta,  a  Book  for  the  Seaside,"  a  col
lection  of  poetry,  partly  original  (1853).  His  latest
publications  are  the  "  Life  of  Henry  Wadsworth
Longfellow  "  (2  vols.,  1886),  and  "  Final  Memorials
of  Henry  W.  Longfellow"  (1887).— Henry  Wads-
worth's  'son,  Ernest  Wadsworth,  artist,  b.  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,  in  1845.  was  a  pupil  of  Couture
at  Paris  in  1865,  and  painted  in  Italy  in  1868.
His  studio  was  at  first  in  Cambridge,  but  is  now
(1887)  in  New  York.  He  paints  with  a  firm  hand
and  brilliant  but  harmonious  scheme  of  color,  and
is  favorably  known  for  such  effective  landscapes
and  compositions  as  "  Old  Mill  at  Manchester,
Mass." ;  "  Italian  Pines  "  (1880) ;  "  Love  Me,  Love
my  Dog  "  ;  "  Misty  Morning "  :  and  "  John  and
Priscilla,"  one  of  his  most  popular  works.

LONGINGS,  Jose"  (lon-ge'-nos),  Spanish  natu
ralist,  b.  in  Logrono,  Spain,  about  1750:  d.  in
Campeche,  Mexico,  in  1803.  In  1787  King  Charles
III.  sent  a  botanical  expedition  to  explore  Mexico
and  Central  America,  and  Longinos  was  appointed
its  chief.  He  explored  Mexico  and  California,  then
travelled  through  Central  America,  and  during  his


16


LONGNECKER


LONGSTREET


sojourn  in  the  capital  gave  public  lessons  in  botany
and  founded  a  museum  of  natural  history.  He  was
an  excellent  taxidermist,  and  formed  a  large  col
lection  of  specimens,  of  which  he  sent  many  boxes
to  the  Royal  museum  in  Madrid,  and  the  rest  was
delivered  after  his  death  to  his  executor,  Dr.  Saenz
de  Alfaro,  in  Mexico.  From  Guatemala  he  went
to  explore  Yucatan,  where  he  died.  Besides  manu
script  catalogues  of  his  collections,  he  wrote  "  Res-
puesta  a  J)on  Vicente  Cervantes  sobre  la  Goma  El-
astica  6  Arbol  del  Hule"  (Mexico,  1799).

LONGNECKER,  Henry  Clay,  lawyer,  b.  in
Allen,  Cumberland  co.,  Pa.,  17  April,  1820;  d.  in
Allentown,  Lehigh  co.,  Pa..  16  Sept.,  1871.  He
was  educated  at  the  Norwich  military  academy.
Vt.,  and  entered  Lafayette  college  in  1841,  but
was  not  graduated.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  January,  1843,  and  practised  in  Northampton
and  Lehigh  counties.  He  served  in  the  Mexican
war  in  1847-'8  as  1st  lieutenant  and  adjutant  of
voltigeurs,  being  wounded  at  Chapultepec,  and  in
1848  was  chosen  district  attorney  of  Lehigh  county.
He  was  a  member  of  state  Democratic  conventions
in  1851  and  1854,  but  in  1856  became  a  Republi
can,  and  in  1859-'61  was  a  member  of  congress,
where  he  served  on  the  committee  on  military
affairs.  He  became  colonel  of  the  9th  Pennsyl
vania  regiment  in  1861,  led  a  brigade  in  western
Virginia  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  and  com
manded  a  brigade  of  militia  at  Antietam.  In  1867
he  became  an  associate  judge  of  Lehigh  county.

LONGSTREET,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Edge-
field  district,  S.  C.,  8  Jan.,  1821.  He  removed  with
his  mother  to  Alabama  in  1831,  and  was  appointed
from  that  state  to  the  U.  S.  military  academy,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1842,  and  assigned  to
the  4th  infantry.  He
served  at  Jefferson  Bar
racks,  Mo.,  in  1842-'4,
on  frontier  duty  at  Nat-
chitoches,  La.,  in  1844-
'5,  in  the  military  occu
pation  of  Texas  in  1845-
'6,  and  in  the  war  with
Mexico,  being  engaged
in  the  battles  of  Palo
Alto,  Resaca  de  la  Pal-
ma,  Monterey,  the  siege
of  Vera  Cruz,  Cerro  Gor-
do,  San  Antonio,  Churu-
busco,  and  Moleno  del

/sf  .  * — , Rev. For  gallant  and

b^^W*^ meritorious  conduct  in
the  two  latter  battles  he

was  brevetted  captain  and  major,  and  he  had  pre
viously  been  promoted  1st  lieutenant,  23  Feb.,  1847.
At  the  storming  of  Chapultepec,  8  Sept.,  1847,  he
was  severely  wounded  in  the  assault  on  the  fortified
convent.  lie  served  as  adjutant,  8th  infantry,
from  8  June,  1847,  till  1  July,  1849,  and  on  frontier
and  garrison  duty,  chiefly  in  Texas,  till  1858,  being
made  captain,  7  Dec.,  1852.  He  became  paymaster,
19  July,  1858,  and  resigned,  1  June,  1861.  He  was
commissioned  brigadier-general  in  the  Confederate
service,  and  at  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run  com
manded  a  brigade  on  the  right  of  the  Confederate
line,  where  he  held  a  large  force  of  the  National
army  from  operating  in  support  of  McDowell's
flank  attack.  On  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston's  re
treat  before  McClellan  at  Yorktown,  Longstreet
commanded  the  rear-guard,  having  been  made  a
major-general.  On  5  May,  1862,  he  made  a  stand
at  Williarnsburg,  and  was  at  once  attacked  by
Heintzelman,  Hooker,  and  Kearny.  He  held  his
ground  until  his  opponents  were  re-enforced  by


Hancock,  when  he  was  driven  back  into  his  works.
He  took  part  in  the  seven  days'  battles  around
Richmond,  and  at  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run,
when  in  command  of  the  1st  corps  of  the  Army  of
Northern  Virginia,  came  to  the  relief  of  Jackson,
when  he  was  hard  pressed  by  Pope's  army,  and  by
a  determined  charge  in  flank  decided  the  fortune's
of  the  day.  At  Fredericksburg  he  held  the  Con
federate  left.  In  1863  he  was  detached  with  two
of  his  divisions  for  service  south  of  James  river.
On  Hooker's  movement,  which  led  to  the  battle  of
Chancellorsville,  Longstreet  was  ordered  to  rejoin
the  army  of  Lee,  but  did  not  arrive  in  time  to  par
ticipate  in  the  battle.  He  commanded  the  right
wing  of  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia  at  the
battle  of  Gettysburg,  and  tried  to  dissuade  Lee
from  ordering  the  disastrous  charge  on  the  third
day.  When  Lee  retreated  to  Virginia.  Longstreet,
with  five  brigades,  was  transferred  to  the  Army  of
Tennessee  under  Bragg,  and  at  the  battle  of
Chickamauga  held  the  left  wing  of  the  Confeder
ate  army.  He  was  then  detached  to  capture
Knoxville,  but  found  it  too  strongly  fortified  to  be
taken  by  assault.  Early  in  1864  he  rejoined  Lee,
and  was  wounded  by  the  fire  of  his  own  troops  in
the  battle  of  the  Wilderness.  He  commanded  the
1st  corps  of  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia  in  all
the  operations  in  1864,  and  was  included  in  the
surrender  at  Appomattox,  9  April,  1865.  He  was
known  in  the  army  as  "Old  Pete,"  and  was  con
sidered  the  hardest  fighter  in  the  Confederate  ser
vice,  lie  had  the  unbounded  confidence  of  his
troops,  who  were  devoted  to  him,  and  the  whole
army  felt  better  when  in  the  presence  of  the
enemy  it  was  passed  along  the  line  that  "  Old
Pete  was  up."  After  the  war  Gen.  Longstreet  es
tablished  his  residence  in  New  Orleans,  where  he
engaged  in  commercial  business  in  the  firm  of
Longstreet,  Owens  and  Company.  He  was  ap
pointed  surveyor  of  customs  of  the  port  of  New
Orleans  by  President  Grant,  supervisor  of  internal
revenue  in  Louisiana,  postmaster  at  New  Orleans,
and  minister  from  the  United  States  to  Turkey  by
President  Hayes,  and  U.  S.  marshal  for  the  dis
trict  of  Georgia  by  President  Garfield.

LONGSTREET,  William,  inventor,  b.  in  New
Jersey  about  1760;  d.  in  Georgia  in  1814.  He  re
moved  in  boyhood  to  Augusta,  Ga.  As  early  as  26
Sept.,  1790,  he  addressed  a  letter  to  Thomas  Teliair,
then  governor  of  Georgia,  asking  his  assistance,  or
that  of  the  legislature,  in  raising  funds  to  enable
him  to  construct  a  boat  to  be  propelled  by  the  new
power.  This  was  three  years  before  Fulton's  let
ter  to  the  Earl  of  Stanhope  announcing  his  theory
"  respecting  the  moving  of  ships  by  the  means  of
steam."  Failing  to  obtain  public  aid  at  that  time,
Longstreet's  invention  remained  for  several  years
in  abeyance  until,  at  last  securing  funds  from  pri
vate  sources,  he  was  enabled  to  launch  a  boat  on
Savannah  river,  which  moved  against  the  current
at  the  rate  of  five  miles  an  hour.  This  was  in
1807,  a  few  days  after  Fulton  had  made  a  similarly
successful  experiment  on  the  Hudson.  Besides
this  invention,  Longstreet  patented  a  valuable
improvement  in  cotton-gins,  called  the  "  breast
roller,"  moved  by  horse  power,  which  entirely  su
perseded  the  old  method.  He  set  up  two  of  his
gins  in  Augusta,  which  were  propelled  by  steam
and  worked  admirably ;  but  they  were  destroyed
by  fire  within  a  week.  He  next  erected  a  set  of
steam  mills  near  St.  Mary's,  Ga.,  which  were  de
stroyed  by  the  British  in  1812.  These  disasters
exhausted  his  resources  and  discouraged  his  enter
prise,  though  he  was  confident  that  steam  would
soon  supersede  all  other  motive  powers. — His  son,


LOXGSTRETH


LOOMIS


17


Augustus  Baldwin,  author,  b.  in  Augusta,  Ga..  |
22  Sept.,  1790;  d.  in  Oxford.  Miss.,  9  Sept.,  1870,  j
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1813,  studied  in  the  law-  ;
school  at  Litchfield,  Conn.,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  Richmond  county,  Ga.,  in  1815,  but  re-  ;
moved  to  Greensboro,  Ga.,  where  he  soon  rose  to  I
eminence  in  his  profession. He  represented  Greene
county  in  the  legislature  in  1821,  and  in  1822  be-  j
came  judge  of  the  Ocmulgee  judicial  district,  which  :
office  he  held  for  several  years,  and  then  declined
re-election. He  then  resumed  the  practice  of  the
law,  becoming  well  known  for  his  success  in  crimi
nal  cases,  and,  removing  to  Augusta,  he  established
there  the  "  Augusta  Sentinel,"  which  was  consoli
dated  in  1838  with  the  "Chronicle,"  continuing,
meanwhile,  the  practice  of  the  law. In  1838  he
became a minister in the Methodist Episcopal
church,  and  was  stationed  at  Augusta. During
this  period  of  his  ministry  the  town  was  visited
with  yellow  fever,  but  he  remained  at  his  post,
ministering  to  the  sick  and  dying. In  1839  he  was
elected  president  of  Emory  college,  Oxford,  Ga.,
where  he  served  nine  years,  after  which  he  became
president  of  Centenary  college,  La. Shortly  after
ward he  became  president of  the University  of
Mississippi,  at  Oxford,  Miss.,  which  post  he  held
for  six  years,  resigning  at  that  time  to  devote  him
self  to  "agricultural  pursuits. But  in  1857  he  was
elected  to  the  presidency  of  South  Carolina  col
lege,  Columbia,  S.  C.,  where  he  remained  till  just
before  the  civil  war,  when  he  returned  to  the  presi
dency  of  the  University  of  Mississippi. In  1844
he  was  a  member  of  the  general  conference  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and  was  conspicuous
in  the  discussions  that led  to  a  rupture  of the
•church,  siding  throughout  with  his  own  section.
In  politics  he  belonged  to  the  Jeffersonian  school
of  strict  construction  and  state  rights. At  an  early
age  he  began  to  write  for  the  press,  and  he  made
speeches  on  all  occasions  through  his  life. "  I  have
heard  him,"  writes  one  who  knew  him,  "  respond
to  a  serenade,  preach  a  funeral  sermon,  deliver  a
college  commencement  address,  and make  a  ha
rangue  over  the  pyrotechnic  glorifications  of  seced
ing  states. He  could  never  be  scared  up  without
a  speech." His pen  was  never  idle. His  chief
periodical  contributions  are  to  be  found  in  "  The
Methodist Quarterly." '•  The  Southern Literary
Messenger,"  "  The  Southern  Field  and  Fireside,"
"  The  Magnolia,"  and  "  The  Orion."  and  include
"  Letters  to  Clergymen  of  the  Northern  Methodist
Church "  and  "  Letters  from  Georgia  to  Massa-  |
chusetts." His  best-known  work  is  a  series  of  |
newspaper  sketches  of  humble  life  in  the  south,  j
"  Georgia  Scenes, Characters, Incidents,  etc., in
the  First  Half  Century  of  the  Republic,  by  a  Na
tive  Georgian,"  which  were  collected  into  a  book
that  appeared  first  at  the  south  and  then  in  New
York  (1840). A  second  edition  was  issued  in  1867,
and  though  it  purported  to  be  revised,  he  would,  it
is  said,  have  nothing  to  do  with  it. It  is  said  that
he  sent  men  through  the  country  to  collect  and
destroy  all  copies  of  the  first  edition. This  book
is  full  of  genuine  humor,  broad,  but  irresistible,
and  by  many  these  sketches  are  considered  the  |
raciest,  most  natural,  and most  original  that  ap-  I
peared  at  the  south  before  the  civil  war. He  also  |
published  "  Master  William  Mitten,"  a  story  (Ma-  ]
con,  Ga., 1864). Many  unpublished  manuscripts  ,
were  destroyed  with  his  library  during  the  war.

LOXGSTRETH,  Miers  Fisher,  astronomer,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  15  March.  1819.  He  was
educated  in  the  schools  of  the  Society  of  Friends,
and  was  graduated  at  the  medical  department  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1«56.  During  r
VOL.  iv. — 2


the  early  part  of  his  life  he  was  a  merchant,  but
devoted  his  leisure  to  the  study  of  astronomy,
having  charge  of  the  Friends'  observatory  in  Phila
delphia  till  1856.  He  then  removed  to  Sharon
Hill,  Pa.,  where  he  has  since  practised  medicine.
Dr.  Longstreth  has  devoted  most  of  his  life  to
study,  and  his  contributions  to  astronomy  have
been  valuable.  They  have  appeared  in  the  "  Trans
actions  of  the  American  Philosophical  Society,"  of
which  he  has  been  a  member  since  1848,  and  he
was  also  one  of  the  original  members  of  the
National  academy  of  science.  He  has  always  de
clined  public  office,  although  for  more  than  forty
years  he  has  been  a  member  of  private  and  public
educational  boards.

LON(*>VORTH,  Nicolas,  horticulturist,  b.  in
Newark,  N.  J.,  16  Jan.,  1782;  d.  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  10  Feb.,  1863.  The  large  property  t>f  his
father,  who  was  a  Tory,  was  confiscated  during  the
Revolution,  and  the  son  passed  his  youth  in  com
parative  poverty.  He  was  a  clerk  in  his  elder
brother's  store  in  South  Carolina  in  his  youth,  and
in  1803  removed  to  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  whore  he
studied  law,  and  purchased  large  tracts  of  land.
After  twenty-five  years'  practice  he  retired  from
law  in  order  to  devote  himself  to  the  cultivation
of  the  grape  with  a  view  to  manufacturing  wine ;
but,  using  foreign  vines  exclusively,  was  unsuc
cessful  until  1828,  when  he  introduced  native
vines  or  their  seedlings  and  produced,  from  the
Catawba  and  the  Isabella  grape,  wine  of  a  high
marketable  value.  He  had  200  acres  of  vineyards,
and  a  large  wine-house  in  the  vicinity  of  Cincin
nati,  and  was  also  favorably  known  by  his  experi
ments  on  the  strawberry.  He  was  kindly  but
eccentric,  and  gave  much  money  to  those  that  he
called  the  "Devil's  poor."  At  his  death  his
property  was  estimated  at  from  $10,000.000  to
$15,000",000.  He  published  "Buchanan's  Treatise
on  the  Grape,  with  an  Appendix  on  Strawberry
Culture  "  (Cincinnati,  1856).

LONG  WORTHY,  John,  Canadian  statesman,
b.  in  Charlottetown,  Prince  Edward  island,  19
Sept.,  1814 ;  d.  there,  11  April,  1885.  He  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1838,  and  entered  the  provin
cial  assembly  in  1846.  Subsequently  he  was  solici
tor-general  and  a  member  of  successive  admin
istrations,  and  drafter  of  the  "  No  terms  reso
lution  "  that  was  adopted  by  the  assembly  in  con
nection  with  the  confederation  of  the  provinces.
In  1883  he  was  appointed  prothonotary  of  the
supreme  court  of  Prince  Edward  island.  He  was
a  lieutenant-colonel  of  militia,  and  at  his  death
was  president  of  the  Bank  of  Prince  Edward  island.

LONtrYEAR,  John  Wesley,  jurist,  b.  in  Shan-
daken,  Ulster  co.,  N.  Y.,  22  Oct.,  1820 ;  d.  in  De
troit,  Mich..  10  March,  1875.  He  was  educated
at  Lima,  N.  Y.,  and,  removing  in  1844  to  Michi
gan,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1846,  settling  the
next  year  in  Lansing,  where  he  acquired  an  ex
tensive  practice.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Republican  in  1862,  served  till  1867,  and  during
both  terms  was  chairman  of  the  committee  on  ex
penditures  on  the  public  buildings.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  Loyalists'  convention  in  Philadel
phia  in  1866,  a  member  of  the  Michigan  constitu
tional  convention  in  1867,  and  in  1870  became
U.  S.  judge  of  the  southern  district  of  the  state.
His  decisions,  especially  those  in  admiralty  and
bankruptcy  cases,  were  extensively  quoted.

LOOMIS,  Alfred  Lebbens,  "physician,  b.  in
Bennington.  Yt.,  10  June.  1831.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Union  college  in  1851,  and  studied  medi
cine  under  Dr.  Willard  Parker  in  New  York,
receiving  his  doctorate  at  the  College  of  phy-


18


LOOMIS


LOOMIS


sicians  and  surgeons  in  1853.  He  then  became
assistant  physician  to  the  hospitals  on  Ward's  and
Blackwell's  'islands,  but  after  two  years  established
himself  in  general  practice  in  New  York  city,
giving  special  attention  to  the  treatment  of  pul
monary  diseases,  in  which  branch  of  medical
science"  he  has  acquired  a  national  reputation.  He
became  visiting  physician  to  Bellevue  hospital  in
1860.  and  in  1874  to  the  Mount  Sinai  hospital,
which  appointments  he  still  (1887)  retains,  and  he
was  also  consulting  physician  to  the  Charity  hos
pital  on  Blackwell's  island  in  1860-75.  Dr.
Loomis  was  lecturer  on  physical  diagnosis  in  the
College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in  1862-'5,  and
was  then  made  adjunct  professor  of  theory  and
practice  of  medicine  in  the  University  of  New
York.  In  1867  he  became  professor  of  pathology
and  practice  of  medicine  in  the  same  institution,
which  chair  he  still  holds.  An  unknown  friend
of  the  university  gave  through  Dr.  Loomis  in  1886
the  sum  of  $100,000  to  the  medical  department,  to
build  and  equip  the  Loomis  laboratory,  which  it  is
intended  to  make  the  finest  of  its  kind  in  the
United  States.  He  is  a  member  of  medical
societies  both  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,
and  has  been  president  of  the  New  York  patho
logical  society,  also  of  the  New  York  state  medical
society.  Besides  occasional  contributions  to  cur
rent  literature,  he  has  published  "  Lessons  in  Physi
cal  Diagnosis  "  (New  York,  1868) ;  "  Diseases  of  the
Respiratory  Organs,  Heart,  and  Kidneys  "  (187(5) ;
"Lectures"  on  Fevers"  (1882):  ''Diseases  of  Old
Age"  (1882);  and  "A  Text-Book  of  Practical
Medicine  "  (1884).

LOOMIS,  Arphaxed,  lawyer,  b.  in  Winchester.
Conn.,  9  April,  1798;  d.  in  Little  Falls,  N.  Y.,  15
Sept..  1885.  Early  in  life  he  accompanied  his
family  to  Ilerkimer  county,  N.  Y.,  and  worked  on
the  home  farm  till  he  was  fourteen  years  old,  when
his  father  hired  him  out  as  teacher  of  a  district
school.  After  teaching  and  studying  law  in
Watertown  and  Sackett's  Harbor,  he  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  practised  in  the  latter  place  till
1827,  when  he  removed  to  Little  Falls,  N.  Y.  He
was  county  judge  and  surrogate  from  1827  till
1837,  first  judge  in  1835-'40,  and  in  1837-'9  sat  in
congress,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Democrat.  He
was  a  member  of  the  New  York  assembly  in  1841,
and  of  the  State  constitutional  convention  in  1846.
and  a  commissioner  to  revise  the  code  of  practice
in  1847  with  Nicholas  Hill  and  David  Graham.
Mr.  Hill  shortly  afterward  resigned  and  was  re
placed  by  David  Dudley  Field.  The  committee
reported  a  code  of  procedure,  which  went  into  op
eration  in  1848.  In  1842,  as  chairman  of  the  as
sembly  judiciary  committee,  Judge  Loomis  had
prepared  a  "  bill  to  improve  the  administration  of
justice,"  and  his. interest  in  law  reform  continued
from  this  time.  Judge  Loomis  was  an  able  public
speaker  and  wrote  much  for  the  press  on  political
subjects.  He  published  in  pamphlet-form  a  "  His
toric  Sketch  of  the  New  York  System  of  Law  Re
form  "  (Little  Falls,  N.  Y.,  1879)."

LOOMIS,  Dwiffht,  lawyer,  b.  in  Columbia,
Conn.,  27  July,  1821.  He  studied  law  in  New
Haven,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1847.  Set
tling  in  Rockville,  Conn.,  he  followed  his  profes
sion  there  until  1851,  when  he  was  elected  to  the
Connecticut  legislature.  In  1856  he  served  as  a
delegate  at  the  People's  convention  held  in  Phila
delphia,  and  in  1857  was  sent  to  the  state  senate.
He  was  elected  as  a  Republican  to  the  United
States  house  of  representatives,  and  served  from
5  Dec.,  1859,  till  3  March,  1863.  In  1864  he  was
appointed  a  judge  of  the  superior  court  of  Connec-


ticut,  and  in  1875  was  advanced  to  the  supreme
court,  where  he  has  since  remained.

LOOMIS,  Elias,  physicist,  b.  in  Willington,
Conn.,  7  Aug.,  1811.  He  was  fitted  for  college  by
his  father,  and  graduated  at  Yale  in  1830.  where  in
1833-'6  he  held  the  office  of  tutor.  In  November,
1834,  for  two  weeks,  from  4  to  6  A.  M.,  with  Alex
ander  C.  Twining,  of  West  Point,  he  made  obser
vations  for  deter
mining  the  altitude
of  shooting  -  stars.
These  are  believed
to  have  been  the
first  concerted  ob
servations  of  this
kind  made  in  the
United  States.  For
fourteen  months,  in
1834 -'5.  he  made
hourly  observations
from  5  or  6  A.  M.
till  10  P.  M.  of  the
declination  of  the
magnetic  needle.
He  was  the  first
person  in  this  coun
try  to  discover  Hal-
ley's  comet  on  its

return  to  perihelion  in  1835,  and  he  computed  the
elements  of  its  orbit  from  his  own  observations.
In  1836-'7  he  spent  a  year  in  Paris  attending
the  lectures  of  Arago.  Biot,  Dulong,  Poisson,
Pouillet,  and  others.  On  his  return  he  became
professor  of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy
in  Western  Reserve  college,  Ohio,  where  he  re
mained  until  1844,  making  diligent  use  of  the
philosophical  and  meteorological  instruments  that
lie  had  purchased  in  Europe.  Prof.  Loomis  ob
served  during  these  years  260  moon  culminations
for  longitude,  69  culminations  of  Polaris  for  lati
tude,  16  occupations  of  stars,  and  made  a  series  of
observations  upon  five  comets,  sufficiently  extend
ed  to  determine  their  orbits.  He  also  observed  the
dip  of  the  magnetic  needle  at  over  70  stations,
spread  over  13  states,  extending  from  the  Atlantic
to  the  Mississippi  river.  In  1844  he  became  pro
fessor  of  natural  philosophy  in  the  University  of
the  city  of  New  York,  which  chair  he  continued  to
fill  until  1860.  During  this  period  he  prepared  a
series  of  text-books  embracing  the  entire  range  of
mathematical  subjects  that  are  taught  in  high-
schools  and  colleges,  and  they  were  subsequently
extended  to  embrace  natural  philosophy,  astrono
my,  and  meteorology.  This  series  attained  an
aggregate  circulation  of  more  than  500.000  copies ;
his  treatise  on  astronomy  has  been  used  as  a  text
book  in  England ;  that  on  analytical  geometry  and
calculus  translated  into  Chinese  ;  and  his  "  Meteor
ology"  into  Arabic.  A  part  of  his  time  between
1846  and  1849  was  employed  in  telegraphic  com
parisons  for  longitude  with  Sears  C.  Walker.  The
difference  in  longitude  between  New  York  and
Washington  was  determined  in  1847,  that  between
New  York  and  Cambridge,  Mass.,  in  1848,  and  the
difference  between  Philadelphia  and  the  observa
tory  in  Hudson,  Ohio,  in  1849.  In  the  two  former
comparisons  Prof.  Loomis  had  charge  of  the  obser
vations  in  New  York,  and  in  the  latter  comparison
he  had  charge  of  those  in  Hudson.  The  first
observations  by  which  the  velocity  of  the  electric
fluid  on  telegraph-wires  was  determined  were  made
on  23  Jan.,  1849,  between  Washington,  Philadel
phia,  New  York,  and  Cambridge,  under  the
direction  of  Sears  C.  Walker,  a  .clock  in  Phila
delphia  being  employed  to  break  the  electric  cir-


LOOMIS


LOOP


19


cuit.  In  these  comparisons  Prof.  Loomis  had
charge  of  the  observations  in  New  York.  In  1860
he  became  professor  of  natural  philosophy  and
astronomy  in  Yale,  and  has  since  devoted  a  large
part  of  his  time  to  original  researches,  the  most  im
portant  of  which  are  a  series  of  articles  published
in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science,"  under  the
title  of  "  Contributions  to  Meteorology."  He  is  now
engaged  in  revising  these  papers,  and  arranging
the  different  topics  in  systematic  order,  at  the  same
time  subjecting  each  principle  to  more  rigid  inves
tigation  by  comparison  with  the  numerous  obser
vations  which  have  recently  been  published  in  the
United  States  or  abroad.  These  revised  contri
butions,  when  completed,  will  present  a  very  full
discussion  of  the  principles  of  dynamic  meteor
ology.  The  titles  of  his  scientific  papers  exceed
100  in  number,  and  they  have  appeared  both  in
this  country  and  abroad  in  journals  and  in  trans
actions  of  societies  of  which  he  is  a  member.  In
1854  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the
University  of  the  city  of  New  York.  Prof.
Loomis  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies  in  the
United  States  and  in  Europe,  and  in  1873  was
elected  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  Be
sides  "  On  Certain  Storms  in  Europe  and  America  "
(Washington,  1860),  forming  part  of  one  of  the
Smithsonian  contributions,  he  has  published  "Plane
and  Spherical  Trigonometry  "  (New  York,  1848) ;
"Progress  of  Astronomy  "  (1850  and  1856) ;  "  Ana
lytical  Geometry  and  Calculus"  and  "  Elements  of
Algebra  "  (1851) :  "  Elements  of  Geometry  and  Con
ic  Sections  "  (1851  and  1871) ;  "  Tables  of  Loga
rithms  "  (1855) ;  "  Natural  Philosophy  "  (1858) ;
"  Practical  Astronomy  "  (1855  and  1865) ;  "  Ele
ments  of  Arithmetic  ""(1863) ;  "  Treatise  on  Meteor
ology  "  (1868);  "Elements  of  Astronomy "  (1869);
arid  "The  Descendants  of  Joseph  Loomis  "  (1870).

LOOMIS,  Gustavus,  soldier,  b.  in  Thetford,  Vt.,
23  Sept.,  1789;  d.  in  Stratford,  Conn.,  6  March,
1873.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1811,  and  assigned  to  the  artillery.
For  two  years  he  served  on  garrison  duty  in  New
York  harbor,  and  then  he  was  sent  to  the  northern
frontier,  where  he  was  at  the  capture  of  Fort
George  in  May,  1813,  and  was  taken  prisoner  at
the  surprise  of  Fort  Niagara  in  December  of  that
year.  Meanwhile  he  had  been  made  assistant  depu
ty  quartermaster-general,  with  the  rank  of  captain,
and  he  subsequently  served  in  various  garrisons.
On  the  reorganization  of  the  army  in  1821  he  was
made  captain  in  the  1st  infantry,'  and  in  1838  re
ceived  his  commission  as  major,  after  serving  in
the  campaigns  against  the  Indians  in  Florida  and
Texas.  In  1840  he  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  6th  infantry,  and,  after  garrison  duty  on  the
frontier,  served  in  that  rank  during  the  Mexican
war  and  until  1851.  when  he  was  made  colonel  of
the  5th  infantry,  and  given  various  commands  in
ths  Indian  territory.  Col.  Loomis  participated  in
the  Florida  campaigns  of  1856-'8  against  the  Semi-
nole  Indians,  and  had  charge  of  that  department
in  1857-'8.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  engaged
at  first  on  mustering  duty,  but  later  was  put  at  the
head  of  the  general  recruiting  service  at  Fort  Co
lumbus,  N.  Y.  He  was  retired  from  active  service
on  1  June,  1863,  but  continued  to  be  occupied  on
court-martial  duty.  In  1865  he  received  the  brevet
of  brigadier-general  for  long  and  faithful  service
in  the  army.

LOOMIS,  Justin  Rudolph,  educator,  b.  in  Ben-
nington,  N.  Y.,  10  Aug.,  1810.  lie  was  graduated
at  Brown  in  1835,  and  in  1836  became  professor  of
natural  sciences  in  Colby  university.  This  chair
he  held  until  1852,  when  he  was  called  to  fill  a  simi


lar  professorship  in  the  University  of  Lewisburg,
Pa.  In  1858  he  was  made  president  of  that  uni
versity,  and  held  the  office  until  1878.  He  received
the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  the  University  of  Lewis-
burg  in  1854,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  the  Uni
versity  of  Rochester  in  1858.  Prof.  Loomis  is  the
author  of  "  f]lements  of  Geology"  (Boston,  1852)
and  of  "  Elements  of  Anatomy  and  Physiology "
(Philadelphia.  1853).

LOOMIS,  Silas  Laurence,  physician,  b.  in  Cov
entry,  Conn.,  22  May,  1822.  He  was  graduated  at
Wesleyan  in  1844,  after  teaching  mathematics  and
natural  sciences  in  Holliston  academy.  Mass.  Af
ter  his  graduation  he  returned  to  teaching,  becom
ing  in  1855  principal  of  the  Western  academy  in
Washington,  D.  C.,  and  meanwhile  was  graduated
from  the  medical  department  of  Georgetown  col
lege  in  1856,  and  was  professor  of  physiology  in
that  department  in  1859-'60.  He  held  the  office  of
astronomer  to  the  U.  S.  coast  survey  in  1857,  and
in  1860  was  special  instructor  in  mathematics  to
the  U.  S.  naval  cadets  while  on  a  cruise.  In  1861-'7
he  was  professor  of  chemistry  and  toxicology  in
Georgetown  college,  also  surgeon  on  Gen.  George
B.  McClellan's  staff  in  1862-'3,  and  acting  assistant
surgeon  on  the  steamer  "  State  of  Maine,"  and  in
Patent  office,  Finley,  and  Mount  Pleasant  hos
pitals  in  1863-'5.  He  became  professor  of  practice
of  medicine  in  the  medical  department  of  Howard
university  in  1867,  later  dean  and  professor  of
chemistry  and  toxicology  in  that  institution  until
1872.  In  1873  he  returned  to  the  practice  of  his
profession,  and  in  1877  was  called  to  the  presidency
of  the  Swede  iron  and  coal  company,  which  he  held
until  1881.  -  He  invented  a  process  for  producing  a
textile  fabric  from  palmetto  in  1878,  and  in  1879
discovered  a  method  by  which  ores  of  chromium,
which  were  formerly  condemned,  have  become  val
uable.  Dr.  Loomis  has  also  made  improvements
in  various  instruments  of  precision.  He  has  held
the  offices  of  president  of  the  Washington  scien
tific  association  in  1862,  and  president  of  the  Ameri
can  union  academy  of  literature,  science,  and  art
in  1872.  Besides  various  magazine  articles  and
college  addresses  he  has  published  "  Normal  Arith
metic"  (Philadelphia,  1859);  "Analytical  Arith
metic "  (1860) ;  and  "  Key  to  the  Normal  Course"
(1867).— -His  brother,  Lafayette  Charles,  educator,
b.  in  Coventry,  Conn.,  7  July,  1824,  was  graduated
at  Wesleyan  in  1844,  and  then  taught,  becoming  in
1853  principal  of  the  Irving  institute  in  Tarrytown,
N.  Y.  A  year  later  he  was  appointed  professor  of
natural  sciences  in  Wesleyan  female  college,  Wil
mington,  Del.,  and  became  its  president  in  1857-'8.
He  was  principal  of  the  Lafayette  institute,  Wash
ington,  D.  C.,  during  1859-'63,  and,  after  being
graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  Georgetown
university  in  1865,  was  acting  assistant  surgeon  in
the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  Dr.  Loomis  then  held
the  presidency  of  the  Wheeling  female  seminary  in
West  Virginia  during  1865,  and  three  years  later
was  appointed  professor  of  physiology  in  Howard
university,  Washington,  D.  C.  Subsequently  he
spent  several  years  in  travel  and  study  in  Europe,
and  he  has  also  lectured  on  art.  In  addition  to
magazine  articles  he  lias  published  "  Miznah.  Prayer
and  Friendship  "  (Philadelphia,  1858) ;  "  Mental  and
Social  Culture  "  (New  York,  1867) ;  and  "  Hand
book  of  Art  and  Travel  in  Europe  "  (1882).

LOOP,  Henry  Augustus,  artist,  b.  in  Hillsdale,
Columbia  co.,  N.  Y.,^9  Sept.,  1831.  He  was  edu
cated  at  Great  Barrington,  Mass.,  settled  in  New
York  city  in  1850,  studied  art  for  a  year  with  Henry
P.  Gray,  and  in  1857  with  Thomas  Couture  at  Paris.
He  was  elected  a  National  academician  in  1861,


20


LOOS


LOPEZ


and  most  of  his  life  work  has  been  given  to  por
traiture.  His  studio  is  in  New  York.  Among  his
works  are  portraits  of  Worthington  Whittredge,  of
Joseph  P.  Thomson,  and  Prof.  Elias  Loomis  (1882) ;
also  "Undine"  (1861);  "Aphrodite"  (187(5):
"  Echo  "  (1877) :  "  Hcrmione  and  Helena  "  (1877) ;
"CEnone"  (1878);  "At  the  Spring"  (1879);  "Idyl
of  the  Lake"  (1881);  "Love's  Crown"  (1882);
"Summer  Moon"  (1884);  and  "The  Dreamer"
(1885).— His  wife,  Jeiinette  Shepherd  (HARRISON),
artist,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  5  March,  1840,  lias
her  studio  with  her  husband.  She  was  a  pupil  of
Louis  Bail  in  New  Haven,  subsequently  of  her
husband,  and  in  1867  studied  in  Paris,  Venice,  and
Rome.  She  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  Nation
al  academy  in  1875.  Her  style  is  unpretentious,
but  natural  and  vigorous.  Among  her  works  are
numerous  portraits,  "A  Banquet  for  Mamma,"
"Little  Runaway,"  and  "  Baby  Belle."

LOOS,  Charles  Louis,  educator,  b.  in  Woerth-
sur-Sauer,  Lower  Alsace,  22  Dec.,  1823.  His  par
ents,  who  were  Protestants,  removed  to  this  coun
try  in  1824,  and  settled  at  New  Franklin,  Stark  co.,
Ohio,  where  his  father  died  a  few  days  after  their
arrival.  The  son  studied  in  the  town  school,  and  at
the  age  of  sixteen  began  teaching.  He  was  grad
uated  at  Bethany  college  in  1846,  and  was  a  teacher
there  for  three  years,  after  which  he  removed  to
Wellsburg,  Va.,  to  take  pastoral  charge  of  the
Christian  church  there.  After  holding  pastorates
in  Somerset,  Pa.,  and  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  lie  was
called  to  the  presidency  of  Eureka  college,  111.,  and
in  1858-'80  held  the  chair  of  ancient  languages  in
Bethany  college.  He  was  then  elected  to  the  presi
dency  of  Kentucky  university  at  Lexington.  For
several  years  Mr.  Loos  was  associate  editor  of  the
"  Disciple,"  a  monthly,  and  of  the  "  Sower,"  a  re
ligious  weekly  in  Pennsylvania,  and  of  the  "  Chris
tian  Age,"  the  chief  weekly  organ  of  his  church  at
Cincinnati.  Afterward,  for  seven  years,  he  was  co-
editor  with  Prof.  W.  K.  Pendletoii  of  the  "  Millen
nial  Harbinger,"  and  at  present  is  contributing
editor  of  the  "  Christian  Standard,"  of  Cincinnati.

LOOT,  (xerard  van  (lote),  Dutch  naturalist,  b.
in  Muyden  in  1705;  d.  in  Breda  in  1761.  He  ob
tained  employment  in  the  Indian  company,  and  re
sided  most  of  his  life  in  Java  and  Dutch  Guiana,
retiring  in  1753  and  settling  in  Breda.  He  pub
lished  "  Anweisung  wie  man  die  Breite  und  Liinge
der  Fliisse  aus  gemeinen  Landkarten  erforschen
kOnne  "  (2  vols.,  Breda,  1754) ;  "  Guiana  geognostisch
und  geologisch  dargestellt "  (1755) ;  "  Grundlehren
der  Anatomie  und  Physiologic  der  amerikanischen
Pflanzen  "  (1757);  "  Naturen  Bloeme  "  (1757);
"  Historia  generalis  plantarum  guianarum  in  quae
familia?  per  tabulas  disponuntur"  (2  vols.,  1758);
"  Die  Naturgeschichte  von  Amerika "  (1760) ;
"Handbuch  fiir'den  Kaufmann  in  Guiana"  (1760);
and  several  other  works.

LOOTENS,  Louis,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Bruges,
Belgium,  in  1825.  He  was  ordained  to  the  Roman
Catholic  priesthood  in  1851,  and  was  sent  to  Cali
fornia  on  a  mission  about  seven  years  afterward ;
successively  officiating  in  Sonora,  Petaluma,  and
San  Rafael",  where  he  erected  a  church  and  greatly
enlarged  the  school-buildings.  In  March,  1868,  he
was  consecrated  bishop  of  Castabala,  in  partibus,
but  resigned  in  1876  on  account  of  failing  health.

LOPES,  Caetano  (lo-pes),  Brazilian  historian,  b.
in  Bahia  in  October,  1780;  d.  in  Paris,  22  Dec.,
1860.  He  was  a  mulatto,  and,  being  the  son  of
wealthy  parents,  received  a  good  education  in  the
college  of  Bahia,  finishing  his  studies  in  Paris,
where  he  was  graduated  in  medicine,  and  entered
the  French  army  in  1808  as  assistant  surgeon.  He


served  during  the  reign  of  Napoleon,  but  resigned
in  1815,  and  practised  his  profession  in  Brazil  for
several  years,-  but  settled  in  Paris  in  1822,  and  en
gaged  in  literary  work.  He  devoted  his  time  prin
cipally  to  the  study  of  Brazil  and  Brazilian  authors,
whose  works  he  wished  to  popularize  in  Europe.
Lopes  became  corresponding  member  of  the  Paris
academy  of  inscriptions  and  belles-lettres.  In  1843
he  was  presented  with  a  gold  medal  by  the  histori
cal  institute  of  Rio  Janeiro  for  his  historical
works,  and  he  also  received  many  proofs  of  esteem
from  the  emperor  Pedro.  He  wrote  under  the  pen-
name  of  Caetano  L.  de  Moura.  His  works,  which
are  numerous  and  noted  for  purity  of  language
and  brightness  of  style,  include  "  Diccionario  geo-
graphico  historico  e  descriptive  do  imperio  do  Bra
zil,  obra  collegida  e  composta  per  Milliet  de  Saint
Adolphe,  e  traduzida  em  portuguez  do  mesmo  manu-
scripto  inedito  frances,  com  numerosas  observances
e  addicoes  "  (2  vols..  Paris,  1839) ;  "  Arte  de  se  cu-
rar  a  si  mcsmo  nas  dcencas  venereas  "  (1845) ;  "  His
toria  de  Napoleao  Bonaparte,"  which  was  written  by
order  of  Pedro  I.  for  the  primary  schools  of  Brazil
(2  vols.,  1846) ;  "  Diccionario  bibliographico  Brasi-
liense  "  (6  vols.,  1847-'52) ;  "  Diccionario  estatistico
geographico  do  imperio  do  Brazil"  (3  vols.,  1853);
and  "  Historia  geral  do  imperio  do  Brazil  "  (3  vols.,
1854).  lie  was  also  the  author  of  surgical  works.

LOPEZ,  Carlos  Antonio  (lo'-peth),  president
of  Paraguay,  b.  in  Asuncion,  4  Nov.,  1790,  died
there,  Sept.  10,  1862.  He  was  educated  in  the
seminary  of  Asuncion,  and  escaped  the  persecution
of  Dr.  Francis,  the  dictator,  by  hiding  for  many
years  in  a  remote  village.  After  Francia's  death
in  September,  1840,  Lopez  returned  to  Asuncion,
and  became  the  secretary  of  the  military  junta
that  was  then  in  control  there.  Seeing  that  the
government  could  be  seized  by  any  one  that  was
cunning  and  strong  enough  to  grasp  it,  he  resolved
to  do  so,  and  caused  the  junta  to  call  a  congress,
which,  under  his  direction,  appointed  a  triumvi
rate,  23  Jan.,  1841.  He  then  induced  one  of  the
triumvirs.  Gen.  Mariano  Roque  Alonso,  to  dissolve
the  triumvirate  on  27  Feb.,  and  a  new  congress  of
his  own  creation  appointed  Alonso  and  Lopez  con
suls  for  three  years.  In  1844  the  same  farce  was
enacted,  and  congress  abolished  the  consulate,  ap
pointing  Lopez  president  for  ten  years.  In  1854  he
was  re-elected  for  three  years,  and  again  in  1857
for  ten  years,  with  power  to  appoint  his  temporary
successor  by  will.  He  governed  arbitrarily,  but  in
general  without  oppression  or  cruelty,  lie  gradu
ally  opened  Paraguay  to  foreign  trade  and  immi
gration,  made  treaties,  laid  the  foundations  of  a
formidable  army,  with  fortifications,  arsenal,  and
flotilla,  constructed  a  railway,  and  provided  for
the  education  of  many  youths  in  European  me
chanical  and  scientific  schools.  His  jealousy  of  all
interference  with  the  independence  of  Paraguay
brought  him  into  conflict  with  the  dictator  Rosas
of  Buenos  Ayres,  and  his  dislike  of  foreigners  in
volved  him  in  diplomatic  disputes  with  England,
France,  and  Brazil,  which  in  each  case  were  carried
to  the  verge  of  hostilities,  from  which  he  escaped
by  shrewd  diplomacy.  On  account  of  his  treat
ment  of  the  U.  S.  consul,  and  an  attack  on  the  ex
ploring  steamer  "  Water  Witch,"  in  1855,  a  large
squadron  was  sent  by  the  U.  S.  government  to
enforce  a  demand  for  reparation,  which  was  prom
ised  by  treaty,  but  ultimately  evaded.  His  long
administratio'n  greatly  advanced  the  material  wel
fare  of  Paraguay,  and  the  security  of  life  and  prop
erty  was  unlimited  except  by  laws  of  his  own  enact
ment. — His  son,  Francisco  Solano,  president  of
Paraguay,  b.  near  Asuncion,  24  July,  1827 ;  killed


LOPEZ


LOPEZ


21


in  battle,  1  March,  1870,  was  said  to  be  a  natural
son  of  Carlos,  but  was  afterward  adopted  by  his
father,  and  intended  as  his  successor.  In  1845  he
was  named  commander-in-chief  of  the  Paraguayan
army,  and  spent  some  time  on  the  frontier  of  Cor-
rientes,  nominally  but  not  actually  engaged  in
warfare  with  the  'dictator  Rosas  of  Buenos  Ayres.
In  1854  he  was  sent  to  exchange  treaty  ratifica
tions  with  several  European  powers,  and  passed
eighteen  months  in  Europe.  While  there  he  met
an  Irish  lady,  who  called  herself  Mrs.  Lynch,  and
who  lived  apart  from  her  husband,  a  French
officer.  She  followed  Lopez  to  Paraguay,  and  be
came  his  mistress,  a  position  not  deemed  discred
itable  in  that  country,  where  marriage  had  been
almost  abolished  by  Francia.  By  her  talents  she
acquired  popularity,  and  exercised  a  controlling
influence  over  Lopez  until  near  the  close  of  his  life.
On  his  return  he  became  minister  of  war,  and  used
his  influence  in  the  government  chiefly  for  putting
the  country  on  a  war  footing.  In  1862  Gen.  Lopez
became  president  by  his  father's  will,  and  congress
chose  him  president  for  ten  years  from  16  Oct.  He
now  devoted  himself  actively  to  preparations  for
war,  and  for  two  years  he  was  constantly  but
secretly  receiving  arms  from  Europe.  In  1864
Brazil  intervened  in  a  Uruguayan  civil  war.  and
Lopez,  declaring  himself  the  protector  of  the
"  equilibrium  "  of  the  Plata  river,  demanded  that
the  Brazilian  forces  should  retire.  This  summons
remaining  unheeded,  he  began  hostilities  in  No
vember.  1864,  by  seizing  a  Brazilian  mail-steamer ;
and  in  December  he  occupied  the  Brazilian  prov
ince  of  Matto  Grosso,  on  the  upper  waters  of
Paraguay  river.  Early  in  1865  he  sent  8,000  troops
across  Argentine  territory  into  the  Brazilian  prov
ince  of  Rio  Grande  do  Sul,  and,  when  the  Argen
tine  government  protested  against  this  violation  of
its  territory,  he  declared  war  on  that  republic.  A
hastily  summoned  congress  ratified  these  acts,
conferred  the  grade  of  marshal  upon  Lopez,  gave
him  extraordinary  powers,  and  formally  declared
war  against  Brazil  and  the  Argentine  Republic.
Before  this  declaration  was  known  in  Buenos
Ayres,  Lopez  seized  two  Argentine  men-of-war
that  lay  at  anchor  in  Corrientes,  and  overran  that
province  with  his  forces.  Brazil,  the  Argentine
Republic,  and  Uruguay  concluded  a  secret  treaty
on  1  May,  1865,  forming  an  offensive  and  defensive
alliance  against  Paraguay,  and  before  the  end  of
this  year  recovered  the  provinces  that  had  been
occupied  by  Lopez.  The  allies  invaded  Paraguay
early  in  1866,  and  during  the  succeeding  four
years  a  war  of  greater  proportions  than  had  hitherto
been  known  in  South  America  was  waged  with
varying  fortunes  on  the  soil  of  that  state.  Lopez
impressed  into  service  all  the  able-bodied  males
between  the  ages  of  twelve  and  seventy,  and  several
lines  of  defence  were  maintained,  but  in  February,
1868,  the  Brazilian  squadron  forced  its  way  above
the  fortresses,  and  bombarded  Asuncion,  which
had  been  evacuated  by  the  government  and  all  its
inhabitants.  Lopez  now  suspected  the  vice-presi
dent  and  his  cabinet  ministers  of  disloyalty,  and
they  were  imprisoned  and  removed  to  army  head
quarters,  where  they  were  tried  before  an  improvised
court  consisting  of  three  priests.  After  being  put
to  the  torture,  the  prisoners  confessed  themselves
guilty  and  implicated  others,  who  were  quickly
seized  and  subjected  to  the  same  process.  In  the
course  of  a  few  weeks  confessions  had  been  ex
torted  that  finally  implicated  all  the  civil  em
ployes  in  Asuncion,  most  of  the  foreign  diplomatic
and  consular  officers,  and  all  the  foreigners  en
gaged  in  commerce,  in  sweeping  charges  of  con


spiracy  against  the  rule  or  even  the  life  of  Lopez.
It  is  estimated  that  more  than  500  persons  were
either  executed  or  died  by  torture  in  the  encamp
ment  of  Lopez  during  the  latter  half  of  1868.
Among  those  that  were  executed  were  Lopez's
brother,  Benigno,  his  sister,  and  her  husband,
Barrios,  and  the  bishop  of  Asuncion ;  and  Lopez's
mother  was  exiled  for  asking  for  the  pardon  of  her
children.  The  U.  S.  legation  was  involved  in  the
charges,  and,  although  the  minister,  Charles  A.
Washburn,  escaped  in  September  through  the
opportune  arrival  of  the  U.  S.  war  vessel  "  Wasp,"
two  attaches  were  seized  and  tortured.  Then-
lives  were  spared,  however,  and  they  M'ere  surren
dered  to  an  American  squadron  "in  December.
Early  in  January,  1869,  after  the  capture  of  Hu-
maita,  Villeta,  and  Angostura,  Asuncion  was  oc
cupied  by  the  allied  forces,  and  Lopez  retired  to
Birabibi.  By  successive  defeats  during  1869,  not
withstanding  an  obstinate  resistance,  aided  even
by  a  corps  of  Amazons  under  Mrs.  Lynch,  Lopez
was  gradually  driven  to  the  extreme  northern
boundary  of  Paraguay.  When  he  was  about  to
cross  the  river  Aquidaban,  he  was  surprised  by  a
detachment  of  Brazilian  cavalry.  The  Brazilian
general,  Camara,  in  vain  summoned  him  to  sur
render  ;  but  his  strength  gave  way  as  he  was
swimming  to  the  opposite  bank,  and  while  bleed
ing  from  his  wounds  he  was  killed  by  two  Brazilian
soldiers,  his  last  words  being:  "  I  die  for  my  coun
try."  Mrs.  Lynch  was  overtaken  in  her'  flight.
The  eldest  son,  Pancho,  in  the  uniform  of  a  colonel,
fired  upon  the  Brazilian  chief  lieutenant,  Martinez,
who  thereupon  killed  him,  and  he  was  buried  by
the  side  of  his  father.  Mrs.  Lynch  went  to  Eng
land.  The  forces  of  Lopez,  reduced  to  about  1,500,
at  once  laid  down  their  arms.  See  "  Seven  Event
ful  Years  in  Paraguay,"  by  George  F.  Masterman
(London,  1869),  and  "History  of  Paraguay,"  by
Charles  A.  Washburn  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1870).

LOPE/,  Estanislao,  Argentine  soldier,  b.  in
Santa  Fe,  22  Nov.,  1786;  d.  there,  15  June,  1838.
He  entered  the  Argentine  army  during  the  war  of
independence,  and  was  present  in  several  battles
under  Gen.  Belgrano.  In  1818  he  had  become
colonel  and  military  commander  of  the  province
of  Santa  Fe,  and  on  23  July  of  the  same  year  was
appointed  its  first  governor,  being  promoted  gen
eral  in  August.  He  took  part  in  the  civil  war  that
began  in  that  year,  and  was  defeated  by  the  forces
of  the  Argentine  government  under  Gen.  Balcarce
on  27  Nov.  in  Paso  de  Aguirre,  and  on  18-19  Feb.,

1819,  at  Herradura,  but  on  10  March  at  Barrancas
he  was  victorious. After  two  years  of  civil  war
Lopez  arrived  before  Buenos  Ayres,  and  the  gov
ernor,  Rodriguez,  recognized  the  federal  govern
ment  on  23  Feb.,  1820. When  Balcarce  was  elect
ed  governor,  Rodriguez,  aided  by  Lopez,  revolted
against him,  and was reinstated on 23 March.
Dorrego  defeated  Lopez  in  the  battle  of  Pavon  on

12  Aug. ;  but  on  2  Sept.  the  latter  defeated  Dor
rego  in  Gamonal,  province  of  Santa  Fe,  and  the
war  between  the  provinces  of  Buenos  Ayres  and
Santa  Fe  was  ended  by  a  treaty  of  peace  on  24  Nov.,

1820.  In  1821  he  declared  war  against  the  prov
ince  of  Entre  Rios,  and  on  26  May  conquered  its
governor,  Ramirez,  in  the  battle  of  Coronda. On

13  May,  1826,  he  signed  a  treaty  of  alliance  be
tween  the  provinces  of  La  Plata  against  Brazil,  and
on  21  April,  1828,  at  the  head  of  a  strong  army,  he
marched  on  the  territory  of  Misiones. The  Argen
tine  national  convention  appointed  him  director
and  general-in-chief  of  all  the  national  forces  on
26  Feb.,  1829,  and  on  26  April.  1829,  he  defeated
Gen.  Lavalle  in  the  battle  of  Puente  de  Marquez,


22


LOPEZ


LOPEZ Y PLANES


near  Buenos  Ayres.  He  resigned  the  office  of
general-in-chief.  30  Jan.,  1832.  In  1857  his  statue
was  erected  in  Santa  Fe.

LOPE/,  Juan  Francisco,  Mexican  clergyman,
h.  in  Guarena  de  Caracas  in  April,  1699;  d.  in
Italy  in  1778.  He  was  taken  prisoner  with  his
father  by  the  English  and  brought  to  Jamaica.
On  his  release  in  1710  he  went  to  Vera  Cruz,
where  he  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus  in  1715.  He
taught  literature  in  S.  Luis  Potosi  and  Vera  Cruz,
philosophy  in  Zacatecas  and  Mexico,  and  theology
in  Merida  de  Yucatan.  He  was  appointed  pro
curator  to  Koine  and  Madrid,  and  instructed  to
ask  the  pope  to  place  North  America  under  the
protection  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  of  Guadalupe.  On
his  return  to  Mexico  the  governor  made  him  rector
of  the  colleges  of  Mexico  and  Puebla.  He  was
forced  to  leave  Mexico  in  1767,  after  the  decree  of
Charles  III.  suppressing  the  Jesuit  order,  and  went
to  Italy.  He  wrote  a  great  many  works,  including
"Vidadel  P.  Jose  Maria  Genove'si,  Jesuita  Sicilia-
no,  Misionero  de  Topia  y  Californias"  (Mexico,
1758) ;  "  Supplex  Libellus  SS.  Papze  Benedicts  XIV.
oblatus  de  miraculosa  Dei  Parentis  imagine  Mexi-
cea  Guadalupensi "  (Rome,  1754);  "Tabla  Topo-
grafica  de  todas  las  Casas  regulares  y  seculares  y
Misiones  de  la  Provincia  Jesuitica  de  la  Nueva
Espana"  (Rome);  and  "Manual  de  Parrocos  ajus-
tado  al  Ritual  Romano,"  which  was  reprinted  in
1803,  and  the  4th  Mexican  council  ordered  it  to  be
used  by  all  priests.  The  life  of  Lopez  was  written
by  Juan  Maneiro  (Bologna,  1792).

LOPEZ,  Martin,  Spanish  sailor.  He  lived  in
the  16th  century,  but,  though  his  name  is  often
cited  in  the  history  of  the  conquest  of  Mexico,
there  is  no  record  of  his  birthplace  or  the  dates
of  his  birth  and  death.  He  was  a  carpenter  by
profession,  made  several  voyages  to  Cuba,  and  ac
companied  Francisco  Hernandez  de  Cordova  in
1517,  Juan  de  Grijalva  in  1518,  and  Cortes  in  1519,
to  Mexico  always  as  chief  carpenter  of  the  expedi
tion.  After  the  defeat  of  Cortes  in  Mexico  and
his  retreat  to  Tlascala  in  July,  1520,  he  formed  a
plan  to  attack  Mexico  by  land  and  water,  and
Lopez  offered  to  build  proper  vessels.  He  began
to  cut  wood  in  the  mountains  of  Tlascala,  and  the
native  chief  Chichemecatecuhtli  furnished  men  to
carry  the  wood  to  the  city.  At  the  end  of  Decem
ber,  1520,  the  timbers  for  the  vessels  were  finished.
They  were  then  carried,  with  the  iron-work,  rig
ging,  and  sails  that  had  been  saved  from  the  ves
sels  that  were  burned  in  Vera  Cruz,  to  the  borders
of  the  Lake  of  Texcoco.  On  28  April,  1521,  twelve
brigantines  were  launched  amidst  festivities  in  the
Lake  of  Texcoco.  These  vessels  rendered  good
service  in  the  siege  and  final  capture  of  the  city,
on  13  Aug.,  and  Lopez  was  rewarded  by  the  con
queror  with  great  honors  and  riches.  He  after
ward  resided  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  where  he  died.

LOPE/,  Narciso,  Spanish-American  soldier,  b.
in  Caracas,  Venezuela,  in  1799  ;  d.  in  Havana,  Cuba,
1  Sept.,  1851.  He  belonged  to  a  rich  family  of  mer
chants,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  for  inde
pendence  in  the  colony  took  the  popular  side,  but
soon  afterward  entered  the  Spanish  army,  and  at
the  close  of  the  war  was  rewarded  with  the  rank  of
colonel,  although  he  was  only  twenty-one  years  old.
The  royal  army  having  evacuated  Venezuela,  Lopez
went  to  Cuba  and  afterward  to  Spain,  where  he
served  in  the  first  Carlist  war,  and  was  called  "  the
first  lancer  in  the  army."  In  1836  he  was  made
brigadier,  and  in  1839  major-general  and  appointed
governor  of  Valencia.  In  1841  Gen.  Valdes  was  ap
pointed  governor-general  of  Cuba,  and  took  with
him  Lopez,  who  was  intrusted  with  several  impor


tant  posts ;  but  when,  in  1843,  Gen.  O'Donnell  went
to  Cuba  to  succeed  Valdes,  Lopez  was  deprived  of
all  his  commands,  and  in  consequence  retired  to  pri
vate  life,  where  he  engaged  in  commercial  pursuits
and  undertook  the  management  of  copper-mines.
In  1848  the  revolutionary  party  in  the  island  won
him  to  their  cause,  and  he  took  part  in  a  conspira
cy  against  the  government,  on  the  discovery  of
which  he  fled  in  1849  to  New  York.  There  he  or
ganized  a  military  expedition  for  the  invasion  of
Cuba,  which  was  frustrated  by  proclamation  of
President  Taylor  in  August,  1849.  In  the  follow
ing  year  he  organized  another  expedition,  and
landed  in  the  town  of  Cardenas,  19  May,  1850,  at
the  head  of  about  600  men.  He  took  possession  of
the  town,  but  was  compelled  to  evacuate  it  after  a
few  hours,  and  returned  to  New  Orleans  to  prepare
a  new  expedition,  with  which  he  landed,  12  Aug.,
1851,  near  Bahia  Honda,  on  the  northern  coast  of
the  island,  west  of  Havana.  He  left  130  men,  un
der  Col.  Crittenden,  at  the  landing-place,  and  with
323  followers  marched  on  Las  Pozas.  lie  was  at
tacked  on  the  following  day  by  a  body  of  500
Spanish  troops,  which  were  afterward  re-enforced
by  800  under  the  command  of  Gen.  Enna,  and
completely  routed  them  with  great  loss,  Gen.  Enna
being  killed;  but  on  the  16th,  dreading  a  fresh
attack,  he  retreated  to  the  interior.  The  country
population  did  not  answer  to  Lopez's  appeal  for  a
general  rising,  and  after  several  skirmishes  his  fol
lowers  scattered  through  the  mountains.  They
were  attacked  by  the  Spaniards,  and  Lopez,  having
fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  was  brought  to
Havana,  tried  for  high  treason,  and  executed  by
the  garrote,  while  many  of  his  soldiers  were  con
demned  to  hard  labor.  Some  days  before  Col.
Crittenden  was  captured  at  sea  while  trying  to
reach  New  Orleans,  and  was  shot  at  Havana,  to
gether  with  fifty  of  his  companions.  Lopez  was
the  leader  of  the  party  in  Cuba  that  favored  an
nexation  to  the  United  States.

LOPE/  DE  ZUSlGA  Y  VELASCO,  Diesro,
Count  of  Nieva.  viceroy  of  Peru,  b.  in  Valladolid
in  1510;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,  20  Feb.,  1564.  He  was
appointed  viceroy  of  Peru  in  1561,  taking  charge
of  the  government  on  17  April.  On  14  Dec.  of
the  same  year  he  ordered  Gomez  de  Tordoya  to  ex
plore  the  river  Tono,  and  on  24  Dec.  commissioned
Juan  Nieto  to  conquer  the  territory  of  Camana.
In  1562  he  introduced  several  reforms  in  the  capi
tal,  and  in  the  same  year  the  city  of  Santiago  del
Estero  (now  in  the  Argentine  Republic)  was  found
ed  by  his  direction.  In  1563  the  audiencia  of  Quito
was  installed.  Lopez  founded  the  city  of  Sana,  or
Santiago  de  Miraflores,  and  Diego  Pineda  the  town
of  Chancay,  formerly  called  Arnedo,  to  which  the
viceroy  intended  to  remove  the  University  of  San
Marcos  for  the  purpose  of  separating  the  students
from  the  noise  of  the  capital.  Toward  the  end  of
that  year  he  commissioned  Cristobal  de  Valverde
to  found  a  town,  which  was  named  San  Geronimo
de  lea.  Lopez  also  directed  the  division  of  the
diocese  of  Chili  from  that  of  Peru.  He  organized
and  improved  schools  for  the  sons  of  Indian  ca
ciques,  favored  the  monasteries,  founded  parishes,
and  was  the  first  to  establish  in  Peru  the  ceremo
nial  and  customs  of  a  viceregal  court.  During
his  term  of  office  he  ordered  and  finished  the  con
struction  of  an  aqueduct  to  supply  the  city  with
potable  water,  passed  laws  for  the  improvement  of
his  government,  and  sent  to  the  royal  treasury
651,000  ducats.  He  was  murdered  in  the  street  of
Trapitos  in  a  feud  caused  by  a  love-affair.

LOPE/  Y  PLANES,  Vicente,  Argentine  poet,
b.  in  Buenos  Ayres  in  1784 ;  d.  there  in  1856.  He


LOQUILLO


LORD


23


studied  law  and  served  as  a  volunteer  during  the
English  invasion  of  1806-'?.  In  1810  he  was  sec
retary  to  Col.  Ortiz  de  Ocampo,  with  whom  he
marched  to  Chuquisaca,  and  in  September,  1811,
he  was  chosen  secretary  of  the  1st  triumvirate  of
Chiclana,  Sarratea,  and  Passo.  He  was  successive
ly  deputy  to  the  constituent  general  assembly,  sec
retary  of  the  director  Puyrredon,  prefect  and
founder  of  the  classic  department  when  the  uni
versity  was  established,  founder  of  its  topographi
cal  department,  member  of  congress  in  the  years
1819  and  1825,  founder  of  the  statistical  register,
provisional  president  of  the  republic  from  5  July
to  13  Aug.,  1827,  minister  of  the  treasury  in  1828,
and  president  of  the  supreme  court  of  justice  till
the  fall  of  Rosas  in  1852.  Gen.  Urquiza  charged
him  with  the  provisional  government,  and  after
ward  he  was  appointed  governor  of  the  province
of  Buenos  Ayres.  He  wrote  the  "Argentine  Na
tional  Hymn  "  and  other  poetical  works.

LOQUILLO,  or  LUQUILLO  (lo-keel'-yo),  West
Indian  cacique,  b.  about  1478 ;  d.  about  1525.  He
took  a  principal  part  in  the  first  insurrection  of  the
natives  against  the  Spanish  conquerors  of  Porto  Ri
co  as  one  of  Agueinaba's  lieu  tenants,  and,  after  this
chief  was  routed  and  killed  in  1511,  withdrew  with
some  followers  to  the  wildest  part  of  the  country,
whence  he  constantly  harassed  his  foes.  In  1515
he  planned  with  the  caciques  Humacao  and  Dagu-
ao  another  general  rebellion,  which  soon  met  with
disaster.  Humacao  and  Daguao  submitted  to  the
conqueror,  but  their  companion  refused  to  do  so,
and  retired  with  the  natives  that  followed  him  to
the  highest  mountain  of  the  island,  which  still
bears  his  name.  There  he  established  his  strong
hold,  and  frequently  fell  upon  the  Spaniards,  kill
ing  them,  burning  their  farms,  and  taking  their
cattle.  He  died  a  free  man,  while  most  of  his
countrymen  were  either  dead  or  slaves.

LORAIN,  Lorenzo,  soldier,  b.  in  Philipsburg,
Centre  co.,  Pa.,  8  Aug.,  1831 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,
6  March,  1882.  He  had  early  showed  much  me
chanical  skill,  and  had  declined  the  superintendency
of  large  machine-works  to  follow  civil  engineering,
when  he  was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  military  acad
emy.  After  his  graduation  in  1856  he  was  on  the
frontier  till  the  civil  war,  in  the  early  part  of  which
he  was  disabled  by  a  wound  at  Blackburn's  ford,
and  saw  no  further  active  service.  He  was  pro
moted  to  a  captaincy  on  28  Feb.,  1862,  and  served
as  assistant  professor  of  chemistry,  mineralogy,  and
geology  at  West  Point  till  1870.  He  was  then  on  gar
rison  duty,  with  the  exception  of  a  year  in  1871-'2,
when  he  held  the  chair  of  physics  at  Lehigh  uni
versity  till  1875,  at  which  time  he  became  instructor
of  engineering  in  the  artillery-school  for  practice
at  Fort  Monroe.  Here  he  placed  his  department
on  a  practical  footing,  obtaining  new  instruments,
introducing  field  reconnoissances,  and  establishing
a  photographic  department.  He  held  this  post  till
his  promotion  to  major  in  1881.  He  invented  the
"  Lorain  telescopic  sight "  for  large  rifled  guns,  and
left  a  •'  range-finder  "  that  he  had  not  perfected  at
the  time  of  his  death.

LORANGER,  Thomas  Jean  Jacques,  Cana
dian  jurist,  b.  in  Sainte  Anne  d'Yamachiche,  Que
bec,  2  Feb.,  1823 ;  d.  on  the  Island  of  Orleans,  18
Aug.,  1885.  He  was  educated  at  Nicolet  college
and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1844.  In  1854  he  be
came  queen's  counsel,  and  in  that  year  was  elected
to  parliament  for  Laprairie,  which  he  represented
till  his  appointment  as  puisne  judge  of  the  su
preme  court  of  Quebec  in  1863.  In  1855  he  argued
the  seigniorial  cause  before  the  court  that  was  es
tablished  for  that  purpose,  and  was  the  first  colo


nial  lawyer  that  was  admitted  to  argue  a  case  be
fore  the  judicial  committee  of  the  privy  council  in
London.  Mr.  Loranger  held  office  in  the  Mac-
donald-Cartier  government  from  November,  1857,
till  July,  1858,  and  until  the  latter  date  served  as  a
commissioner  for  consolidating  the  statutes.  In
1877  he  was  appointed  professor  of  law  in  Laval
university,  and  was  created  by  the  pope  a  com
mander  of  the  order  of  Pius  IX.  In  1883  he  re
tired  from  the  bench,  and  subsequently  was  en
gaged  in  consolidating  the  statutes  of  Quebec.  At
the  semi-centenary  of  St.  Jean  Baptist  association
in  1884  he  was  chosen  its  president.  He  was  chief
editor  of  "  La  Themis,"  wrote  a  work  on  the  civil
code,  and  several  pamphlets  on  legal  and  constitu
tional  subjects. — His  brother,  Louis  Onesime,
Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Sainte  Anne  d'Yamachiche,
Quebec,  10  April,  1837,  was  educated  at  Montreal
and  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in  1858.
He  was  president  of  the  special  committee  to  super
intend  the  national  demonstration  of  the  St.  Jean
Baptist  society  in  1875,  was  elected  to  the  parlia
ment  of  Quebec  in  that  year,  was  re-elected,  and
became  a  member  of  the  executive  council  in  1879.
He  was  appointed  puisne  judge  of  the  superior
court  of  the  province  of  Quebec  in  1882,  and  revis-
ing-officer  in  1885.

LORAS,  Mathias,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Lyons,
France,  in  1702;  d.  in  Dubuque,  Iowa,  19  Feb.,
1858.  He  was  descended  from  a  noble  family,  and
his  father  perished  on  the  scaffold  during  the  reign
of  terror.  He  studied  for  the  priesthood,  was  or
dained  about  1817,  and  soon  afterward  appointed
superior  of  the  ecclesiastical  seminary  of  Largen-
tiere.  In  1830  he  accompanied  Bishop  Portier,  who
was  seeking  priests  in  France  for  his  diocese  of
Mobile,  Ala.,  to  the  United  States.  Father  Loras
was  appointed  vicar-general  on  his  arrival,  and
made  president  of  the  College  of  Spring  Hill,  near
Mobile.  In  1837  the  diocese  of  Dubuque  was  creat
ed,  comprising  Iowa  and  Minnesota,  and  Father
Loras  became  its  bishop.  After  a  visit  to  France
to  obtain  missionaries  he  went  to  his  diocese  in
April,  1839,  and  in  June  following  he  made  his
first  visitation,  also  founding  missions  at  Fort
Snelling  and  Prairie  du  Chien.  On  15  Aug.  of  the
same  year  he  consecrated  the  cathedral  of  Dubuque,
and  shortly  afterward  built  a  church  in  Davenport.
He  also  established  missions  among  the  Sioux,
Foxes,  and  Winnebagoes,  built  churches  and  schools
in  every  part  of  his  diocese,  and  expended  large
sums  of  money  in  employing  teachers,  as  well  as
boarding  and  educating  many  poor  children  at  his
own  expense.  He  introduced  the  Sisters  of  Charity
into  his  diocese,  established  a  seminary  at  Mount
St.  Bernard,  and  founded  a  convent  of  Trappist
monks  and  another  of  visitation  nuns.  In  1851
Minnesota  was  erected  into  a  separate  see.  He
built  a  hospital  in  1857,  and  during  the  same  year
was  compelled  to  apply  for  a  coadjutor,  owing  to
failing  health.  Bishop  Loras  paid  much  attention
to  the  question  of  emigration,  and  under  his  en
couragement  and  guidance  Roman  Catholic  settlers
came  to  Iowa  in  large  numbers  after  1850.

LORD,  Benjamin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Saybrook,
Conn..  31  May,  1694 ;  d.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  31
March,  1784.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1714,
was  tutor  there  the  next  year,  and  in  1717  was  or
dained  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  Nor
wich,  in  which  charge  he  continued  until  his  death.
He  was  a  trustee  of  Yale  in  1742-72,  and  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  that  college  in  1774.  His
numerous  sermons  include  "  The  Faithful  and  Ap
proved  Minister,  a  very  Blessed  Man  "  (New  Lon
don,  1727);  "  Two  Sermons  on  the  Necessity  of  Re-


24


LORD


LORD


generation  "  (Boston,  1738) ;  "  God  Glorified  in  his
Works"  (1743) :  "  Believers  in  Christ "  (1748) ;  and
"  A  Christian's  Hope  at  the  Close  of  Life  "  (Nor
wich,  1774).— His  great-grandson,  Daniel  Minor,
clergyman,  b.  in  Lyme,  Conn.,  9  April,  1800;  d.  on
Shelter  island,  N.  Y.,  26  Aug.,  1861.  was  graduated
at  Amherst  in  1830,  studied  at  Princeton  theologi
cal  seminary,  and  in  1834  was  licensed  to  preach.
He  was  subsequently  pastor  of  the  Boston  mariner's
church,  and  from  1848  till  his  death  was  pastor  of
the  1st  Presbyterian  church  on  Shelter  island,  N.  Y.,
and  agent  of  the  American  seaman's  friend  society.
He  published  various  articles  on  the  moral  claims
of  seamen. — Another  great-grandson  of  Benjamin,
Willis,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bridgeport,  Conn.,  15  Sept..
1809,  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1833,  studied
theology  at  Princeton,  was  ordained  in  1834,  and
was  successively  pastor  of  Presbyterian  churches  in
New  Hartford,  Conn..  Providence,  R.  I.,  Philadel
phia.  Pa.,  and  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  He  was  professor
of  biblical  literature  and  pastoral  theology  in  Lane
seminary,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  in  1850-'4,  pastor  of
the  2d  Presbyterian  church  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in
1855-'9,  professor  of  ecclesiastical  and  biblical  his
tory,  and  of  didactic  and  polemic  theology  in  the
Seminary  of  the  northwest  in  Chicago,  from  the
latter  date  till  1870,  and  then  became  president  of
Wooster  university,  Ohio.  Failure  of  health  com
pelled  his  resignation  of  this  office  in  1874.  He  was
pastor  of  the  1st  Presbyterian  church  in  Chicago  in
1878-'9,  and  now  (1887)  resides  in  Colorado  Springs,
Col.,  where  he  is  engaged  in  literary  work.  He  has
published,  besides  sermons  and  reviews,  "Christian
Theology  for  the  People"  (Chicago,  1874).

LORD,  Daniel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Stonington,  Conn.,
2  Sept.,  1795 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  4  March,  1868.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1814,  studied  law  un
der  George  Griffin,  of  New  York,  and  at  the  Litch-
field.  Conn.,  law-school,  and  in  1817  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  settling  in  New  York  city.  He  gradu
ally  attained  the
highest  rank  in  his
profession,  to  which
he  devoted  himself
exclusively,  steadily
refusing  all  public
office,  and  for  forty
years  previous  to  his
death  there  were
few  great  civil  cases
before  the  United
States  or  New  York
state  courts  in  which
he  was  not  retained.
His  most  noted  cases
include  the  Dutch
Reformed  and  Meth
odist  church  cases,
the  "  fire  cases "
growing  out  of
the  conflagration  of
1835,  the  American

life  and  trust  cases,  the  Leake  and  Watts  charity
case,  the  Mason  and  Phelps  will  case,  the  foreign
cases  growing  out  of  the  financial  crisis  of  1837,
the  insurance  cases  that  brought  up  the  question
of  general  average,  and  the  argument  before  the
U.  S.  supreme  court  of  the  "Hiawatha"  prize
cause  in  which  the  doctrines  of  war  as  bearing
upon  the  public  laws  of  prize  and  blockade  were
discussed.  Yale  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in
1846. — His  son,  James  Couper,  philanthropist,  b.
in  New  York  city,  11  March,  1825;  d.  there,  9  Feb.,
1869,  after  receiving  an  academic  education  entered
mercantile  life,  subsequently  becoming  associated


in  the  ownership  of  the  Boonton,  N.  J.,  iron-works.
Mr.  Lord  took  great  interest  in  the  improvement  of
the  condition  of  his  workmen,  erecting  two  churches,
and  founding  a  library  and  a  free  reading-room  for
their  use.  He  also  founded  in  New  York  city  in
1800  the  "  First  Ward  Industrial  School,"  and  for
several  years  almost  entirely  supported  that  charity.
LORD,  Eleazar,  financier,  b.  in  Franklin,  Conn.,
9  Sept.,  1788;  d.  in  Piermont,  N.  Y.,  3  June,  1871.
He  was  educated  in  the  district  schools  of  his  na
tive  town,  studied  four  years  at  Andover  theologi
cal  seminary  and  one  at  Princeton,  but  was  forced
by  the  failure  of  his  eyesight  to  abandon  a  pro
fessional  life.  He  went  to  New  York  in  1815,  where
he  engaged  in  commercial  pursuits,  and  subsequent
ly  in  banking,  founded  the  Manliattan  insurance
company  in  1821,  was  its  president  twelve  years,
and  introduced  important  changes  in  the  system
of  insurance.  He  was  a  founder  of  the  New  York
and  Erie  railroad,  and  its  president  for  many  years,
an  advocate  of  the  "  free  banking  system,"  which
was  adopted  in  New  York  in  1838,  and  induced
Henry  Clay  to  declare  himself  in  opposition  to  free-
trade.  Mr.  Lord  was  an  accomplished  scholar,  and
a  successful  projector  of  schemes  for  the  public-
good.  He  was  a  founder  of  the  American  Sunday-
school  union  in  1815,  its  corresponding  secretary
in  1818-'26,  and  its  president  from  the  latter  date
till  1836.  lie  was  a  founder  in  1820,  and  subse
quently  secretary  and  president,  of  the  National
institution  for  the  promotion  of  industry,  at  the
same  time  editing  its  organ,  the  "  Patron  of  Indus
try  "  ;  and  he  assisted  in  establishing  the  Home  and
foreign  missionary  society,  the  theological  semi
naries  at  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  and  East  Windsor,  Conn.,
and  the  University  of  New  York,  of  which  he  was
a  trustee  for  many  years.  His  pamphlet  on  the
subject  led  to  the  establishment  of  the  American
and  other  educational  societies.  He  removed  to
Piermont,  N.  Y.,  in  1836,  and  was  principally  en
gaged  during  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  philan
thropic  work  and  the  composition  of  religious
books  and  pamphlets.  In  1861  he  originated  and
drew  in  his  own  handwriting  what  he  claims  to  be
the  draft  of  the  first  greenback  that  was  ever  issued
in  the  United  States.  He  founded,  edited,  and  was
a  contributor  to  the  "  Theological  and  Literary
Journal."  The  University  of  New  York  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1861.  His  publications  in
clude  an  edition  of  Lempriere's  "  Biographical  Dic
tionary,"  to  which  he  contributed  800  original  ar
ticles  (New  York,  1825);  "Credit,  Currency,  and
Banking"  (1828);  "The  Epoch  of  the  Creation"
(1838);  "Geological  and  Scriptural  Cosmogony"
(1843):  "The  Mediatorial  Work  of  Christ"  (1844);
"The  Messiah  in  Moses  and  the  Prophets"  (1852);
"  Symbolic  Prophecy  "  (1854) ;  "  Hints  to  Orthodox
Miilenarians"  (1854);  "An  Historical  Review  of
the  New  York  and  Erie  Railroad"  (1855);  "The
Plenary  Inspiration  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  "  (1855) ;
"  A,  Layman's  Letters  to  the  Pastoral  Union  of
Connecticut"  (1856);  "The  Prophetic  Office  of
Christ"  (1858);  "Inspiration  not  Guidance  nor  In
tuition  "  (1858) ;  "  Reviews  of  Authors  on  Inspira
tion"  (1859);  "The  Psalter  readjusted  in  its  Re
lation  to  the  Temple  Services"  (1860);  "Analysis
of  the  Book  of  Isaiah"  (1861);  "A  Letter  on  Na
tional  Currency  "  (1861);  and  "  Six  Letters  on  the
Necessity  and  Practicality  of  a  National  Currency"
(1862). — His  brother,  David  Nevins,  author,  b.'in
Franklin,  Conn..  4  March,  1792;  d.  in  New  York
city,  14  July,  1880.  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1807,
and  studied  theology,  but  was  prevented  by  delicate
health  from  entering  the  ministry.  He  settled  in
New  York  in  1823,  for  many  years  was  a  successful


LORD


LORD


importer  of  dry-goods,  and  was  concerned  in  the
early  management  of  the  New  York  and  Erie  rail
road  company. From  early  manhood  he  gave  much  j
study  to  theological  subjects,  especially  on  the  ful-  |
filment  of  prophecy,  and  the  true  methods  of  in
terpretation  of  symbolism. In  1848-'61  he  edited  j
a  quarterly  entitled  the  '•  Theological  and  Literary
Journal.''  and  was  its  principal  contributor. His  !
publications  include  "  Exposition  of  the Apoca-  |
lypse  "  (New  York,  1847) :  "  Characteristics  of  Figu-  i
rative  Language"  (1854):  "  Louis  Napoleon — is  he  :
to  be  the  Imperial  Chief  of  the  Ten  Kingdoms!"
(18(56) :  and  "  Visions  of  Paradise,"  an  epic  (1867).

LORD,  John  Chase,  clergyman,  b.  in  Buffalo,  j
N.  Y.,  9  Aug.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  21  Jan..
1877,  was  educated  at  Hamilton  college,  but  was
not  graduated.  Settling  in  Buffalo,  he  studied
law,  and  in  1828  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  af
terward  entered  Auburn  theological  seminary,  was
graduated  in  1833.  and  from  1835  until  his  resig
nation  in  1873  was  pastor  of  the  Central  Presby
terian  church,  which  he  had  organized.  In  1851
he  published  a  sermon  on  the  fugitive-slave  law,  in
which  he  took  the  ground  that  no  citizen  had  a
right  to  resist  laws  that  protected  slavery.  This
sermon  was  distributed  as  a  campaign  document.  !
and  was  described  by  President  Fillmore  in  a  per-  |
sonal  letter  to  its  author  as  "  rendering  the  nation  '
a  valuable  service."  On  the  secession  of  the  south  i
Dr.  Lord  was  an  earnest  Unionist.  He  was  mod-  j
erator  of  the  general  assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  i
church  in  1852.  His  published  works  include,  be
sides  separate  sermons  and  lectures,  "  Land  of
Ophir  and  other  Lectures  "  (Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  1851),  j
and  ''Occasional  Poems"  (1869).  See  "Memoir  of  j
John  C.  Lord"  (Buffalo,  1878).  — His  brother.
Charles  Bachns.  jurist,  b.  in  Thornton,  Me.,  13
July,  1810 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  15  Nov.,  1868,  was
educated  at  Hamilton  college,  practised  law  in
Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  and  removing  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  at
tained  eminence  in  his  profession.  For  many  years
he  was  judge  of  the  land  court,  and  subsequently
of  the  circuit  court  of  that  city. — Another  brother,  j
William  Wilberforce,  clergyman,  b.  in  Madison  \
county.  N.  Y.,  28  Oct.,  1819.  He  was  educated  at
the  University  of  Western  New  York  (since  discon
tinued),  studied  theology  at  Princeton  and  Auburn
theological  seminaries,  was  tutor  in  mental  and
moral  science  at  Amherst  in  1847.  and  subsequent
ly  took  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,
officiating  as  rector  in  the  south  and  southwest,
and  for  many  years  at  Vicksburg,  Miss.  During
the  civil  war  he  was  a  chaplain  in  the  Confederate
army.  He  has  published  "Poems"  (New  York,
1845).  that  were  praised  by  Wordsworth  and  ridi
culed  by  Edgar  A.  Poe  :  "  Christ  in  Hades"  (1851);
and  "Andre,  a  Tragedy"  (1856). — Another  broth
er.  Scott,  congressman,  b.  in  Nelson,  N.  Y.,  20  Dec..
1820 ;  d.  in  Morris  Plains,  N.  J.,  10  Sept.,  1885.  He
received  an  academic  education,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  removed  to  Geneseo,
N.  Y.,  in  1822,  established  a  large  practice,  and
was  county  judge  from  1847  till  1854,  when  he  re
sumed  his  profession.  In  1872  he  removed  to  Utica,
N.  Y.,  formed  a  partnership  with  Roscoe  Conkling
and  Alfred  C.  Cox.  and  became  surrogate  of  Oneida
county.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo
crat  in  1874,  but  was  defeated  at  the  next  elec
tion.  During  his  term  he  was  chairman  of  the
Belknap  impeachment  committee.  He  removed  to
New  \  ork  city  in  1878,  and  established  the  law-
firm  of  Lord  and  Lord.  He  was  senior  counsel  for
Cornelius  Yanderbilt  in  the  contest  over  the  will
of  Com.  Vanderbilt,  and  was  largely  engaged  in  the
claims  arising  under  the  Geneva  award  bill.


LORD.  Nathan,  clergyman,  b.  in  Berwick,  Me..
28  Nov.,  1793:  d.  in  Hanover,  N.  H.,  9  Sept.,  1870.
He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1809.  and  at  An-
dover  theological  seminary  in  1815.  He  was  pastor
of  the  Congregational  church  in  Amherst,  N.  II.,
from  1816  till  1828,  and  at  the  latter  date,  on  the
resignation  of  Rev.  Bennett  Tyler,  became  presi
dent  of  Dartmouth.  Under  his  administration  the
professorships  of  Greek  literature  and  language,  of
astronomy  and  meteorology,  of  modern  languages,
of  intellectual  philosophy,  and  of  natural  history
were  established,  three  new  halls  and  a  chapel  were
built,  the  observatory  was  added,  the  "  Chandler
scientific  department  "  was  founded  by  the  eift  of
$50,000  from  Abiel  Chandler,  and  1,824  students
were  graduated.  He  retired  in  1863.  Dr.  Lord  up
held  the  institution  of  slavery,  and  thus  incurred
the  censure  of  most  northern  people ;  but  while  he
advocated  his  views  in  letters  and  sermons.  Dart
mouth  was  the  only  college  in  the  United  States
for  many  years  where  colored  students  were  ad
mitted,  and  while  under  his  care  they  were  treated
with  uniform  kindness  and  courtesy.  He  inclined
to  the  old-school  system  of  theology,  and  to  a  lit
eral  interpretation  of  the  prophesies.  Dartmouth
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1864,  and  Bow
doin  that  of  D.  D.  in  1828.  He  occasionally  con
tributed  to  theological  reviews,  edited,  with  an  in
troductory  notice,  the  selected  sermons  of  his  son,
Rev.  John  King  Lord  (Boston.  1850),  and  published
numerous  sermons,  essays,  and  letters.  Among  the
latter  are  "  Letter  to  Rev.  Daniel  Dana.  D.  D.,  on
Park's  'Theology  of  New  England'"  (1852):  "An
Essay  on  the  Millennium."  read  to  the  General  con
vention  of  New  Hampshire  (1854);  and  "Two
Letters  to  Ministers  of  all  Denominations  on  Sla
very"  (1854-'5).  in  which  he  endeavored,  by  biblical
arguments,  to  prove  the  lawfulness  of  that  institu
tion. — His  son,  John  Kin?,  clergyman,  b.  in  Am
herst,  N.  H.,  22  March,  1819 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati.  Ohio,
13  July,  1849,  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1836,
taught  two  and  one  half  years,  and  in  1841  was
graduated  at  Andover  theological  seminary.  He
then  became  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church
in  Hartford,  Vt.,  and  in  1847  of  the  1st  orthodox
Congregational  church  of  Cincinnati.  Ohio.  He
possessed  fine  abilities,  was  a  popular  and  energetic

Bistor,  and  his  early  death  was  greatly  deplored,
is  selected  sermons  were  published  by  his  father
(Boston,  1850). — Nathan's  nephew,  John,  lecturer,
b.  in  Portsmouth.  N.  H..  10  Sept.,  1812,  was  gradu
ated  at  Dartmouth  in  1833,  studied  at  Andover  theo
logical  seminary  in  1837,  became  agent  and  lecturer
on  history  to  the  American  peace  society,  and  was
afterward  pastor  of  Congregational  churches  in
New  Marlborough  and  Stockbridge.  Mass.  He
subsequently  withdrew  from  pastoral  work  and
devoted  himself  to  historical  study  and  lecturing,
spending  1843-'6  in  England,  where  he  spoke  on
"The  Middle  Ages"  in  the  principal  cities.  Re
turning  to  the  United  States,  during  a  career  of
fifty  years  he  has  lectured  in  most  of  the  larger
towns  and  cities  of  the  middle  and  New  England
states,  and  is  supposed  to  be  the  oldest  living  lec
turer  in  this  country.  The  University  of  New  York
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1864.  and  he  was
lecturer  on  history  at  Dartmouth  in  1866-'?6.  His
publications  include  "Modern  History  for  Schools  "
(Philadelphia.  1850);  "The  Old  Roman  World"
(1867) ;  "  Ancient  States  and  Empires  "  (1869) ;  and
"  Beacon  Lights  "  (1883).

LORD,  Otis  Phillips,  jurist,  b.  in  Ipswich.
Mass.,  11  July.  1812  :  d.  in  Salem.  Mass.,  13  March.
1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1832,  and
at  the  Harvard  law-school  in  1836,  subsequently


26


LORENCEZ


LORIMIER


settling  in  Ipswich  and  afterward  in  Salem,  where
he  practised  his  profession.  lie  was  a  member  of
the  Massachusetts  legislature  in  1847-'54,  serving
in  the  latter  year  as  speaker,  was  a  member  of  the
Constitutional  convention  in  1858,  and  from  1859
till  1875  an  associate  justice  of  the  state  superior
court.  On  the  dissolution  of  the  Whig  party,  of
which  he  had  been  a  member,  he  was  nominated  for
congress  in  1858  by  an  independent  convention,
and  was  defeated  then,  and  again  in  18(50,  when  he
was  the  candidate  of  the  Constitutional  union  par
ty.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  pro-slavery  in  his
p'olitics,  and  in  1866  he  published  a  series  of  arti
cles  opposing  the  15th  constitutional  amendment.
He  was  elevated  to  the  supreme  bench  in  1875,  and
held  office  till  his  retirement  in  1882.  Amherst
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  I),  in  1869.

LORENCEZ,  Charles  Ferdinand  Latrille,
Count  de  (lo-ron-say),  French  soldier,  b.  in  Paris,
23  May,  1814.  He  entered  the  military  school  of
Saint  Cyr  in  1830,  and  was  graduated  two  years
later  as  3d  lieutenant.  He  served  in  Algiers,
had  become  a  colonel  in  1852,  and  won  the  com
mission  of  major-general  in  1855,  during  the  Cri
mean  war,  at  the  capture  of  the  Malakoff.  In
January,  1862.  he  was  sent  to  Mexico  with  re-en
forcements  for  the  expedition  that  had  landed
there  in  December,  1861.  He  arrived  at  Vera  Cruz
on  5  March,  and  was  made  lieutenant-general  on
the  20th.  He  left  the  camp  of  Chiquihuite  on  19
April,  and  on  the  following  morning  entered
Orizaba,  having  defeated  the  Mexican  forces  in
a  cavalry  engagement.  On  the  23d  lie  was
joined  by  the  Mexican  Gen.  Galvez  with  a
strong  force  of  volunteers,  and  on  the  27th  as
sumed  command  of  the  French  forces  in  Mexico.
He  defeated  the  patriots  at  Acultzingo  on  28  April,
entered  Amozoc  on  4  May,  and  on  the  following
day  attacked  the  fortified  hills  of  Guadelupe  and
Loreto,  opposite  Puebla.  Owing  to  the  lack  of
proper  artillery,  he  was  unable  to  capture  these
posts,  and  retreated  toward  Orizaba.  He  passed
the  Cumbres  heights  on  the  16th,  and  on  the  fol
lowing  morning  was  joined  at  Tecomolucan  by
the  insurgent  chief  Marquez  and  500  cavalry.
Zaragoza  was  beaten  after  a  sharp  action  at
Acultzingo  on  18  May,  and  on  the  20th  Lorencez
arrived  at  Orizaba,  which  he  fortified,  as  he  had
resolved  to  await  the  arrival  of  re-enforcements
in  that  city.'  On  17  June  he  defeated  Zaragoza
again,  but  the  French  forces  suffered  heavily  from
yellow  fever  and  want  of  provisions.  When  Na
poleon  III.  sent  a  larger  army  to  Mexico,  he  ap
pointed  Lorencez  second  in  command  under  Gen.
Forey ;  but  the  former  asked  to  be  recalled,  and
left  Vera  Cruz  on  17  Dec.,  1862.  Gen.  Lorencez
would  have  been  created  a  senator  but  for  his  op
position  to  the  sending  of  re-enforcements  to
Mexico,  urging  the  emperor  to  recall  his  troops,
and  predicting  that  the  issue  would  be  disastrous.
He  fought  during  the  Franco-German  war  of
1870-'!,  but  a  disease  contracted  in  Mexico  com
pelled  him  to  retire  from  active  service  in  1872.
He  has  since  been  occupied  with  a  history  of  the
French  expedition  to  Mexico.

LOREN/ANA  Y  BUTRON,  Francisco  An
tonio  (lo-ren-thah'-nah),  Spanish  archbishop,  b.  in
Leon,  Spain,  22  Sept.,  1722;  d.  in  Rome,  Italy,  17
April,  1804.  He  was  at  first  canon  of  Toledo,' and
in  1765  became  bishop  of  Placencia,  but  in  1766
was  transferred  to  the  archbishopric  of  Mexico.
He  remained  in  that  country  six  years,  after  which
he  was  made  archbishop  of  Toledo,  Spain.  lie
was  nominated  cardinal  in  1789,  resigning  his  arch
bishopric  in  1800,  and  went  to  live  at  Rome.  Of  his


numerous  works  the  most  notable  are  "  Coleccion
de  Cartas  Pastorales  y  Edictos"  (Mexico,  1770);
"Memorial  de  16s  Mendigos  de  Mexico"  (1769);
and  "  Cartas  Originales  de  Hernan  Cortes  a  Carlos
V.  con  Notas  y  Estampas  utiles  para  la  llistoria  de
la  N.  E."  (1770).

LORILLARI),  Jacob,  merchant,  b.  in  New
York  city,  22  May,  1774;  d.  there,  20  Sept.,  1838.
He  was  of  French  descent  on  his  father's  and  Ger
man  on  his  mother's  side.  His  early  education  was
meagre,  but  he  supplied  the  deficiency  by  night
study.  He  was  apprenticed  when  a  boy  to  a  leather
merchant,  and  for  many  years  was  engaged  in  the
leather  business,  yet  in  later  life  he  devoted  his
energies  mainly  to  the  interests  of  the  Mechanics'
bank,  which,  while  its  president,  he  twice  delivered
from  serious  embarrassment.  He  invested  the
profits  of  his  business  largely  in  real  estate  in  New
York  city.  Mr.  Lorillard  was  unostentatiously  lib
eral  to  the  poor,  often  assisted  struggling  traders
with  credit,  and  once  mortgaged  his  property  to
save  a  friend  from  financial  ruin.  lie  was  presi
dent  of  the  German  society,  a  trustee  of  the  Gen
eral  theological  seminary  of  the  Protestant  Epis
copal  church,  alderman,  member  of  the  assembly,
and  an  officer  in  many  associations. — His  nephew,
Pierre,  b.  in  New  York  city,  provided,  jointly
with  the  French  government,  the  means  for  archa1-
ological  explorations  by  Desire  Charnay  in  Central
America,  which  resulted  in  the  discovery  of  the
ruins  of  Toltec  cities.  He  also  founded  Tuxedo
Park,  a  suburban  retreat  in  Orange  county,  N.  Y.,
combining  the  advantages  of  landscape-gardening
with  facilities  for  country  sports.

LORIMER,  (ieorg-e  Claud,  clergyman,  b.  in
Edinburgh,  Scotland,  in  1838.  He  removed  to  the
United  States  in  1856,  was  educated  at  Georgetown
college,  Ky.,  and  ordained  to  the  Baptist  ministry
in  1856.  lie  was  successively  pastor  of  churches
in  Harrodsburg,  Paducah,  and  Louisville,  Ky.,
Albany,  N.  Y.,  and  Boston,  Mass.,  where  he  of
ficiated  for  several  years  in  Tremont  Temple.
Since  1881  he  has  held  charges  in  Chicago,  111.
He  edited  "  The  Watchman  "  in  1876.  Georgetown
college  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1885,  and
he  is  a  member  of  the  Victoria  institute,  London.
His  publications  include  "Under  the  Evergreens"
(Boston,  1872);  "The  Great  Conflict"  (1876);
"Isms"  (Chicago,  1882);  "Jesus  the  World's  Sav
iour"  (1884);  and  "Studies  in  Social  Life"  (18S6).

LORIMIER,  Mary -Thomas  Chevalier  de,
lawyer,  b.  in  Montreal  in  1805 ;  d.  there,  15  Feb.,
1839.  He  was  educated  for  the  law,  and  took  a
prominent  part  in  the  struggle  between  the  Cana
dian  and  the  British  government.  He  was  princi
pally  instrumental  in  procuring  the  election  of
Tracey  for  the  west  quarter  of  Montreal,  and  still
more  active,  in  the  general  election  of  1834,  in
favor  of  the  candidate  that  supported  "the  ninety-
two  resolutions."  He  was  secretary  of  almost  all
the  assemblies  that  preceded  the  insurrection,  and
of  the  central  committee  charged  with  watching
over  the  formation  of  the  county  committees.  In
the  conflict  between  the  Doric  club  and  the  Sons
of  Liberty  he  was  seriously  wounded.  When  war
rants  of  arrest  were  issued,  he  set  out  for  the
county  of  Deux-Montagnes  in  1837,  and  placed
himself  under  the  revolutionary  chief,  Chenier.
He  took  part  in  the  affair  at  Saint-Eustache  on
14  Sept. ;  but  afterward,  seeing  that  resistance
was  useless,  advised  Chenier  to  lay  down  his  arms.
As  the  latter  refused,  Lorimier  crossed  into  the
United  States.  He  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the
expedition  of  28  Feb.,  1838,  and  after  its  failure
returned  to  Plattsburg,  and  devoted  his  energies  to


LORING


LORING


27


the  organization  of  the  insurrectionary  movement
of  November,  1838.  He  took  part  in  the  capture  of
the  "  Brougham,"  at  Beauharnois.  on  3  Nov.,  and
passed  several  days  in  Camp  Baker,  where  the
Canadian  patriots  received  orders  to  concentrate
in  Napierville.  After  the  defeat  of  Nelson  at  Odell-
town,  he  set  out  for  the  United  States,  but  lost  his
way  when  near  the  frontier,  and  was  arrested,  with
seven  of  his  companions,  on  12  Nov.  He  was  taken
to  Montreal,  tried  by  court-martial,  found  guilty
of  high  treason,  and  hanged.  Money  was  raised
for  his  wife  and  children,  in  Canada,  in  1883.

LORING,  Charles  Greeley,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bos
ton,  Mass.,  2  May,  1794;  d.  in  Beverly,  Mass.,  8
Oct.,  18G8.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1812,
studied  law  in  Boston,  and  for  many  years  was  a
well-known  member  of  the  Boston  bar.  He  was
actuary  of  the  Massachusetts  hospital  life-insur
ance  company  from  1857  until  his  death,  and  in
1862  he  served  in  the  state  senate.  He  was  a
member  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and
sciences,  and  of  the  Massachusetts  historical  so
ciety.  Mr.  Loring  was  an  eloquent  and  effective
speaker.  His  numerous  addresses  include  one  that
he  delivered.  4  July,  1821,  before  the  town  authori
ties  of  Boston,  Mass.,  that  before  the  Boston  mer
cantile  library  association  in  1845,  at  the  Republi
can  mass-meeting  in  Faneuil  hall  in  1862,  an  ora
tion  on  the  death  of  Edward  Everett,  whom  he
succeeded  as  president  of  the  Boston  union  club,
and  an  address  at  the  meeting  of  Boston  citizens
after  the  assassination  of  President  Lincoln.  Har
vard  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1850.  Be
sides  addresses,  he  published  '•  Neutral  Relations
between  the  United  States  and  England  "  (Boston,
1863),  and  "Life  of  William  Sturgis"  (1864).

LORING,  Ellis  Gray,  lawyer,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1803 ;  d.  there,  24  May,  1858.  He  entered
Harvard  college  in  1819,  but  was  not  graduated
with  his  class,  afterward  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  Suffolk  bar,  and  became  eminent.  He  was
one  of  the  twelve  that  formed  the  first  anti-slavery
society  in  Boston  in  1833.  He  distinguished  him
self  chiefly  in  the  defence  of  the  slave-child  •'  Med  "
in  the  Massachusetts  supreme  court,  where  he  suc
ceeded  in  obtaining  the  decision  that  every  slave
brought  on  Massachusetts  soil  by  the  owner  was
legally  free ;  a  case  precisely  analogous  to  the
celebrated  "  Somerset "  case  in  England.  By  this
argument  he  achieved  the  unusual  success  of  con
vincing  the  opposing  counsel,  Benjamin  R.  Curtis,
afterward  justice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  who
shook  hands  with  him  after  the  trial,  saying:
'•  Your  argument  has  entirely  converted  me  to
your  side,  Mr.  Loring."  He  also  attracted  some
attention  as  the  author  of  a  "  Petition  in  behalf  of
Abner  Kneeland,"  which  was  headed  by  the  name
of  Rev.  Dr.  William  E.  Channing.  Abner  Knee-
land  (q.  v.)  was  a  professed  atheist  who  was  indict
ed  for  blasphemy,  and  Mr.  Loring's  petition  was  a
strong  plea  in  behalf  of  freedom  of  speech.  Sev
eral  of  Mr.  Loring's  arguments  and  addresses  were
published  at  different  times,  including  "  An  Ad
dress  before  the  Massachusetts  Anti-Slavery  So
ciety  "  (Boston,  1838).  At  the  New  England"  anti-
slavery  convention,  27  May,  1858,  two  days  after
his  death,  Wendell  Phillips  said :  "  The  great  merit
of  Mr.  Loring's  anti-slavery  life  was,  he  laid  on  the
altar  of  the  slave's  needs  all  his  peculiar  tastes.
Refined,  domestic,  retiring,  contemplative,  loving
literature,  art,  and  culture,  he  saw  there  was  no
one  else  to  speak,  therefore  he  was  found  in  the
van.  It  was  the  uttermost  instance  of  self-sacri
fice  —  more  than  money,  more  than  reputation,
thousrh  he  crave  both."


LORING,  Frederick  Wadsworth,  journalist,
b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  12  Dec.,  1848;  d.  near  Wick-
enburg,  Arizona,  5  Nov.,  1871.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1870,  and  during  the  brief  period
between  that  event  and  his  death  gave  unusual
promise  of  success  as  a  writer,  being  connected
with  several  newspapers  and  a  contributor  to  the
"  Atlantic  Monthly,"  "  Appletons'  Journal,"  "  Old
and  New,"  the  "  Independent,"  and  "  Every  Sat
urday."  In  the  spring  of  1871  he  went  as  cor
respondent  of  "Appletons'  Journal"  on  the  U.  S.
exploring  expedition  to  Arizona  that  was  in  com
mand  of  Lieut.  George  M.  WTheeler.  To  that  jour
nal  he  wrote  from  San  Francisco  a  lively  sketch  of
his  Chinese  experiences,  entitled  "Je  Horge,"
and  during  his  wanderings  in  the  wilderness  "  A
Council  of  War,"  "A  Glimpse  of  Mormonism."
"  Silver  Mining  in  Nevada,"  "  The  Valley  of
Death,"  and  several  poems.  The  party  suffered
great  privations,  and  in  August,  1871,  Loring
wrote  to  his  employers,  from  the  "  Valley  of
Death,"  a  canon  in  California  and  Nevada,  three
hundred  feet  below  the  level  of  the  sea,  which  all
former  expeditions  had  avoided,  or  from  which
they  had  never  returned  :  "  I  am  bootless,  coatless,
everything  but  lifeless.  I  have  had  a  fortnight  of
horrors.  This  morning  an  Indian  fight  capped
the  climax.  However,  I  am  well  and  cheerful."
He  escaped  from  the  valley,  but  when  he  was  on
his  way  home  a  band  of  Apaches  attacked  the
stage-coach  in  its  passage  from  VVickenburg  to  La
Paz,  Arizona,  killing  the  driver  and  Loring,  with
four  other  passengers.  A  short  time  before  Lor
ing's  death,  Charles  Reade,  the  novelist,  said  that
he  seemed  to  him  the  most  promising  of  all  the
young  American  authors.  His  collected  writings
include  "  Cotton  Cultivation  in  the  South,"  with
Charles  F.  Atkinson  (Boston,  1869) ;  "  The  Boston
Dip,  and  other  Verses"  (1871);  and  "Two  College
Friends,"  a  novel  (1871).

LORING,  George  Bailey,  agriculturist,  b.  in
North  Andover,  Mass.,  8  Nov.,  1817.  He  was  grad
uated  at  Harvard  in  1838,  and  at  the  medical  de
partment  in  1842.  He  was  surgeon  to  the  marine
hospital,  Chelsea,  Mass.,  in  1843-'50,  a  commis
sioner  to  revise  the  U.  S.  marine  hospital  sys
tem  in  1849,  and  postmaster  at  Salem,  Mass.,  in
1853-'7.  He  subsequently  devoted  himself  for
many  years  to  practical  and  scientific  agriculture,
and  to  the  preparation  and  delivery  of  addresses  on
that  and  kindred  topics.  He  has  been  president
of  the  New  England  agricultural  society  since  1864,
was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Republican  conven
tions  in  1868,  1872,  and  1876,  chairman  of  the
Massachusetts  Republican  committee  in  1869-'76,
U.  S.  centennial  commissioner  in  1872— '6,  and
president  of  the  state  senate  in  1873-7.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican  in  1876,  and
served  till  1881,  when  he  became  commissioner  of
agriculture,  holding  office  till  1885.  Among  his
numerous  addresses  are  "  Relation  of  Agriculture
to  the  State  in  Time  of  War"  (Concord,  Mass.,
1862) ;  "  Classical  Culture  "  (Amherst,  1866) ;  "  Eu
logy  on  Louis  Agassiz "  (1873) ;  "  The  Cobden
Club  and  the  American  Farmer"  (Worcester,
1880);  address  at  the  cotton  convention  in  At
lanta,  Ga.  (1881) ;  and  "  The  Farm- Yard  Club  of  Jo-
tham,"  a  sketch  of  New  England  life  and  farming
(Boston,  1876).

LORING,  Israel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hull,  Mass.,
15  April,  1682:  d.  in  Sudbury,  Mass.,  9  March,
1772.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1701,  and
in  1706  became  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church
in  Sudbury,  Mass.,  continuing  in  this  charge  for
sixty-six  years.  Mr.  Loring  was  one  of  the  readi-


LORING


LORING


est  writers  of  his  day.  was  an  ardent  temperance  re
former,  and  was  often  called  on  to  speak  on  special
occasions.  Tn  1737  he  delivered  the  annual  elec
tion  sermon,  in  the  presence  of  Gov.  Jonathan
Belcher,  in  which  he  urged  that  "  the  infamy  may
he  taken  from  the  memory  and  names  of  those  who
had  suffered  from  the  witchcraft  delusion,  and  rep
aration  made  to  their  children  for  the  injuries  done
them."  He  also  opposed  the  system  of  revivals
as  conducted  by  Whitefield,  and  wrote  a  paper  on
the  subject,  entitled  •'  Testimony  against  the  Rev.
George  Whitefield  and  his  Conduct."  He  left  a
manuscript  journal  of  thirty  volumes,  biographi
cal  and  historical,  most  of  which  has  been  lost.

LORING,  James  Spear,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass..  6  Aug.,  1799;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  12
April,  1884.  His  father,  James,  was  for  fifty-five
years  a  Boston  printer  and  bookseller,  edited  the
"  Christian  Watchman,"  and  published  the  "  Mas
sachusetts  State  Register"  in  1800-'48.  The  son
was  for  thirty  years  a  bookseller  in  Boston,  and  a
contributor  of  historical  and  biographical  articles
to  the  "  New  England  Historical  and  Genealogical
Register."  lie  afterward  removed  to  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.  He  was  the  author  of  '•  A  Hundred  Boston
Orators  "  (Boston,  1852).

LORING,  Joshua,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1716;  d.  in  Highgate,  England,  in  1781.
He  was  a  captain  in  the  royal  navy  in  1757,  com
manded  in  the  operations  on  Lake  George  and
Lake  Champlain  in  1759,  and  on  Lake  Ontario  the
next  year,  accompanying  Gen.  Jeffrey  Amherst  to
Montreal.  He  was  subsequently  proscribed  and
banished,  the  committee  on  confiscated  estates  ad
vertising  for  sale  his  "  large  mansion-house,  to
gether  with  about  sixty -five  acres  of  mowing-
land,"  in  Roxbury,  and  his  house  and  garden  in
Boston,  "  next  to  the  South  writing-school  adjoin
ing  the  common."  He  went  to  England,  and  in  a
contemporary  record  of  his  death  is  described  as
"  one  of  the  oldest  captains  of  the  royal  navy,  and
late  commodore  of  the  lakes  of  North  America."

LORING,  Joshua,  commissary  of  prisoners,  b.
in  Hingham,  Mass.,  in  December,  1737:  d.  in  Edge-
field,  England,  in  August,  1789.  lie  was  high
sheriff  of  Massachusetts  in  1708,  subsequently
mayor  of  Hingham,  and  one  of  those  who  signed
an  address  to  Gov.  Hutchiuson  in  1774,  and  to
Gov.  Gage  in  1775,  approving  their  course.  One
of  Gage's  last  official  acts  was  the  appointment  of
Loring,  in  June,  1775,  as  "sole  vendue-master  and
auctioneer."  He  went  to  Halifax  with  the  royal
army  the  next  year,  and  early  in  1777  was  appoint
ed  by  Sir  William  Howe  commissary  of  prisoners,
toward  whom  he  was  accused  of  excessive  cruelty.
Gen.  Ethan  Allen  said  of  him  that  "  he  murdered
precipitately,  in  cold  blood,  near  or  quite  two  thou
sand  helpless  prisoners  in  New  York."  But  Gen.
Gold  Selleck  Silliman,  in  his  letters  to  his  wife,
describes  Loring  as  having  treated  him  with
'•  kindness,  complaisance,  and  friendship."  Other
authorities  agree  that  Loring  starved  prisoners  so
that  300  died  before  an  exchange  could  be  effected.
His  wife,  Miss  Lloyd,  of  Dorchester,  Mass.,  was  a
brilliant  and  unprincipled  woman,  noted  for  her
extravagance  and  love  of  play,  at  which  she  occa
sionally  lost  as  much  as  300  guineas  at  a  sitting.
Loring  owed  his  appointment  of  commissary  of
prisoners  to  her  influence  with  Howe.

LORING,  William  Wingr,  soldier,  b.  in  Wil
mington,  N.  C.,  4  Dec.,  1818  ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
30  Dec.,  1886.  When  he  was  about  thirteen  years
old  he  enlisted  in  a  company  of  volunteers  to  fight
the  Seminole  Indians  in  Florida,  participated  in
several  battles,  and  was  promoted  to  a  2d  lieu


tenancy,  16  June,  1887.  He  was  sent  to  school  at
Alexandria,  Va.,  and  subsequently  at  Georgetown,
D.  C.,  was  graduated  in  the  law  in  1842,  and,  re
turning  to  Florida,  was  elected  to  the  legislature.
Early  in  1846  he  was  made  senior  captain  of  a  new
regiment  of  mounted  riflemen,  and  on  16  Feb.,
1847,  was  placed  in  command,  with  the  rank  of  ma
jor.  In  the  assault  on  the  Mexican  intrenched
camp  at  Contreras,  Loring's  regiment  was  tempo
rarily  detached  for  special  service,  which  resulted
in  its  being  first  in
the  main  works  of
the  Mexicans,  and
leading  in  the  pur
suit  of  the  enemy
as  far  as  San  An
gel.  But  at  this
moment  counter
orders  were  re
ceived.  Loring
and  his  regiment
were  the  first  to
enter  the  Mexican
batteries  at  Cha-
pul  tepee  on  the
side  next  the  capi
tal,  arid,  though
without  orders,  he

led  the  fighting  on  ,

the  cause  way  from  •

that  point  to  the  Belen  Gate,  where  he  received  a
wound  that  necessitated  the  amputation  of  his
left  arm.  For  "gallant  and  meritorious  conduct"
at  Contreras  and  Churubusco  he  received  the  bre
vet  of  lieutenant-colonel,  and  for  Chapultepec  and
Garita  de  Belen  that  of  colonel.  lie  was  pro
moted  lieutenant-colonel,  5  March,  1848.  The  citi
zens  of  Appalachicola,  Fla.,  presented  him  with
a  sword  on  which  were  engraved  the  words,  that
Gen.  Scott  had  addressed  to  the  Rifles  on  the  field
of  Chapultepec :  "  Brave  Rifles,  you  have  gone
through  fire  and  blood,  and  come  out  steel."  In
April,  1849,  he  successfully  marched  across  the
continent  to  Oregon  as  escort  to  a  party  of  gold-
seekers,  and  on  3  Oct.  he  was  assigned  to  the  com
mand  of  the  llth  military  department.  Some  time
afterward  he  was  ordered  to  Texas,  where  he  re
mained  till  August,  1850.  and  was  promoted  to  the
rank  of  colonel  on  30  Dec.  Till  8  April,  1858,  he
was  engaged  against  hostile  Indians  in  New  Mexi
co,  and  he  afterward  took  part  in  the  Utah  ex
pedition  of  1858.  In  1859  he  received  leave  of
absence  to  visit  Europe,  Egypt,  and  the  Holy  Land,
and  on  his  return  he  commanded  the  Department
of  New  Mexico  until  13  May,  1861,  when  he  re:
signed  and  was  appointed  brigadier-general  in  the
Confederate  army.  He  served  in  the  Army  of
Northern  Virginia,  on  15  Feb.,  1862,  was  pro
moted  to  major-general,  and  led  a  division  till  the
end  of  the  civil  war,  frequently  commanding  a
corps.  In  the  spring  of  1863,  when  Gen.  Grant  was
operating  for  the  investment  of  Vicksburg,  Loring
was  sent  to  Fort  Pemberton,  where  he  mounted
two  heavy  siege-guns  that  silenced  the  fire  of  the
U.  S.  gun-boat  "  Chillicothe."  His  exclamation,
"  Give  her  a  blizzard,  boys !  "  on  this  occasion,  was
the  origin  of  the  name  of  "  Old  Blizzard,"  by
which  he  was  afterward  known.  Gen.  Loring  ac
cepted  service  in  the  army  of  the  khedive  of  Egypt
in  December,  1869,  as  a  liwa  pacha,  or  general  of
brigade.  Shortly  after  his  arrival  in  Cairo  he  was
assigned  to  the  command  of  Alexandria  and  its  de
fences  extending  along  the  coast  to  the  Rosetta
mouth  of  the  Nile.  On  10  Dec.,  1875,  he  was  or
dered  to  accompany,  as  chief  of  staff  and  military


LORNE


LOSADA


29


adviser,  the  general-in-chief  of  the  Egyptian  army,
Ratib  Pacha,  who  was  ordered  to  the  command  of
an  expedition  to  Abyssinia.  Ratib  refused  to  fol
low  the  counsel  of  Gen.  Loring  and  his  staff  of
American  officers,  and  the  Egyptian  army  was  al
most  annihilated  by  the  Abyssinians  at  the  battle
of  Kaya-Khor.  Gen.  Loring,  shortly  after  his  re
turn  to  Egypt,  was  decorated  by  the  khedive  with
the  imperial  order  of  the  Osmariah  and  promoted
to  fcrik,  or  general  of  division.  In  1879,  with  the
American  officers,  he  was  mustered  out  of  the
Egyptian  service  and  returned  to  the  United  States.
Gen.  Loring  published  "  A  Confederate  Soldier  in
Egypt"  (New  York,  1888).

LORNE,  John  George  Edward  Henry  Bong-
las  Sutherland  Campbell,  Marquis  of,  gov
ernor-general  of  Canada,  b.  in  Stafford  House,  Lon
don,  England,  6  Aug.,  1845.  He  is  the  eldest  son
of  the  eighth  Duke  of  Argyll  and  Lady  Elizabeth
Georgiana  Sutherland  Levison-Gower,  eldest  daugh
ter  of  the  second  Duke  of  Sutherland.  He  was
educated  at  Eton,  the  University  of  St.  Andrews,
and  Trinity  college,  Cambridge.  In  1866  he  trav
elled  in  the  West  Indies,  the  United  States,  and
Canada,  the  same  year  was  appointed  captain  of
the  London  Scottish  volunteers,  and  in  1868  com
missioned  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  Argyll  and
Bute  volunteer  artillery  brigade.  In  February,
1868,  he  was  elected  a  member  of  parliament  for
Argyllshire  in  the  Liberal  interest,  and  in  Decem
ber  of  that  year  he  became  private  secretary  to  his
father  at  the  India  office.  He  was  re-elected  by  ac
clamation  in  two  subsequent  general  elections,  1869
and  1874.  On  21  March,  1871,  he  married  Princess
Louise  Caroline  Alberta,  the  sixth  child  and  fourth
daughter  of  Queen  Victoria,  b.  1848.  The  mar
riage  took  place  at  St.  George's  chapel,  Windsor,
and  on  that  occasion  the  marquis  was  created  a
knight  of  the  thistle.
On  14  Oct.,  1878,  he
was  appointed  govern
or-general  of  Canada,  in
succession  to  Lord  Duf-
ferin,  and  soon  after
ward  he  was  created
knight  of  the  grand
cross  of  St.  Michael  and
St.  George.  Accom
panied  by  the  Princess
Louise,  he  went  to  Can
ada  in  November,  1878,
where  they  received  an
enthusiastic  welcome,
and  during  the  summer
of  1879  they  visited  the
principal  cities.  The
chief  political  incident
of  his  term  of  office  was
his  refusal  to  dismiss
the  lieutenant-govern
or  of  Quebec,  Luc  Le-
tellier  de  Saint  Just,
from  office,  at  the  request  of  the  administration,
referring  the  question  instead  to  the  home  gov
ernment,  which  ordered  him  to  take  the  advice
of  his  ministers.  The  marquis  and  marchioness
were  popular  with  all  classes  of  people,  and  among
the  French  Canadians  they  were  probably  more
highly  esteemed  than  any  of  their  predecessors.
His  term  of  office  expired  in  1883.  At  the  general
election  in  1883  the  Marquis  of  Lome  contested
Hampstcad  as  a  Liberal,  but  was  defeated  by  a
large  majority.  He  has  written  for  the  magazines,
and  is  the  author  of  "  A  Trip  to  the  Tropics  and
Home  through  America  "  (London,  1867) ;  "  Guido


and  Lita :  a  Tale  of  the  Riviera."  a  poem  (1875) ;
and  "  The  Psalms  literally  rendered  in  Verse "
(1877).  The  Marchioness  has  gained  some  repute
as  an  artist  and  musician.  The  illustrations  in  her
husband's  poem,  "  Guido  and  Lita,"  are  by  her  hand.

LORQUET,  Lonis  Michael  Polemon,  Hay-
tian  soldier,  b.  in  Hayti,  5  Dec.,  1825 ;  d.  there  in
April,  1876.  His  father  was  a  colonel  in  the  army.
After  leaving  school,  Lorquet  entered  the  ranks  of
the  regiment,  and  soon  afterward  became  secretary
to  Gen.  Inginac.  After  the  revolution  of  1843,
when  President  Boyer  fled  to  Jamaica,  young  Lor
quet  attended  him,  and  remained  with  him  till
1845,  when  he  returned  to  Hayti.  He  was  ap
pointed  chief  clerk  in  the  custom-house,  but  was
removed  by  Gen.  Faustin  Soulouque.  and  went  to
reside  at  Gonaives.  In  1849,  when  Soulouque  was
proclaimed  emperor,  under  the  title  of  Faustin  I.,
through  the  influence  of  the  Duke  de  Saint-Louis
du  Sud,  Lorquet  was  appointed  judge  at  Gonaives,
and  on  28  March,  1854,  tie  was  commissioned  pub
lic  prosecutor  for  that  place.  In  December.  1858,
when  Gen.  Fabre  Geffrard  became  president,  he
appointed  Lorquet  chief  justice,  minister  of  in
struction,  and  temporary  commander  of  the  re
publican  forces.  On  11  Nov.,  1865.  he  was  made
general  of  the  army,  and  on  the  overthrow  of  Gef
frard  shared  his  exile,  but  returned  on  8  May,  1868,
and  took  part  in  the  revolution  of  that  year.  On
13  May,  1871,  he  was  appointed  commander  of  the
city  of  Port  an  Prince  by  President  Nissage  Saget,
which  post  he  filled  for  several  years.

LORRAINE,  Narcisse  Zepnrin,  Canadian  R.
C.  bishop,  b.  in  St.  Martin,  Lower  Canada,  13  June,
1842.  He  was  educated  at  the  Seminary  of  Sainte
Therese,  and  at  Laval  university,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1864  as  bachelor  of  sciences.  He  was
ordained  priest  on  4  Aug.,  1867,  and  appointed  as
sistant  director  of  the  Seminary  of  Sainte  Therese,
which  office  he  held  till  15  Aug.,  1869,  when  he  be
came  pastor  of  the  congregation  at  Redford,  Clin
ton  co.,  N.  Y.  On  3  Aug.,  1880,  he  was  appointed
vicar-general  of  the  diocese  of  Montreal,  and  on  21
Sept.,  1882,  he  was  consecrated  titular  bishop  of
Cythera,  and  vicar-apostolic  of  Pontiac,  with  resi
dence  at  Pembroke.  In  1884  Bishop  Lorraine,
while  on  a  mission  tour,  visited  the  Temiscamingue
region  and  the  country  around  Hudson  bay,  and
travelled  about  1,500  miles  in  a  bark  canoe.  In
1887  he  made  a  pastoral  visit  to  the  Indian  mis
sions  on  the  upper  Ottawa,  Rupert's  Land,  and
the  upper  St.  Maurice.  During  the  five  years  he
has  been  in  Pembroke,  Bishop  Lorraine  has  paid
off  a  large  debt  that  had  encumbered  the  church,
built  a  fine  episcopal  residence,  and  purchased  sites
for  several  charitable  institutions.

LOSADA,  Dieg-o  de  (lo-sah'-dah),  Spanish  ad
venturer,  b.  in  San  Lucar  de  Barrameda  in  1519;
d.  in  Tocuyo,  Venezuela,  in  1569.  Of  his  early  life
little  is  known.  He  probably  served  under  Pedro
de  Heredia  (q.  v.)  in  Carthagena,  and  he  certainly
participated  in  the  expedition  that  was  sent  under
Felipe  de  Urre  for  the  discovery  of  the  fabulous
El  Dorado  in  1541-'5.  He  continued  to  serve
under  the  different  governors  of  Venezuela,  and  in
1566  was  intrusted  by  Pedro  Ponce  de  Leon  with
the  conquest  of  the  country  of  the  Caracas  In
dians,  which  had  been  partially  settled  by  Fajardo
in  1560,  but  afterward  abandoned.  The  valley  of
the  Caracas  was  said  to  be  very  rich,  and  densely
populated  by  nearly  150,000  Indians ;  but  Losada
left  the  city  of  Mariana  in  January,  1567,  with
only  150  soldiers,  18  of  whom  were  mounted.
After  fighting  against  the  warlike  Arbaces  and
Teques,  he  arrived  in  April  in  the  valley  of  Cam-


30


LOSADA


LOS  SANTOS


cas,  and,  after  routing  part  of  the  Indian  forces,
founded  at  the  foot  of  a  high  mountain  a  city
which  he  named  Santiago  de  Leon  de  Caracas.
The  Indians  soon  rallied  and  attacked  Losada,
cutting  off  his  supplies;  but  as  the  tribes  were
under  command  of  many  different  caciques,  Losada
caused  dissension  among  them,  and  gained  over  a
chief  named  Guaipata,  through  whom  he  obtained
the  necessary  supplies.  Incensed  at  the  treachery,
the  other  tribes  formed  a  league,  and,  under  com
mand  of  the  cacique  Guaicapuro,  fell  with  a
numerous  army  upon  Guaipata,  who  demanded
succor  from  Losada.  The  latter,  after  a  protracted
war,  defeated  the  allies,  and  was  appointed  by
Ponce  de  Leon  governor  of  the  newly  founded
colony.  He  began  to  reward  his  followers  with
rich  grants  of  hind  and  Indian  commandcries,  but
caused  dissatisfaction  by  the  distribution ;  and
those  who  thought  themselves  unjustly  dealt  with
allied  themselves  with  the  Indians,  and  there  was
an  insurrection.  Losada  applied  to  Ponce  de  Leon
for  help ;  but,  in  order  to  restore  peace,  the  latter
divested  him  of  his  command  in  1569,  transferring
the  seat  of  the  general  government  to  Caracas.
Losada  retired  to  Tocuyo,  where  he  died  of  grief
after  vain  endeavors  to  obtain  justice.

LOSADA,  or  LO/ADA,  Manuel  (lo-thah'-dah),
Mexican  bandit,  b.  in  Santa  Teresa,  canton  Tepic,
about  1825  ;  d.  in  Tepic,  19  July,  1873.  He  was  of
mixed  white,  negro,  and  Indian  race,  but  was  born
and  bred  among  the  Indians.  He  passed  his  youth
as  a  farm-laborer.  About  1855  he  abducted  the
daughter  of  a  rich  Indian  of  Mojarres,  who  had
been  refused  in  marriage  to  him,  and  fled  to  the
neighboring  mountains  of  Nayarit  or  Alica.  Soon
he  became  a  cattle-thief,  and  in  one  of  his  descents
to  the  plains  was  captured,  together  with  his  wife,
but  both  managed  shortly  to  escape.  On  returning
to  his  mountain  haunts  he  became  a  highwayman
out  of  a  desire  for  revenge,  which  was  increased  by
the  barbarous  flogging  of  his  mother,  from  whose
hut  he  had  just  escaped,  by  the  government  officer
who  pursued  him.  He  soon  gathered  a  large  band
of  Indians,  and  the  farmers  on  the  plains  were  in
such  fear  of  him  that  they  did  not  dare  to  assist
the  government  troops  against  him,  while  he  levied
from  them  contributions  of  arms,  horses,  and  pro
visions.  Owing  to  internal  strife,  the  authorities
were  too  weak  to  suppress  brigandage,  so  that  Lo
sada  soon  became  a  terror  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
plains,  and  exacted  tribute  from  every  pack-train
between  the  seaport  of  San  Bias  and  the  town  of
Tepic,  and  from  all  the  proprietors  of  farms.
When  he  captured  the  officer  that  had  flogged  his
mother,  he  killed  him  and  his  command  with  cruel
tortures,  and  followed  these  with  other  barbarities,
which  gave  him  the  name  of  "  the  tiger  of  Alica."
During  the  strife  between  the  Liberal  and  Con
servative  parties,  Losada  joined  the  latter,  and
soon  he  became  the  autocrat  of  the  mountains,
dividing  the  population  into  districts,  and  exacting
from  every  village  a  tribute  and  a  certain  number
of  warriors,  whom  he  armed  with  American  guns,
and  who  obeyed  him  even  under  the  most  outrage
ous  oppression.  At  last,  Ramon  Corona,  a  miner
from  Acaponeta,  who  had  been  persecuted  by  Lo
sada  for  his  Liberal  ideas,  attacked  the  brigand  in
1858,  first  with  a  force  of  partisans  and  afterward
with  Liberal  troops,  but  was  unsuccessful,  and
Losada  remained  undisputed  master  of  the  depart
ment  of  Tepic.  The  government  of  Miramon  flat
tered  and  decorated  him,  and  after  the  fall  of  that
leader  in  1860  the  returning  Liberal  government,
busy  with  internal  strife,  left  him  undisturbed.
After  the  French  invasion  the  authorities  recog


nized  his  grade  of  general-in-chief  and  commander
of  the  Department  of  Alica,  and  the  bishop  of
Guadalajara  came  to  bless  him.  Maximilian  sent
a  commission  to  deliver  to  the  Indian  bandit  gen
eral  a  costly  sword  and  the  emperor's  picture  in  a
frame  adorned  with  diamonds.  The  commission,
on  arrival  at  the  village  of  San  Luis,  found  "  his
excellency  "  clad  in  coarse  cotton  garb  and  raw
hide  sandals  behind  the  plough.  After  the  fall  of
the  empire,  Juarez  failed  to  punish  the  bandit  for  his
breach  of  faith  in  disregarding  the  neutrality  that
he  had  promised  in  1862.  Until  1872  Losada
reigned  supreme  in  the  mountains  of  Alica.  In
that  year  he  sent  messengers  to  the  Mayas  of  Yuca
tan,  the  Tarascos  of  Michoacan,  and  the  Yaquis  of
Sonora,  asking  them  to  rise  at  the  same  time
against  the  Liberal  government,  as  he  intended  to
establish  an  Indian  empire.  At  the  beginning  of
1873  he  had  gathered  at  San  Luis  an  army  of  about
20,000  Indians,  which  he  divided  into  three  bodies,
sending  one  against  Zacatecas  and  another  against
Sinaloa,  and  he  marched  at  the  head  of  10,000  men
on  17  Jan.  toward  the  centre  of  Jalisco,  proclaim
ing  to  his  followers  that  they  were  to  take  their
pay  from  the  captured  towns.  His  former  antago
nist.  Gen.  Corona,  was  military  commander  of  Ja
lisco,  and  marched  with  scarcely  1,600  men  to  de
fend  the  city  of  Guadalajara  from  plunder.  The
two  forces  met,  28  Jan.,  1873,  at  Mojonera,  near
Guadalajara,  and.  after  a  desperate  battle,  Losada
was  totally  routed,  and,  with  a  loss  of  nearly  3.000,
fled  to  the  mountains,  wounded  in  the  arm.  The
government  troops  lost  fewer  than  400.  Gen.  Ce-
ballos.  with  a  large  force,  was  sent  in  pursuit  of
Losada,  and  after  defeating  him  in  several  encoun
ters,  in  which  he  was  gradually  abandoned  by  his
followers,  Col.  Rosales  at  last  captured  him.  Lo
sada  was  taken  to  Tepic,  quickly  tried  by  a  mili
tary  court,  and  executed  near  that  town.

LOSKIEL,  George  Henry,  Moravian  bishop,  b.
in  Angermuende,  Courland,  Russia,  7  Nov.,  1740;
d.  in  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  23  Feb.,  1814.  He  was  edu
cated  at  the  Moravian  college  and  theological  semi
nary  of  Germany.  In  1802  lie  was  consecrated  to
the  episcopacy,  and  appointed  presiding  bishop  of
the  northern  district  of  the  American  province  of
the  Moravian  church,  and  he  filled  the  office,  with
general  acceptance,  until  1811,  when  his  health
failed.  In  the  following  year  he  was  elected  to  the
chief  executive  board  of  his  church  at  Berthels-
dorf,  Saxony ;  but  the  condition  of  his  health  pre
vented  him  from  leaving  this  country.  Lcskiel
was  an  eloquent  preacher  and  a  good  writer.  Two
of  his  works  are  especially  important :  "  Etwas  furs
Herz,"  meditations  for  every  day  in  the  year,
which  has  passed  through  more  than  eight  editions
and  still  enjoys  high  repute  (Basle,  1806),  and  the
"  History  of  tlie  Moravian  Mission  among  the  North
American  Indians,"  translated  into  English  by
Charles  J.  Latrobe  (London,  1794).

LOSS,  Lewis  Hoinri,  clergyman,  b.  in  Augusta,
N.  Y.,  1  July,  1803  ;  d.  10  July,"l865.  He  was  grad
uated  at  Hamilton  college  in  1828,  ordained  to  the
ministry  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  1829,  and
held  various  pastorates  in  the  states  of  New  York,
Ohio,  Illinois,  and  Iowa.  He  erected  many  churches
in  the  west,  and  was  active  in  the  establishment  of
Rockford  female  seminary  and  Beloit  college.

LOS  SANTOS,  Thomas  de,  clergyman,  b.  in
Cordova,  Argentine  Republic,  in  1826  ;  d.  in  Bue
nos  Ayres  in  1868.  He  was  educated  in  Buenos
Ayres.  and  in  1840  entered  the  Dominican  order  in
The  convent,  of  Cordova,  where  he  gave  such  evi
dences  of  superior  intelligence  that  he  was  appoint
ed  professor  of  theology  and  philosophy  at  the  age


LOSSING


LOTBINIERE


31


of  twenty.  He  was  ordained  priest  in  1850,  and
appointed  successively  regent  of  studies,  sub-prior,
and  master  of  novices  in  his  convent.  In  I860  he
was  ordered  to  Mendoza  to  organize  the  studies  in
the  convent  of  that  city.  While  he  was  lecturing
before  his  brethren  there  was  an  earthquake,  de
stroying  the  convent  as  well  as  the  whole  city,  and
burying  the  greater  part  of  the  monks  under  the
ruins.  lie  made  heroic  efforts  during  the  catastro
phe,  and  saved  several  lives.  In  1800  he  was  sum
moned  k>  Buenos  Ayres;  but,  as  he  insisted  on
making  the  journey  on  foot,  it  took  him  two  years
to  reach  the  capital.  Travelling  across  the  pam
pas,  he  acted  as  missionary  on  the  way,  converting
several  Indian  tribes.  He  was  elected  prior  of  the
convent  of  Buenos  Ayres  in  1862,  and  in  1867  was
appointed  provincial  of  his  order  in  the  Argentine
Republic.  Shortly  after  his  appointment  there
was  an  outbreak  of  cholera,  and  he  devoted  himself
entirely  to  the  service  of  the  sick,  until  he  himself
became  a  victim.  lie  wrote  several  works,  the
principal  of  which  are  "  El  Tercero  Instruido  "  and
"  Mctodo  Spiritual."

LOSSING,  Benson  John,  author,  b.  in  Beek-
man,  Dutchess  co.,  X.  Y.,  12  Feb.,  1813.  His
father,  a  farmer,  died  when  the  son  was  an  infant.
After  attending  school,  Benson  was  apprenticed
to  a  watchmaker  in  Poughkeepsie,  who,  when  he
had  served  nearly  seven  years,  took  him  into
partnership.  Two  years  later  he  became  joint  pro
prietor  and  editor  of  the  Poughkeepsie  "  Tele
graph,"  and  in  1836  he  began  with  his  partner  the
publication  of  a  literary  journal  called  the  "  Pough
keepsie  Casket."  Mr.  Lossing  placed  himself  un
der  the  instruction  of  a  wood-engraver  in  New
York,  became  an  engraver  on  wood,  and  was  en
gaged  in  1838  by  the  publisher  of  the  "Family
Magazine "  to  become  its  editor  and  illustrator.
He  performed  this  service  for  the  last  two  of  the
eight  volumes  of  this  the  earliest  fully  illustrated
American  magazine.  In  1839  he  established  him
self  in  New  York  as  a  professional  wood-engraver,
a  craft  that  had  then  but  three  practitioners  be
sides  himself  in  the  city,  and  two  years  later  he
severed  his  business  connection  with  the  Pough
keepsie  publications.  In  1848  he  matured  the
plan  of  his  principal  work,  the  "  Pictorial  Field-
Book  of  the  Revolution,"  which  was  published
in  thirty  illustrated  numbers  (New  York,  1850-'2).
For  twenty  years  Mr.  Lossing  was  a  frequent  con
tributor  of  illustrated  papers  to  Harper's  "Maga
zine."  For  the  London  "Art  Journal"  he  pre
pared  a  series  of  articles  descriptive  of  the  scenery,
history,  and  legends  of  the  Hudson  river,  which  were
published,  with  illustrations  from  his  sketches,  in
that  monthly  in  I860-'!,  and  afterward  in  a  volume
entitled  •'  The  Hudson,  from  the  Wilderness  to  the
Sea  "  (New  York,  1866).  From  the  papers,  letters,
and  orderly  books  of  Gen.  Philip  Schuyler  he  pre
pared  "  The  Life  and  Times  of  Philip  Schuyler"
(2  vols.,  New  York,  1860;  new  ed.,  1880).  Early
in  1862  he  began  the  compilation  of  a  "  Picto
rial  Field- Book  of  the  Civil  War  in  the  United
States,"  which  was  issued  in  three  illustrated  vol
umes  (vol.  i.,  Philadelphia,  1866;  vols.  ii.  and  iii.,
Hartford,  1869).  On  its  completion  he  prepared  a
"Pictorial  Field- Book  of  the  War  of  1812"  (New
York,  1868).  Since  1868  Mr.  Lossing  has  resided
on  a  farm  near  Dover  Plains,  Duchess  co.,  N.  Y.  In
1873  he  received  from  Michigan  university  the  de
gree  of  LL.  D.  In  1872-'5  he  edited  the'"  Amer
ican  Historical  Record  and  Repository  of  Notes  and
Queries,"  published  in  Philadelphia.  Besides  the
works  already  mentioned  he  is  the  author  of  "  Out
line  History  of  the  Fine  Arts  "  (New  York,  1841) ;


"Lives  of  the  Presidents  of  the  United  States"
(1847) ;  "  Seventeen  Hundred  and  Seventy-Six,  or
the  War  for  Independence  "  (1847);  "  Life  of  Gen
Zachary  Taylor"  (1847);  "Life  of  Gen.  Winfleld
Scott  "  (1847) ;  "  The  New  World  "  (1847) ;  "  Lives
of  the  Signers  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence  "
(1848) ;  an  illustrated  "  History  of  the  United
States  for  Schools  "  (1854),  which  was  followed  by
the  other  volumes>of  a  graded  series  ;  "  Biographies
of  Eminent  Americans  "  (1855) ;  "  Mount  Vernon
and  its  Associations  "  (1859) ;  "  Life  of  Washing
ton,"  illustrated  (1860) ;  "  Vassar  College  and  its
Founder  "  (1867) ;  "  Pictorial  Description  of  Ohio  "
(1869);  "Memorial  of  Lieut.  John  Trout  Greble"
(printed  privately,  1870) ;  an  illustrated  "  Memoir
of  Dr.  Alexander  Anderson,"  the  first  engraver  on
wood  in  America,  published  by  the  New  York
historical  society  (1870) ;  a  "History  of  England"
for  schools  (1871) ;  a  large  history  of  the  United
States  entitled  "  Our  Country,"  with  500  illustra
tions  by  Felix  0.  C.  Darley  (3  vols.,  1873) ;  an  illus
trated  work  on  the  progress  of  industries  in  the
United  States  between  1776  and  1876,  entitled
"The  American  Centenary  "  (Philadelphia,  1876) ;
"  Story  of  the  United  States  Navy  for  Boys  "  (New
York,  1880);  "Cyclopaedia  of  United  States  His
tory,"  with  over  1,000  illustrations  (1881) ;  "  Bi
ography  of  James  A.  Garfield"(1881);  an  illustrated
"History  of  New  York  City  "  (1884) ;  "Mary  and
Martha  Washington  "  (1886) ;  "  Two  Spies  :  Nathan
Hale  and  John  Andre  "  (1886) ;  and  "  The  Empire
State,  a  Compendious  History  of  the  Commonwealth
of  New  York "  (1887).  Mr.  Lossing  annotated
Francis  Hopkinson's  "  Pretty  Story,"  with  a  bi
ography  of  the  author  of  the  allegory,  which  was
published  under  the  title  of  "  The  Old  Farm  and
the  New  Farm  "  (New  York,  1857).  With  Edwin
Williams  he  compiled  the  "  Statesman's  Manual  "
(4  vols.,  1858)  and  the  "National  History  of  the
United  States  "  (2  vols.,  1858).  He  also  edited  and
annotated  the  "  Diaries  of  Washington "  (1859),
and  the  "  Recollections  and  Private  Memoirs  of
Washington,"  by  George  W.  P.  Custis  (1860),  edit
ed  the  "  Poems  "  of  William  Wilson,  with  an  ac
companying  biography  (Poughkeepsie,  1869),  and
prepared  an  edition  of  John  Trumbull's  "  Mc-
Fingal,"  with  a  life  (New  York,  1871).

LOTBINIERE,  Michael  Eustace  Gaspard,
Marquis  de,  Canadian  soldier,  b.  in  Canada  in
1723  ;  d.  in  New  York  in  1799.  He  embraced  the
military  profession,  became  one  of  the  ablest  en
gineers  of  his  time,  and  was  appointed  engineer  to
the  French  colony  in  1753.  Soon  after  the  defeat
of  Baron  Dieskau  in  1755  he  built  Fort  Carillon
(TicoTideroga),  with  the  object  of  preventing  the
English  from  entering  Canada.  In  1758  he  con
tributed  more  than  any  other  person  to  the  defeat
of  the  English  at  Carillon,  which  Montcalm  occu
pied  reluctantly  at  his  earnest  advice.  For  this
and  other  services  he  was  made  chevalier  of  St.
Louis  in  1760,  and  shortly  afterward  a  marquis.
He  was  deprived  of  some  of  his  domains  by  the
English  government,  and  on  his  return  from
England,  where  he  had  gone  to  demand  the  res
toration  of  his  property,  he  met  his  death  from
yellow  fever  in  the  city  of  New  York.  The  Mar
quis  de  la  Lotbiniere  was  a  member  of  the  Insti
tute  of  France,  and  other  learned  societies  in
Europe. — His  eldest  son,  Eustace  Gaspard  Mi
chael  Chartier  tie,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Canada ;  d.  there  in  1821.  inherited  his  father's
title,  but  did  not  use  it.  He  aided  in  defending
Fort  St.  Jean  against  the  English  colonists  in
1775,  several  years  afterward  was  elected  to  the
chamber  of  assembly,  and  in  1793  unanimously


LOTIIROP


LOTTER


named  orator.  An  effort  that  the  English  party
made  to  abolish  the  use  of  the  French  language  in
the  legislature  was  defeated  by  his  efforts.  By  his
conciliatory  attitude  he  gained  the  esteem  of  all
parties,  and  his  influence  with  the  governor,  Sir
George  Prevost,  was  successfully  used  to  obtain
for  the  French  Canadians  a  larger  share  in  the  ad
ministration  of  affairs.

LOTHROP,  Charles  Henry,  surgeon,  b.  in
Taunton,  Mass.,  3  Sept.,  1831.  He  was  educated
at  Brown,  and  graduated  in.  medicine  at  the  Uni
versity  of  New  York  in  1859,  and  established  him
self  in  practice  at  Lyons,  Iowa.  He  has  success
fully  performed  many  difficult  surgical  operations,
and'  is  the  inventor  "of  an  apparatus  for  treating
fractures  of  the  leg,  and  of  a  rubber  appliance  for
club-foot.  He  served  during  the  civil  war  as  sur
geon  of  the  1st  Iowa  cavalry,  and  has  been  an  ex
amining  surgeon  for  pensions  since  18(58.  In  1870
he  edited  the  "  Southern  Medical  Record."

LOTHROP,  George  Van  Ness,  lawyer,  b.  in
Easton,  Bristol  co.,  Mass.,  8  Aug.,  1817.  He  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1838,  and  entered  the  Har
vard  law-school,  but  on  account  of  ill  health  joined
his  brother  in  1839  on  a  farm  near  Schoolcraft,
Mich.  In  March,  1843,  he  went  to  Detroit,  com
pleted  his  preparation  for  the  bar,  and  began  prac
tice  in  the  following  spring.  He  was  attorney-
general  of  Michigan  in  1848-'51,  recorder  of  the
city  in  1851-'3,  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  con
gress  in  1856  and  18(50,  and  in  I860  a  delegate  lo
the  Democratic  national  convention  in  Charleston,
S.  C.,  where  he  supported  the  nomination  of  Ste
phen  A.  Douglas.  He  was  also  nominated  three
times  by  the  Democratic  party  for  U.  S.  senator,
and  was  a  delegate  to  the  State  constitutional  con
vention  in  1867.  P'rom  1854  till  1880,  when  he  re
signed,  he  was  general  counsel  for  the  Michigan
Central  railroad  company.  In  May,  1885,  he  was
appointed  IT.  S.  minister  to  Russia.

LOTHROP,  Harriett  Mulford,  author,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  22  June,  1844.  Her  maiden
name  was  Stone.  She  was  educated  at  seminaries
near  her  home,  travelled  extensively  in  the  United
States,  and  early  began  to  practise  literary  compo
sition,  but  published  nothing  before  about  1877,
when  she  began  to  contribute  stories  and  sketches
to  the  magazines.  Before  her  third  work  was
issued  in  book-form  she  married  Daniel  Lothrop,
a  publisher  of  Boston.  All  her  writings  have  ap
peared  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Margaret  Sidney."
Mrs.  Lothrop's  summer  residence  is  at  Concord,
Mass.,  in  Nathaniel  Hawthorne's  old  home,  which
he  called  "The  Wayside."  Her  published  works
are  "So  as  by  Fire"  (Boston,  1881);  "Five  Little
Peppers,  and  How  they  Grew"  (1882),  a  juvenile
story,  which  first  appeared  in  the  "  Wide  Awake  "
magazine  ;  "  Half  Year  at  Bronckton  "  (1882) ;
"  The  Pettibone  Name,"  a  novel  of  New  England
life  (1883) ;  "  What  the  Seven  Did  "  (1883) ;  "  Who
told  it  to  Me  "  (1884) ;  "  Ballad  of  the  Lost  Hare  "
(1884);  "The  Golden  West"  (1885);  "How  they
Went  to  Europe  "  (1885) ;  "  Hester,  and  other  New
England  Stories"  (1886);  "The  Minute  -  Man  "
(1886) ;  "  Two  Modern  Little  Princes,"  (1887) ;  and
"  Dilly  and  the  Captain  "  (1887).

LOTHROP,  Samuel  Kirkland,  clergyman,  b.
in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  13  Oct.,  1804;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
12  June,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1825,  and  at  the  divinity-school  there  in  1828.  In
1829  he  was  ordained"  pastor  of  the  Unitarian
church  in  Dover,  N.  II.,  and  on  17  June,  1834,  took
charge  of  the  Brattle  square  church  in  Boston.
Mass.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Harvard  in  1852.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the


State  constitutional  convention  of  1853.  His  so
ciety  removed  to  a  new  building  in  1873,  but  dis
solved  in  1876,  when  Dr.  Lothrop  resigned  the  pas
torate.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Boston  school
committee  for  thirty  years,  and  chairman  of  its
committee  on  the  English  high-school  for  twenty-
six.  Among  his  literary  works  are  a  life  of  his
grandfather,  Samuel  Kirkland,  included  in  Sparks's
"American  Biography,"  and  a  "History  of  Brat
tle  Square  Church."

LOTHROP,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  England;
d.  near  Bloody  Brook,  Deerfield  township,  Mass.,
29  Sept.,  1675.  He  resided  for  many  years  in  Sa
lem,  of  which  town  he  became  a  freeman  in  or  be
fore  1634.  He  was  a  representative  in  the  general
court  in  1647,  1653,  and  1664.  Subsequently  he
removed  to  Beverly,  and  with  others  organized  a
church  there,  and  represented  the  town  for  four
years  in  the  general  court.  In  the  beginning  of
King  Philip's  war  he  was  chosen  captain  of  militia.
He  had  a  severe  battle  with  the  Indians  near  Had-
ley  in  August,  1675,  and  after  the  burning  of  Deer-
field,  while  guarding  the  road  to  Hadley,  was  killed,
with  eighty-nine  of  his  men,  only  eight  escaping.

LOTT,  John  A.,  jurist,  b.  in"  1805;  d.  in  Flat-
bush,  L.  I.,  20  July,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at
Union  in  1823,  studied  law,  and  began  practice  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in  1835.  In  1838  he  was  elected
county  judge  of  Kings  county,  which  office  he  held
for  four  years.  In  1841  he  was  a  member  of  the
state  assembly,  and  in  1842-'6  a  state  senator.  lie
was  justice  of  the  supreme  court  in  1857-'65,  and
judge  of  the  court  of  appeals  in  1869.  He  was  also
a  member  of  the  commission  of  appeals  from  1870
until  it  completed  its  labors  in  1875.  lu  the  latter
year  he  was  appointed  on  a  commission  to  draft  a
uniform  law  for  the  government  of  cities  in  the
state.  Until  a  short  time  before  his  death  he  was
president  of  the  Flatbush  and  Coney  Island  rail
road.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Union  college  in  1859.

LOTTENSCHIOL1),  Mathias  (lot'-ten-ske-old),
German  explorer,  b.  in  Greifenberg,  Pomerania,
in  1729:  d.  in  Arolsen,  Waldeck.  in  1782.  He  was
a  Jesuit,  and  was  employed  for  fifteen  years  in  the
missions  of  Uruguay  and  Paraguay,  where  he  had
special  charge  of  the  manufacturing  that  was  done
by  the  Indians  for  the  company.  After  the  expul
sion  of  the  order  in  1767,  he  remained  in  the  coun
try  as  a  teacher,  and  severed  his  connection  with
his  former  colleagues,  becoming  converted  to  Prot
estantism  toward  the  close  of  his  career.  As  he
was  in  comfortable  circumstances,  he  devoted  sev
eral  years  to  the  exploration  of  South  America  be
fore  returning  home,  visited  Peru,  Chili,  and  Cen
tral  America  in  1770-'4,  and  published  "Metallur-
gische  Reisen  durch  Amerika"  (2  vols.,  Leipsic,
1776);  "  Geognostische  Bemerkungen  iiber  die  ba-
saltischen  Gebilde  der  Cordilleren  von  Peru"  (Dres
den,  1779);  "  Reise  auf  dem  La  Plata-  und  Para-
guay-Flusse"  (2  vols.,  Leipsic,  1780);  "  Umgelmn-
gen"  von  Rio  de  Janeiro  "  (1780);  "Geschichte  der
Entdeckung  von  Paraguay"  (1781);  "Geschichte
und  Zustande  der  Indianer  in  Siid-Amerika"  (2
vols.,  1782);  and  several  less  important  works.

LOTTER,  Frederic  August,  German  botanist,y,cvv
b.  in  Kleinaupe,  Moravia,  in  1741 ;  d.  in  Gotha  in &e
1806. He  studied  in  Prague,  and  in  1789  was  at
tached  as  botanist  to  the  expedition  that  was  sent  N Y.  t
by  the  Spanish  government  around  the  world  un
der  command  of Capt.  Malaspina. Lotter  being  T  rj
taken  sick in Concepcion,  Chili,  was unable to"0"!
accompany the expedition. He rejoined it at <S<:
Acapulco  in  1791,  but  soon  left  it  again  and  ex
plored  the  interior  of  Mexico  as  far  as  Lower  Cali-'


LOUBOIS


LOUGHLIN


33


fornia.  Afterward  he  visited  Peru,  Chili,  and  the
Argentine  provinces,  returning  in  1795  to  Europe,
where  he  became  professor  of  natural  history  at
the  College  of  Gotha.  He  published  "  De  Usu  et
ratione  experimentorum  in  perficiendi  historia  na-
turali "  (Prague,  1787 ;  revised  and  enlarged  ed.,
Gotha,  1796);  "Vermium  fluvialum  Americana-
rum,  sive  animalium  infusorium  helminthorum  et
testaceorum  historia"  (Gotha,  1796) ;  "  Flora  Mexi-
cana"  (2  vols.,  1798);  "Flora  Peruana"  (2  vols.,
1800) ;  "  Reisen  durch  Mexico  und  Siid-Amerika  "
(2  vols.,  1801) ;  "  Compendium  plantarum  sponte
crescentium  circa  Conceptium  in  quo  familiae  per
tabulas  disponuntur"  (2  vols.,  1802);  "  Icones
plantarum  Americanarum  rarium  "  (2  vols.,  1803) ;
and  several  less  important  works.

LOUBOIS,  Chevalier  (le,  b.  in  France  in  the
latter  part  of  the  17th  century.  He  was  mayor  of
New  Orleans  in  1730,  when  he  was  sent  at  the  head
of  an  expedition  against  the  Natchez,  who  held
several  French  prisoners,  and  attacked  the  Indians
who  were  intrenched  in  two  forts  on  the  Bay  of  the
Tonicas  (now  Bayou  Sainte  Catherine).  The  Nat
chez  made  a  vigorous  resistance  for  several  days,
and  Loubois,  dreading  treachery  on  the  part  of
his  savage  allies,  the  Choctaws,  allowed  them  to
retire  on  condition  of  giving  up  their  prisoners.
He  then  returned  to  New  Orleans,  and  set  out  again
in  1731  at  the  head  of  sixty  men  to  the  relief  of
Juchereau,  Sieur  de  St.  Denys  (q.  v.\  who  was  be
sieged  by  the  Natchez  at  Fort  Natchitoches.  But,
after  advancing  six  leagues  lip  Red  river,  he  was
informed  by  a  messenger  from  Juchereau  that
the  Indians  were  defeated.  Loubois  was  engaged
in  various  expeditions,  and  his  valor  and  experi
ence  are  highly  praised  by  Charlevoix  and  other
historians  of  New  France.

LOUD,  Marguerite  St.  Leon,  poet,  b.  in  Wy-
sox,  Bradford  co.,  Pa.,  about  1800.  Her  maiden  name
was  Barstow.  After  her  marriage  in  1824  she  lived
in  Philadelphia,  except  during  a  brief  residence  in
the  south,  and  contributed  poetry  to  the  "  United
States  Gazette"  and  to  the  monthly  magazines  of
that  city.  A  volume  entitled  "  Wayside  Flowers  "
was  published  (Boston,  1851).  Some  of  her  poems
are  reprinted  in  Griswold's  "  Female  Poets  of  Amer
ica  "  and  in  the  similar  collections  of  Thomas  Bu
chanan  Read  and  Caroline  May.

LOUDOUN,  John  Campbell,  Earl  of.  British
soldier,  b.  in  Scotland  in  1705 ;  d.  there,  27  April,
1782.  He  succeeded  to  the  estate  and  title  in  1731.

He  was  a  friend  of
Lord  Halifax,  and
when  the  board  of
trade  determined  to
unite  the  colonies
under  military  rule
and  force  them  to
support  a  perma
nent  army  was  cho
sen  to  carry  out
this  policy.  He  was
appointed  to  suc
ceed  the  popular
William  Shirley  as
com  mander-in-chief
of  the  British  forces
in  North  America,
and  given  the  addi
tional  dignity  of
governor  of  Vir
ginia,  although  Rob
ert  Dinwiddie  continued  to  administer  the  prov
ince.  Loudoun  arrived  in  Virginia  in  July,  1756.
Although  devoted  to  the  idea  of  colonial  sub-
VOL.  iv. — 3


ordination,  he  was  an  incapable  and  irresolute
officer.  After  collecting  a  force  sufficient  to  crush
the  French,  he  disbanded  the  provincials  and  sent
the  regulars  into  winter-quarters,  illegally  billet
ing  the  officers  on  the  citizens  of  New  York  and
Philadelphia.  He  further  incensed  the  Americans
by  imposing  an  embargo  on  commerce,  and  on  20
June,  1757,  after  impressing  400  men  in  New
York  and  committing  other  arbitrary  acts,  sailed
for  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia.  He  had  there  an  army
of  10.000  troops  and  a  fleet  of  sixteen  sail  be
sides  frigates,  and,  after  wasting  time  in  foolish
parades,  embarked  the  soldiers  to  attack  Louis-
burg;  but,  on  hearing  that  the  French  had  one
ship  more  than  the  English,  revoked  the  order  and
returned  to  New  York.  Although  the  English
had  been  driven  from  the  lake  region  and  the  val
ley  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  Fort  William  Henry  had
fallen  and  the  province  of  New  York  was  threat
ened,  yet  Lord  Loudoun  encamped  his  forces  on
Long  Island  and  remained  inactive.  When  Will
iam  Pitt  became  prime  minister  toward  the  close
of  1757,  he  resolved  on  a  vigorous  campaign  to
save  the  English  colonies  from  the  French,  who
encircled  them  and  were  already  in  possession  of
three  quarters  of  the  continent.  The  British  min
ister  declared  that  he  never  heard  from  the  com-
mander-in-chief  in  America  and  could  not  tell
what  he  was  doing,  and,  in  spite  of  the  protests  of
Loudoun's  many  friends,  recalled  him  and  ap
pointed  Lord  Amherst  in  his  place.

LOUGHBOROUGH,  James  Moore  (luff  bur
ro),  lawyer,  b.  near  Shelbyville,  Ky.,  2  Nov.,  1833;
d.  in  Little  Rock,  Ark.,  31  July,  1876.  He  left  col
lege  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  to  become  a  clerk  under
his  father,  who  was  the  land-agent  for  Illinois
and  Missouri.  He  served  throughout  the  civil  war
as  a  colonel  on  the  staff  of  the  Confederate  Gen.
Sterling  Price,  and  was  for  some  time  a  prisoner.
After  the  war  he  practised  law  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
superintended  the  land-sales  of  the  Iron  Mountain
railway,  removing  to  Little  Rock,  and  was  a  mem
ber  in  1874-'5  of  the  Arkansas  legislature,  where
he  introduced  a  bill  for  the  conversion  of  depre
ciated  certificates  into  a  funded  debt,  which  did
much  to  restore  the  financial  credit  of  the  state. —
His  wife,  Mary  Webster,  author,  b.  in  New  York
city,  27  Aug.,  1836;  d.  in  Little  Rock,  Ark.,  27
Aiig.,  1887,  was  taken  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in  her
infancy,  graduated  at  Monticello  seminary,  God
frey,  111.,  in  1853,  and  in  1857  was  married.  She
accompanied  her  husband  during  the  civil  war,
and  kept  a  diary  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg.  from
which  she  prepared  her  first  book,  entitled  "  My
Cave  Life  in  Vicksburg"  (New  York,  1864).  She
afterward  contributed  stories  7-elating  to  the  early
history  of  St.  Louis  to  "  The  Land  We  Love."  In
1871  she  removed  with  her  husband  to  Little  Rock.
She  wrote  for  various  newspapers,  and  in  1883  es
tablished  the  "Southern  Ladies'  Journal,"  which
she  edited  till  her  death.  In  it  she  published  a  se
rial  entitled  "  For  Better,  for  Worse."  Mrs.  Lough-
borough  established  also  a  Woman's  exchange  in
Little  Rock  with  the  object  of  opening  a  wider
range  of  remunerative  employment  for  her  sex.

LOUGHLIN,  John,  R.  C.' bishop,  b.  in  County
Down,  Ireland,  in  1816.  He  emigrated  to  the
United  States  in  early  youth,  settling  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  was  educated  at  'Mount  St.  Mary's  college,
Emmettsburg,  Md.,  taught  there  several  years,  and
in  1842  was  ordained  priest  in  the  Roman  Catholic
church.  He  was  assistant  priest  in  St.  Patrick's
cathedral,  New  York  city,  in  1841-'4,  at  the  latter
date  became  rector,  and,  on  the  formation  of  the
diocese  of  Brooklyn,  was  consecrated  its  first  bishop


34


LOUVIGNY


LOVEJOY


in  November,  1853.  He  introduced  the  Sisters  of
St.  Joseph  and  Sisters  of  Mercy  in  1855,  established
churches  throughout  Long  Island,  and  in  1868  be
gan  the  erection  of  the  Brooklyn  cathedral.  He
has  been  a  member  of  two  plenary  councils,  and
has  held  a  diocesan  synod  for  the  purpose  of  estab
lishing  the  decrees  of  the  councils.

LOUVIGNY,  Louis  de  la  Porte,  Sieur  de,
French  soldier,  b.  in  France  about  1G54;  d.  at  sea,
27  Aug.,  1725.  lie  came  to  Canada  in  1687.  and
in  1690  was  sent  to  the  west  at  the  head  of  a  great
convoy,  accompanied  by  Nicholas  Perrot  (q.  v,\
whom  he  was  directed  to  obey  on  the  route.  At
Les  Chats  he  was  attacked  by  the  Iroquois,  but  de
feated  them  and  put  them  to  flight.  He  was  com
mandant  at  Mackinaw  from  1690  till  1694.  when
he  returned  from  the  west  with  a  convoy  of  furs.
In  the  winter  of  1696  he  was  sent  at  the  head  of
300  picked  men  to  attack  the  Iroquois  in  their
hunting-grounds  between  the  St.  Lawrence  and
the  Ottawa.  He  marched  through  snow  eight  feet
in  depth  to  within  fifteen  miles  of  Fort  Frontenac,
and  defeated  a  party  of  Iroquois,  but,  owing  to
want  of  provisions,  returned  to  Montreal,  which
he  reached  after  great  hardships.  He  was  made
adjutant-general  of  Three  Rivers  in  1700,  and
of  Montreal  in  1703.  In  1705  he  went  to  Macki
naw  to  prevent  the  Ottawas  from  making  war  on
the  Iroquois,  and  succeeded  in  his  mission,  though
with  great  difficulty.  In  1708  he  was  created  a
chevalier  of  St.  Louis.  In  1712  he  was  sent  to
restore  Fort  Mackinaw,  which  had  been  destroyed
by  the  English.  He  was  appointed  king's  lieuten
ant  at  Quebec  in  1716,  and  led  an  expedition  of
800  Canadians  and  Indians  from  Quebec,  on  14
March,  to  attack  the  Foxes,  who  took  refuge  in  a
stockade.  Louvigny  compelled  them  to  surrender,
but  spared  their  lives  on  their  promising  to  become
allies  of  the  French  and  to  pay  the  expenses  of  the
war  with  furs.  He  returned  on  12  Oct.,  taking  the
sons  of  the  Indian  chiefs  as  hostages.  He  was
shortly  afterward  sent  as  commandant  to  Upper
Canada,  and  remained  there  till  1724,  when  he  was
appointed  governor  of  Three  Rivers.  He  was  on
the  ship.  "  Chameau,"  when  it  was  wrecked  on  its
way  to  Quebec,  and  all  on  board  perished.

LOVE,  (Jeorsre  Maltby,  soldier,  b.  in  Buffalo,
N.  Y.,  1  Jan.,  1831;  d.  there,  19  March,  1887.
In  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the
army  as  a  three  months'  volunteer,  and  served  as
sergeant  and  sergeant-major.  On  his  discharge  he
re-enlisted,  and  was  commissioned  1st  lieutenant
in  the  44th  N.  Y.  infantry.  He  was  promoted  cap
tain  on  2  Jan.,  1862,  and  participated  in  the  siege
of  Yorktown  and  the  battles  of  Hanover  Court-
House  and  Malvern  Hill.  After  his  second  term
of  service  had  expired  he  was  appointed  major  of
the  116th  N.  Y.  volunteers  on  5  Sept.,  1862,  com
manded  the  regiment  in  the  Department  of  the
Gulf,  and  was  severely  wounded  in  the  assault  on
Port  Hudson.  He  was  promoted  colonel  on  16
July,  1863,  and  engaged  at  Cox's  Plantation,  at  the
battles  of  Sabine  Cross-roads  and  Pleasant  Hill,
and  the  skirmishes  at  Cane  River  Crossing  and
Mansura.  He  afterward  commanded  a  brigade  in
the  19th  corps  for  eighteen  months,  serving  through
the  Shenandoah  campaign.  He  was  engaged  at
Winchester  and  Fisher's  Hill,  and  for  gallantry  at
Cedar  Creek  received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-gen
eral  and  a  bronze  medal  of  honor.  He  was  mus
tered  out  on  8  June,  1865.  On  7  March,  1867,  he
was  appointed  a  2d  lieutenant  in  the  regular  army,
and  received  four  brevets  for  services  in  the  war.
He  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant  on  1  March,  1875,
and  engaged  in  garrison  and  frontier  service  until


he  was  retired  on  15  March,  1883,  for  disability  in
curred  in  the  line  of  duty.

LOVE,  Smoloff  Palace,  soldier,  b.  in  Lincoln
county,  Ky.,  10  May,  1826.  He  was  educated  at
Columbia  academy,  Mo.,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty
enlisted  in  Col.  Doniphan's  1st  Missouri  volun
teers  and  went  on  the  expedition  to  Santa  Fe,
participating  in  the  battles  of  Bracito  and  Sacra
mento.  He  was  mustered  out  of  service  in  1847,
returned  to  Muhlcnburg  county,  Ky..  and  engaged
in  teaching  from  1849  till  1857.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  aided  in  raising  the  llth  Ken
tucky  infantry  for  the  National  army,  became  its
lieutenant-colonel,  and  fought  with  it  at  Shiloh,
Corinth,  Perryville,  Stone  River,  and  Bowling
Green.  He  was  promoted  colonel,  joined  Bumside
in  east  Tennessee,  and  was  with  Sherman  in  the
engagements  around  Atlanta.  At  the  close  of  the
war  he  settled  at  Greenville,  Ky.,  qualified  for
the  bar,  and  began  practice  in  1865.  From  1866
till  1874  he  was  presiding  judge  of  Muhlenburg
county,  and  in  1872  was  a  presidential  elector.

LOVEJOY,  Elijah  Parish,  abolitionist,  b.  in
Albion.  Me.,  9  Nov.,  1802;  d.  in  Alton,  111.,  7  Nov.,
1837.  lie  was  the  son  of  a  Presbyterian  clergy
man,  was  graduated  at  Waterville  college  in  1826,
and  in  1827  went
to  St.  Louis.  Mo.,
and  established  a
school.  He  con
tributed  prose  and
verse  to  the  news
papers,  was  known
as  a  vigorous  writ
er,  and  in  1829  be
came  editor  of  a
political  paper,  in
which  he  advocat
ed  the  claims  of
Henry  Clay  as  a
candidate  for  the
presidency.  In
1832,  in  conse
quence  of  a  change
in  his  religious
views,  he  decided

to  become  a  minister,  and,  after  a  course  of  theo
logical  study  at  Princeton,  was  licensed  to  preach
by  the  Philadelphia  presbytery  on  18  April.  1833.
On  his  return  to  St.  Louis  he  established  a  religious
paper  called  the  "  Observer,"  in  which  he  repro
bated  slavery.  Repeated  threats  of  mob  violence
impelled  him  to  remove  his  paper  in  July,  1836,  to
Alton,  111.  His  press  was  destroyed  by  mobs  three
times  within  a  year;  yet  he  procured  a  fourth  one,
and  was  engaged  in  setting  it  up,  when  a  mob,
composed  mostly  of  Missourians,  again  attacked
the  office.  With  his  friends  he  defended  the
building,  and  one  of  his  assailants  was  killed.
After  the  attacking  party  had  apparently  with
drawn,  Mr.  Lovejoy  opened  the  door,  when  he  was
instantly  pierced  by  five  bullets  and  died  in  a  few
minutes.  His  "Memoir"  was  published  by  his
brothers,  Joseph  C.  and  Owen,  with  an  introduc
tion  by  John  Q.  Adams  (New  York.  1838).  See,
also,  "  Narrative  of  Riots  at  Alton,  in  Connection
with  the  Death  of  Lovejoy,"  by  Edward  Beecher
(Alton,  1838),  and  "The  Martyrdom  of  Lovejoy,"
by  Henry  Tanner  (Chicago,  1881). — His  brother.
Owen,  abolitionist,  b.  in  Albion,  Me.,  6  Jan.,  1811 ;
d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  25  March,  1864,  worked  on
his  father's  farm  till  he  was  eighteen  years  old,
and  then  entered  Bowdoin,  but  left  before  gradua
tion,  emigrated  to  Alton,  111.,  and  studied  theology.
He  was  present  when  his  brother  was  murdered,


LOVELACE


LOVELL


35


and  was  moved  by  that  event  to  devote  himself  to
the  overthrow  of  slavery.  He  became  pastor  of  a
Congregational  church  at  Princeton,  111.,  in  1838.
Although  anti-slavery  meetings  were  forbidden  by
the  laws  of  Illinois,  he  openly  held  them  in  all
parts  of  the  state,  announcing  at  each  one  the  time
and  place  for  the  next  meeting.  This  course  sub
jected  him  to  frequent  fines  and  to  violence  and  in
timidation  ;  but  by  his  eloquence  and  persistency
he  won  many  adherents,  and  eventually  the  re
pressive  laws  were  repealed.  He  resigned  his  pas
toral  charge  in  1854  on  being  elected  a  member  of
the  legislature.  In  1856  he  was  sent  to  congress,
and  was  continued  there  by  re-election  until  his
death.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  de
livered  in  the  house  of  representatives  a  remark
able  speech  against  slavery,  in  which  he  recounted
the  circumstances  of  his  brother's  death.

LOVELACE,  Francis,  colonial  governor,  b.  in
England  about  1630.  He  was  the  second  son  of
Baron  Lovelace,  of  Hurley,  Berks  co.,  England,  a
member  of  parliament,  and  a  colonel  in  the  British
army.  He  succeeded  Richard  Nicolls,  as  governor
of  New  York  in  May,  1667,  and  developed  more
fully  the  extortionate  and  arbitrary  system  of  gov
ernment  that  he  found  in  practice  there.  When
the  Swedish  settlers  of  Delaware  were  provoked  to
resistance,  he  decreed  an  arbitrary  tax,  asserting
that  "  the  method  of  keeping  the  people  in  order
is  severity,  and  laying  such  taxes  as  may  give  them
liberty  for  no  thought  but  how  to  discharge  them."
In  New  York  a  tax  for  purposes  of  defence  was
ordained,  and,  when  the  towns  of  Long  Island
refused  to  pay  it  unless  they  received  the  right  of
representation,  the  governor  ordered  their  protests
to  be  burned.  The  people  were  on  the  verge  of
rebellion  when  the  war  began  between  England  and
Holland.  New  Jersey  and  Delaware  surrendered
willingly  to  Admiral  Evertsen  when  he  appeared
with  a  small  fleet  in  July,  1673,  and  New  York
•capitulated  within  four  hours  after  the  Dutch
squadron  had  cast  anchor  off  Manhattan  island.
Lovelace  departed  on  30  July.  He  had  interested
himself  in  the  settlement  of  Ulster  county,  where
he  laid  out  the  town  of  Hurley.  A  volume  of  his
"Speeches"  was  published  (London,  1660). — His
grandson,  LORD  LOVELACE,  succeeded  Lord  Corn-
bury  as  governor  of  New  York  in  1709.  The  as
sembly  jaet  in  April  soon  after  his  arrival,  and
insisted  on  voting  supplies  annually  and  by  specific
appropriations.  He  died  on  12  May,  1709,  leaving
the  contest  to  be  waged  by  his  successor.

LOVELL,  Charles  Swain,  soldier,  b.  in  Hull,
Mass.,  13  Feb..  1811;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  3  Jan.,
1871.  He  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  3d  U.  S.  ar
tillery  in  January,  1831,  and  served  in  various  gar
risons,  rising  to  quartermaster-sergeant,  sergeant-
major,  and,  in  October,  1837,  to  2d  lieutenant.  He
was  promoted  1st  lieutenant  in  July,  1838,  captain,
18  June,  1846,  and  took  part  in  the  battles  of
Churubusco,  Molino  del  Rey,  Chapultepec,  and  the
city  of  Mexico.  He  then  served  in  the  territories
till  the  civil  war,  and  after  promotion  to  major,  on
14  May,  1861,  commanded  a  brigade  at  Gaines's
Mills,  Malvern  Hill,  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run,
Antietam,  and  Fredericksburg.  From  1863  till
1865  he  was  on  provost-marshal  duty  in  Wisconsin,
and  he  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel,  21  Jan.,
1863,  and  colonel  of  the  14th  infantry,  16  Feb.,
1865.  He  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  for  gal
lantry  at  Gaines's  Mills,  colonel  for  Malvern  Hill,
and  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,  for  Antietam.
After  the  war  he  commanded  his  regiment  at  Fort
Yuma,  Cal.,  and  on  15  Dec.,  1870,  was  retired  from
active  service.


LOVELL,  Frederick  Solon,  lawyer,  b.  in
Charlestowri,  N.  H.,  1  Nov.,  1814 ;  d.  in  Kenosha,
Wis.,  14  May,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Geneva
(now  Hobart)  college,  N.  Y.,  in  1835,  studied  law,
and  after  admission  to  the  bar  in  New  York  settled,
in  1837,  in  Southport  (now  Kenosha),  Wis.  He
served  for  three  sessions  in  the  territorial  council,
and  took  part  in  the  constitutional  conventions  of
1846  and  1847.  In  1857  he  sat  in  the  legislature,
and  was  a  commissioner  to  revise  the  state  statutes,
and  in  1858  he  was  speaker  of  the  assembly.  He
entered  the  National  army  in  August,  1862,  as  lieu
tenant-colonel  of  the  33d  Wisconsin  infantry,  and
served  later  as  colonel  of  the  43d  regiment  in  the
southwest.  In  January,  1865.  he  was  commissioned
colonel  of  the  46th  regiment,  and  on  27  Sept.  of
that  year  was  mustered  out,  and  resumed  the  prac
tice  of  law  at  Kenosha.

LOVELL,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
16  June,  1710;  d.  in  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  in  1778.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1728,  succeeded
Jeremy  Gridley  as  assistant  master  of  the  Boston
Latin-school  in  the  following  year,  and  from  the
death  of  Dr.  Nathaniel  Williams  in  1738  till  the
Revolution  was  its  head  master.  In  1743  he  deliv
ered  the  first  address  in  Faneuil  hall,  on  the  occa
sion  of  the  death  of  its  founder.  He  was  a  good
scholar  and,  though  a  stern  disciplinarian,  a  genial
and  witty  companion.  Master  Lovell  taught  the
men  in  Boston  that  were  leaders  in  the  struggle
for  independence,  yet  he  adhered  to  the  loyalist
cause,  and  went  with  the  British  troops  to  Halifax
on  14  March,  1776.  His  portrait,  by  John  Smi-
bert,  hangs  in  the  Harvard  gallery  of  paintings.
Besides  his  funeral  oration  on  Peter  Faneuil,  he
published  several  political  and  theological  pam
phlets,  and  contributed  articles  in  English  and
Latin  to  the  "  Pietas  et  Gratulatio  "  (Cambridge,
1761). — His  son,  James,  patriot,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  31  Oct.,  1737  ;  d.  in  Windham,  Me.,  14  July,
1814,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1756,  and  was
his  father's  assistant  in  the  South  grammar-  or
Latin-school  till  it  was  dispersed  on  19  April.  1775,
on  account  of  the  siege.  He  was  also  master  of
the  North  grammar-school,  afterward  called  the
Eliot  school.  He  delivered,  2  April,  1771,  the  first
anniversary  oration  on  the  Boston  massacre.  In
the  Revolution  he  took  the  side  of  the  Whigs,  and
was  imprisoned  after  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill,
carried  to  Halifax  with  the  British  army,  and  kept
in  close  confinement,  while  his  father  was  there  as
a  Tory  refugee,  until,  in  November,  1776,  he  was
exchanged  for  Col.  Philip  Skene.  On  his  return
to  Boston  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Con
tinental  congress,  and  served  from  December,  1776,
till  1782.  During  the  quarrel  between  Gen.  Horatio
Gates  and  Gen.  Philip  Schuyler,  early  in  1777,  Lovell
was  a  correspondent  and  confidant  of  the  former,
and  the  recipient  of  his  plan  of  campaign.  He
encouraged  Gates  in  dealing  directly  with  con
gress,  over  the  head  of  Gen.  Washington,  and  was
one  of  the  malcontents  that  sought  to  make  Gates
commander-in-chief,  threatening  Washington,  in  a
letter  dated  11  Oct.,  1777,  with  a  "torrent  of
public  clamor  and  vengeance,"  and  in  another
describing  him  as  a  general  that  collected  men  to
wear  out  shoes  and  breeches,  and  that  had  "  Fabi-  A
used  matters  into  a  very  disagreeable  posture."
Lovell  was  a  diligent  member  of  the  committee  on
foreign  correspondence.  Some  of  his  letters  were
printed  in  Richard  H.  Lee's  life  of  his  brother
Arthur.  He  was  receiver  of  taxes  at  Boston  from
1784  till  1788,  then  collector  of  the  port  till  1790,
and  after  that  naval  officer  till  his  death.  He
published  several  tracts,  and  a  Latin  oration  on


36


LOVERING


LOVEWELL


the  death  of  Henry  Flint  (1760).— James's  son,
James,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass..  9  July,  1758:
d.  in  St.  Matthews,  S.  C.,  10  July,  1850,  was  gradu
ated  at  Harvard  in  1776.  He  joined  the  Revolu
tionary  army  as  adjutant  of  Henry  Jackson's
Massachusetts  regiment  in  the  beginning  of  1777,
fought  in  many  battles,  and  was  severely  wounded.
In  1779-'82  he  served  as  adjutant  of  Gen.  Henry
Lee's  southern  legion,  with  the  rank  of  major. —
The  second  James's  son,  Joseph,  physician,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  22  Dec.,  1788;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C.,  17  Oct.,  1836,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1807,  studied  medicine,  and  on  15  May,  1812,  was
appointed  surgeon  of  the  9th  U.  S.  infantry.  He
served  on  the  Niagara  frontier,  and  on  30  June,
1814,  was  appointed  a  hospital  surgeon  there.  On
18  April,  1818,  he  became  surgeon-general  of  the
U.  S.  army. — Joseph's  son,  Mansfield,  soldier,  b.
in  Washington,  D.  C.,  20  Oct.,  1822 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  1  June,  1884,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military 'academy  in  1842,  appointed  a  lieutenant
of  artillery,  and  served  in  the  occupation  of  Texas
in  1845-'6,  and  in  the  war  with  Mexico  was  aide
to  Gen.  John  A.  Quitman  and  assistant  adjutant-
general  of  his  division,  being  promoted  1st  lieu
tenant  on  16  Feb.,  1847.  He  was  wounded  at
Monterey,  brevetted  captain  for  bra  very  at  Chapul-
tepec,  and  severely  wounded  at  the  Helen  Gate.
After  the  war  he  served  on  the  Kansas  frontier  for
two  years.  On  18  Dec.,  1854,  he  and  his  classmate,
Gustavus  A.  Smith,  resigned  in  order  to  take  high
commands  in  Gen.  Quitman's  projected  Cuban
expedition.  After  the  failure  of  the  project  they
found  employment  in  connection  with  Cooper  and
Hewitt's  iron-works  at  Trenton,  N.  J.  In  April,
1858,  Lovell  was  appointed  superintendent  of
street  improvements  in  New  York  city,  and  in
November  of  that  year  deputy  street-commissioner
under  his  friend  Smith.  At  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  he  went  to  the  south  with  Gen.  Smith,
was  commissioned  as  a  brigadier-general  in  the
Confederate  service,  and  on  9  Oct.,  1861,  was
made  a  major-general  and  placed  in  command  at
New  Orleans,  relieving  Gen.  David  E.  Twiggs.
When  the  forts  were  captured  by  the  National
forces  he  withdrew  his  troops,  and,  on  the  com
plaint  of  the  mayor  that  he  had  left  the  citizens
without  military  protection,  explained  that  it  was
for  the  purpose  of  saving  the  town  from  a  bom
bardment,  offering  to  return  if  the  citizens  desired
to  continue  the  defence.  After  the  surrender  of
New  Orleans  to  Farragut,  26  April,  1862,  he  joined
Gen.  Beauregard  in  northern  Mississippi,  and  com
manded  one  of  the  divisions  that  were  routed  by
Gen.  William  S.  Rosecrans  at  Corinth,  4  Oct..  1862.
At  the  battle  of  Hatchie  his  division  constituted
the  rear-guard  of  the  retreating  army.  He  com
manded  the  Confederate  forces  at  the  battle  of
CoiTeeville.  When  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk  was  killed,
14  June,  1864,  Lovell  succeeded  to  the  command  of
the  corps,  and  on  27  June  repelled  Gen.  Sherman's
attack  on  his  intrenchments  at  Kenesaw.  When
the  war  was  ended  he  retired  to  a  rice-plantation
near  Savannah,  Ga.,  but  not  long  afterward  went
to  New  York  city,  and  was  engaged  as  an  assistant
engineer  under  Gen.  John  Newton  in  removing
the  Rust  river  obstructions  at  Hellgate.

LOVERING,  Joseph,  physicist,  b.  in  Charles-
town  (now  a  part  of  Boston)/Mass..  25  Dec.,  1813.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1833,  and  after
teaching  for  a  year  in  Charlestown  spent  two  years
in  Harvard  divinity-school.  In  1836  he  was  ap
pointed  tutor  in  mathematics  and  physics  in  Har
vard,  and  two  years  later  was  made  Roll  is  profes
sor  of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy,  which


chair  he  still  (1887)  retains,  becoming  also  in
1884  director  of  the  Jefferson  physical  laboratory.
In  addition  to  his  college  work,  he  has  given  nine
courses,  each  of  twelve  lectures,  on  astronomy  or
physics  before  the  Lowell  institute  of  Boston.
Five  of  these  courses  were  repeated,  on  the  days
following  those  of  their  first  delivery,  to  another
audience,  according  to  the  original  practice  of
that  institution.  He  has  delivered  shorter  courses
of  lectures  at  the  Smithsonian  institution,  the
Peabody  institute  of  Baltimore,  and  the  Charitable
mechanics'  institution  of  Boston,  and  one  or  more
lectures  in  many  towns  and  cities  of  New  England.
During  1867-'76  he  was  connected  with  the  U.  S.
coast  survey,  and  had  charge  of  the  computations
for  determining  trans-Atlantic  longitudes  from  tele
graphic  observations  on  cable  lines.  Prof.  Lover-
ing  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Harvard
in  1879,  and  was  regent  of  that  college  in  1853-'4
and  in  1857-'70,  an  office  now  merged  into  that  of
dean.  He  is  a  member  of  the  American  philo
sophical  society  and  of  the  National  academy  of
sciences.  During  1854-'73  he  was  permanent  secre
tary  of  the  American  association  for  the  advance
ment  of  science,  and  edited  fifteen  volumes  of  its
proceedings,becoming  in  1873  its  president.  In  1839
he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  American  academy
of  arts  and  sciences,  and  he  was  its  corresponding
secretary  in  1869-'73,  its  vice-president  in  1873-'80,
and  president  in  1880-'7.  Prof.  Levering  has
been  an  indefatigable  contributor  of  scientific  arti
cles  to  contemporary  literature,  and,  in  addition  to
special  memoirs  on  the  aurora,  terrestrial  magnet
ism,  and  the  determination  of  trans-Atlantic  longi
tude,  which  were  published  by  the  American  acad
emy,  he  has  prepared  a  volume  on  the  "Aurora
Borealis"  (Boston,  1873),  and  edited  a  new  edition
of  Farrar's  "Electricity  and  Magnetism  "  (1842).

LOVEWELL,  John,  centenarian,  b.  in  Eng
land,  about  1634 :  d.  in  Dunstable,  Mass.,  about
1754.  lie  was  an  ensign  in  Oliver  Cromwell's  army
about  1653,  afterward  emigrated  to  New  England,
settled  in  Weymouth,  Mass.,  and  was  with  Capt.
Benjamin  Church  during  King  Philip's  war  and  in
the  Narragansett  Swamp  fight  of  19  Dec.,  1675.  He
removed  to  Dunstable,  where  he  was  still  constant
in  attendance  at  church  at  the  age  of  110.  and
when  117  years  old  used  to  chase  boys  out  of  his
orchard  with  a  cane.  —  His  son,  John,  Indian
fighter,  b.  in  the  border  part  of  Dunstable,  Mass.,
which  subsequently  fell  within  what  is  now  Nashua,
N.  II.,  14  Oct.,  1691;  d.  in  the  Pigwacket  wilder
ness,  near  Ossipee  lake,  8  May,  1725,  was,  like  his
father,  a  man  of  remarkable  courage  and  physical
vigor,  and  fond  of  adventurous  enterprises ;  and
in  time  of  war  engaged  in  exploring  the  wilderness
to  find  the  lurking-places  of  the  Indians.  At  the
head  of  a  company  of  thirty  men.  attracted  by  a
bounty  of  £100  that  had  been  offered  for  every
Indian  scalp,  he  marched  to  the  north  of  Winni-
piseogee  lake  on  19  Dec.,  1724,  and  returned  with
one  scalp  and  a  boy  prisoner.  With  forty  men  he
surprised  ten  Indians  near  Tamworth,  N.  H.,  on
20  Feb.,  1725,  and  marched  into  Dover  with  their
scalps  exhibited  on  poles.  In  his  third  and  last
expedition  he  led  forty-six  men  to  attack  the  In
dian  town  of  Pigwacket,  the  village  of  the  Ossipee
or  Pigwacket  tribe.  After  leaving  twelve  men  in
a  fort  that  he  built  near  Ossipee  lake,  he  marched
to  the  north  of  the  lake  with  his  command,  re
duced  to  thirty-four.  While  at  morning  prayers
the  company  were  alarmed  by  the  report  of  a  gun
and  the  discovery  of  an  Indian.  They  left  their
packs,  and  advanced,  seeking  the  enemy  in  front ;
but  the  Indians  had  gained  their  rear,  and  took


LOW


LOW


37


possession  of  their  camp.  The  savages  outnum
bered  the  English  two  to  one,  and  were  commanded
by  their  able  chief,  Paugus.  They  were  met  in  a
sparsely  wooded  place,  and  at  the  first  fire  Capt.
Lovewell  fell,  mortally  wounded.  His  men  with
drew  in  good  order  to  the  lake  to  escape  being  sur
rounded,  and  the  fight  continued  from  10  A.  M.  till
nightfall,  when  the  Indians,  having  lost  their  chief,
retired  from  the  field.  Only  nine  of  Capt.  Love-
weirs  company  escaped  unhurt.  The  survivors  and
the  widows  and  children  of  the  slain  received  a
grant  of  LovewelPs  town  or  Suncook  (now  Pem
broke),  X.  H.  A  long  ballad,  entitled  "  Lovewell's
Fight,"  was  composed  at  the  time.  Rev.  Thomas
Sy names  published  "  Historical  Memoirs  of  the
Fight  of  Pigwacket,"  with  a  sermon  on  Lovewell's
death  (1725).  This  was  republished,  with  notes  by
Nathaniel  Bouton  (Boston,  1861).  See  also  "Expe
ditions  of  Capt.  Lovewell,"  edited  by  Frederick
Kidder  (1865). — His  brother,  Zaccheus,  soldier,  b.
in  Dunstable,  Mass.,  22  July,  1701;  d.  there,  12
April,  1772,  served  in  the  French  war,  succeeding
Joseph  Blanchard  as  colonel  of  the  regiment  of
New  Hampshire  volunteers  in  April,  1758,  and  was.
ordered  to  join  Gen.  Prideaux  at  Niagara  on  29
July,  1759. — Another  brother.  Jonathan,  b.  in
Dunstable,  Mass.,  14  May,  1713;  d.  in  1792,  was  a
preacher,  and  in  later  life  was  appointed  a  judge.

LOW,  AMel  Abbot,  merchant,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  7  Feb.,  1811.  He  was  educated  in  the  pub
lic  schools,  early  became  a  clerk  in  a  mercantile
house,  and  subsequently  for  several  years  was  with
his  father,  who  was  an  importer  of  drugs  and
India  goods  in  New  York  city,  and  had  resided  in
Brooklyn.  N.  Y.,  since  1829.  In  1833  he  sailed  for
Canton,  China,  where  he  became  a  partner  in  an
American  mercantile  house  in  1837.  Three  years
later  he  returned  home  and  engaged  in  the  China
tea  and  silk  trade.  As  his  business  increased  he
built  many  of  his  own  ships.  Pie  was  made  a  mem
ber  of  the  New  York  chamber  of  commerce  in
1846,  and  in  1863  was  elected  its  president,  holding
the  office  until  the  close  of  1866,  when  he  resigned.
He  was  frequently  called  upon  to  address  the  cham
ber  and  other  bodies,  or  to  consult  with  the  gov
ernment  at  Washington  in  relation  to  commercial
or  financial  interests,  and  his  voice  and  influence
were  always  decided  and  powerful  in  support  of
the  plighted  faith  of  the  nation.  During  the  war
he  was  treasurer  of  the  Union  defence  committee  of
New  York,  a  member  of  the  war  fund  committee
of  Brooklyn,  and  president  of  the  general  commit
tee  of  citizens  in  Brooklyn  that  was  appointed  in
aid  of  the  sanitary  service.  Mr.  Low  has  been  for
many  years  president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of
the  Packer  institute.  He  has  contributed  gifts  to
the  Brooklyn  library,  the  City  hospital,  and  many
other  educational,  benevolent,  and  religious  enter
prises. — His  son,  Setll,  merchant,  b.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  18  Jan.,  1850,  was  graduated  at  Columbia"  in
1870,  became  a  clerk  in  his  father's  mercantile
house,  and  in  1875  was  admitted  as  a  partner.  He
was  elected  a  member  of  the  New  York  chamber
of  commerce,  and  made  addresses  on  the  carrying
trade  and  related  subjects,  which  commanded  at
tention.  Mr.  Low  was  a  founder  of  the  Brooklyn
bureau  of  charities  and  its  first  president,  and  "at
the  same  time  he  began  to  take  part  in  political
reform.  He  was  nominated  for  the  mayoralty  in
1881  as  a  reform  candidate,  and,  being  elected  by  a
decisive  majority,  gained  much  praise  by  his  ad
ministration  of  the  city  government.  He  was  the
first  mayor  in  the  state  to  introduce  the  system  of
competitive  examination  for  appointments  to  mu
nicipal  offices.  He  was  re-elected  in  1883,  and


served  for  another  term  of  two  years.  Shortly
after  his  retirement  from  office  he  went  abroad,  ancl
on  his  return  resumed  his  commercial  occupations.

LOW,  Edward,  English  buccaneer,  b.  in  West
minster,  London  ;  d.  in  Martinique  in  1724.  He
was  entirely  uneducated  and  manifested  vicious  in
clinations  from  his  childhood.  After  making
several  voyages  with  his  brother,  he  went  alone
to  Boston,  where  he  embarked  on  a  vessel  that  was
bound  for  the  Gulf  of  Honduras.  Here  he  quar
relled  with  the  captain,  and,  putting  to  sea  in  the
long-boat  with  several  companions,  captured  a
small  ship,  on  which  they  raised  the  black  flag,
and  became  pirates.  By  1722  he  had  several  ves
sels  under  his  command  with  which  he  ravaged
the  coasts  of  New  England  and  the  Antilles.  His
crews  were  constantly  increased  by  sailors  that
deserted  their  ships  or  were  forced  to  join  him.
In  the  roadstead  of  St.  Michael  he  took  several
ships,  and.  being  in  want  of  water  and  provisions,
he  had  the  boldness  to  demand  them  of  the  gov
ernor  of  St.  Michael,  promising  to  surrender  the
captures  he  had  just  made,  and  threatening  to
burn  them  if  his  demands  were  not  complied  with.
The  governor  did  what  the  pirates  asked,  and  Low
kept  his  word.  On  returning  to  the  Antilles,  he
committed  horrible  cruelties  on  those  who  fell  into
his  power,  especially  on  those  who  concealed  their
money  or  threw  it  into  the  sea.  In  an  engage
ment  with  a  ship-of-war,  in  June,  1723,  one  of
Low's  vessels  was  so  badly  damaged  that  he  left  it
to  its  fate  and  fled.  This  ship  was  taken  and
brought  to  Rhode  Island,  where  two  thirds  of  the
crew  were  hanged.  After  this  the  career  of  Low
was  marked  by  greater  atrocities.  His  fleet  in
creased,  for  he  often  manned  the  vessels  that  he
took,  giving  the  command  to  one  of  his  subordi
nates.  Not  only  New  England,  Cape  Breton,
Newfoundland,  and  the  Antilles  suffered  from  his
ravages,  but  they  extended  as  far  as  the  coasts  of
Guinea.  Cruelty  had  become  so  familiar  to  him
that  he  took  an  eager  pleasure  in  torturing  and
murdering  his  prisoners.  Toward  the  end  of  July.
1723,  he  captured  a  large  vessel,  of  which  he  took
command,  with  the  title  of  admiral,  and  hoisted
on  the  main-mast  a  black  flag  with  a  death's-head
in  red.  When  he  was  in  the  Caribbean  sea  in
January,  1724,  a  quarrel  arose  between  him  and
his  crew.  The  officer  next  in  command  showed
himself  violently  opposed  to  an  enterprise  on
which  Low  was  bent,  and  the  latter  avenged  him
self  by  murdering  his  subordinate  in  his  sleep.
The  crew  seized  their  leader  and  two  or  three
of  his  partisans,  lowered  them  into  a  boat,  and
abandoned  them  without  provisions.  A  ship  from
Martinique  met  them  and  brought  them  to  the
island,  where  they  were  recognized  and  executed.
See  "  History  of  the  English  Pirates,"  by  Charles
Johnson  (London,  1734).

LOW,  Frederick  Ferdinand,  governor  of  Cali
fornia,  b.  in  Frankfort,  Me.,  30  June,  1828.  He  was
trained  for  mercantile  life  in  Boston,  Mass.,  went
to  California  in  1849,  and,  after  spending  some  time
in  the  mines,  established  himself  in  business  in
San  Francisco,  and  in  1854  removed  to  Marysville,
where  he  became  a  banker.  He  was  elected  as  a
Republican  to  congress  in  1860,  and,  after  the  ex
piration  of  his  term  in  1863,  was  appointed  collector
of  the  port  of  San  Francisco.  He  was  elected  gov
ernor  the  same  year,  and  served  for  the  four-years'
term  beginning"  1  Jan.,  1864.  From  1869  til!  1874
he  was  LT.  S.  minister  to  China.  In  February,  1871,
he  was  empowered  to  negotiate  with  Corea  for  the
protection  of  shipwrecked  seamen  and  for  a  treaty
of  commerce  and  navigation.


38


LOW


LOWE


LOW,  Isaac,  merchant,  b.  near  New  Brunswick,
N.  J.,  about  1735;  d.  in  England  in  1791.  He  ac
quired  a  fortune  by  trade  in  New  York  city,  and  in
the  early  part  of  the  Revolutionary  conflict  was  an
active  Whig.  He  made  public  speeches  in  favor
of  resistance  to  taxation  without  representation,
though  opposed  to  the  demand  for  independence,
was  chairman  of  the  first  committee  of  fifty  that
was  appointed  to  correspond  with  the  other  colo
nies,  and  continued  as  chairman  of  the  new  com
mittee,  lie  was  also  elected,  with  John  Jay  and
other  conservatives,  to  the  1st  Continental  con
gress,  took  part  in  its  deliberations,  and  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  Provincial  congress  of  New  York  in  1775.
He  was  the  first  signer  of  the  association  on  29
April,  1775,  and  on  that  occasion  delivered  a  vio
lent  speech  against  the  king  and  parliament ;  yet,
while  his  colleagues  in  congress  embraced  the  re
publican  cause,  he  sought  safety  by  adhering  to  the
crown.  In  1770  he  was  arrested  on  the  charge  of
holding  treasonable  correspondence  with  the  enemy.
He  remained  in  the  city  during  the  British  occu
pation,  and  was  one  of  the  persons  named  in  an  act
of  attainder  that  was  passed  by  the  New  York  as
sembly  on  22  Oct.,  1779.  Mr.  Low  was  appointed
by  Sir  Guy  Carleton,  previously  to  the  evacuation,
one  of  a  board  of  commissioners  to  enforce  the  pay
ment  of  debts  that  were  due  to  the  departing  loyal
ists.  He  went  to  England,  and  his  property,  includ
ing  a  tract  of  land  in  Tryon  county,  was  confiscated.
— His  wife,  who  was  a  daughter  of  the  mayor  of  Al
bany  and  a  sister  of  Sir  Cornelius  Cuyler,  was  noted
for  her  beauty  of  person  and  gentle  manners.  She
died  in  London  in  1820,  at  the  age  of  eighty. — Their
only  son,  ISAAC,  became  a  commissary-general  in
the  British  army. — The  first  Isaac's  brother,  Nicho
las,  merchant,  b.  near  New  Brunswick.  N.  J.,  30
March,  1739 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  15  Nov.,  1826,
became  a  prominent  merchant  in  New  York  city
before  the  Revolution,  espoused  the  cause  of  in
dependence,  and  was  elected  a  member  of  the  as
sembly,  and  of  the  convention  that  adopted  the
United  States  constitution.  He  became,  in  1796,
part  proprietor  of  a  large  tract  in  Jefferson  and
Lewis  counties,  N.  Y.,  built  a  hotel  and  a  cotton-
factory  in  Ballston,  N.  Y.,  about  1810,  and  after
ward  devoted  himself  to  the  settlement  of  his  land,
which  included  the  sites  of  Adams,  Watertown,
and  Lowville.

LOW,  Samuel,  poet,  b.  12  Dec.,  1765;  date  of
death  unknown.  He  published  his  "  Poems  "  in  two
volumes  (New  York,  1800).  The  first  piece  is  an
ode  on  the  death  of  Washington,  which  was  recited
by  John  Hodgkinson  in  the  New  York  theatre  on
8  Jan.,  1800.  The  collection  contains  also  sonnets
on  many  subjects,  humorous  poems,  patriotic  odes
on  the  fourth  of  July  and  the  adoption  of  the  con
stitution,  and  a  long  descriptive  poem  on  "  Winter
Displayed,"  which  was  first  published  in  1784.

LOW,  Will  Hicok,  artist,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
31  May,  1853.  He  supported  himself  in  New  York
city  in  1870-'3  by  making  illustrations  for  periodi
cals,  and  in  1873-^'7  was  a  pupil  of  Gerome  and  Caro-
lus-Duran  in  Paris.  After  completing  his  studies,
he  returned  to  the  United  States  and  opened  a
studio  in  New  York.  He  was  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Society  of  American  artists.  Among  his
works  are  "  Nine  of  the  First  Empire,"  exhibited
at  the  Paris  salon  (1876);  "Portrait  of  Mile.  Al-
bani,"  "  Calling  Home  the  Cows  "  (1880) ;  "  Skipper
Ireson"  (1881);  "Arcades"  (1882);  and  "Telling
the  Bees"  (1884).  He  has  illustrated  two  volumes
of  Keats's  poems — the  "  Lamia  "  (1885)  and  "  Odes
and  Sonnets  "  (1887) — and  has  done  some  good  work
in  stained-glass  and  house  decoration.


LOWE,  David  Pearly,  jurist,  b.  in  Oneida
county,  N.  Y.,  22  Aug.,  1823.  He  was  graduated
at  the  law  department  of  Cincinnati  college  in  1851,
practised  in  that  city  for  ten  years,  and  then  re
moved  to  Kansas,  and  took  up  his  residence  at
Mound  City.  He  declined  the  nomination  of  the
Union  party  in  1862  for  attorney-general  of  the
state,  but  was  elected  a  member  of  the  state  senate,
and  served  two  years.  During  the  raid  of  Gen.
Sterling  Price  into  Kansas  he  performed  military
service  as  a  lieutenant-colonel  on  Gov.  Thomas
Carney's  staff.  He  was  defeated  as  a  candidate
for  chief  justice  in  1866,  was  a  district  judge  in
1867-'71,  and  was  twice  elected  to  congress  as  a
Republican,  serving  from  4  March,  1871,  till  3
March,  1875.  He  was  appointed  a  commissioner  of
pensions,  and  declined,  but  accepted  the  chief  jus
ticeship  of  Utah  territory,  and  subsequently  re
sumed  practice  in  Fort  Scott,  Kan.

LOWE,  John,  poet,  b.  near  New  Galloway,  Scot
land,  in  1750;  d.  in  Culpeper  county,  Va.,  in  De
cember,  1798.  He  was  a  son  of  the  gardener  of
Ken  mure  castle,  and  was  apprenticed  to  a  weaver,
but  found  means  to  pursue  the  academical  course
at  Edinburgh,  and  studied  theology  while  teaching
in  the  family  of  a  gentleman  named  McGhie,  with
whose  daughter  he  exchanged  vows  of  affection.
He  wrote  verses  descriptive  of  the  scenery  of  the
River  Dee  and  Loch  Ken,  and  was  inspired  by  the
death  at  sea  of  the  lover  of  a  sister  of  his  betrothed
to  compose  a  melodious  and  affecting  ballad  called
'•  Mary's  Dream,"  by  which  his  fame  as  a  poet  has
been  preserved.  Not  obtaining  a  charge  in  Scot
land,  he  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1773,  to  be
come  a  tutor  in  the  family  of  George  Washington's
elder  brother.  He  subsequently  conducted  a  board
ing-school  at  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  which  was  at
first  successful,  but  eventually  failed.  Amid  new
scenes  he  forgot  the  lady  to  whom  his  faith  was
pledged,  and  married  an  American,  but  the  union
was  not  happy  and  he  died  at  the  house  of  a  friend,
having,  it  is  suspected,  taken  a  dose  of  laudanum.
His  poetical  compositions  were  printed  in  Richard
H.  Crornek's  "  Remains  of  Nithesdale  and  Gallo
way  Song,"  with  a  memoir  by  Rev.  Mr.  Gillespie.
See  also  James  Grant  Wilson's  "Poets  and  Poetry
of  Scotland  "  (New  York,  1876).

LOWE,  John  Williamson,  soldier,  b.  in  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  9  Nov.,  1809;  d.  in  Nicholas
county,  Va.,  10  Sept.,  1861.  He  learned  the  print
er's  trade  in  New  Y7ork  city,  settled  in  Batavia,
Clermont  co.,  Ohio,  in  1833,  studied  law,  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  in  Dayton,  and
subsequently  in  Xenia,  Ohio.  He  was  a  captain  in
the  2d  Ohio  volunteers  during  the  Mexican  war,
and  in  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  joined  the
National  army  as  captain  of  the  first  company  that
was  raised  in  Greene  county,  and  was  elected  colo
nel  of  the  12th  Ohio  infantry,  which  formed  part
of  Gen.  Jacob  D.  Cox's  brigade  that  operated  in
western  Virginia,  and  cleared  the  Kanawha  valley
of  the  enemy.  Col.  Lowe  on  17  July,  1861,  at
tacked  the  enemy's  position  on  Scary  creek,  but  re
tired  when  his  ammunition  was  nearly  exhausted.
He  took  part  in  the  occupation  of  Charleston,  Va.,
and  at  Carnifex  Ferry  fell  while  leading  his  regi
ment  in  a  charge  against  a  strongly  posted  battery.

LOWE,  Martha  Ann,  poet,  b.  in  Keene,  N.  II.,
21  Nov.,  1829.  Her  maiden  name  was  Perry.  She
was  educated  at  Keene  academy  and  at  Elizabeth
Sedgwick's  school  in  Lenox,  Mass.,  and  married
in  1857  Rev.  Charles  Lowe,  of  Exeter,  N.  H.  She
accompanied  her  husband  to  Europe  in  1871,  and
during  two  years'  residence  there  corresponded
with  the  "  Liberal  Christian."  Her  published


LOWE


LOWELL


39


works  are  "The  Olive  and  the  Pine"  (Boston,
1859) :  "  Love  in  Spain,  and  other  Poems  "  (1867) ;
"  The  Story  of  Chief  Joseph  "  (1881) ;  and  "  Memoir
of  Charles" Lowe  "  (1883).

LOWE,  Thaddeus  S.  C.,  aeronaut,  b.  in  Jeffer
son,  N.  H.,  20  Aug.,  1832.  He  made  his  earliest
voyages  about  1858,  and  during  one  of  them  rose
to  a  height  of  23,000  feet.  On  20  April,  1861,  he
rose  from  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  at  4  A.  M.,  in  a  bal
loon,  and  drifted  first  westward,  but  afterward  to
the  southeast,  attaining  an  altitude  of  18,000  feet.
He  descended  in  Union  county,  S.  C.,  after  being
in  the  air  eight  hours  and  traversing  350  miles  in
a  straight  line.  He  next  announced  his  intention
of  crossing  the  Atlantic  ocean  by  means  of  a  bal
loon,  and  for  this  purpose  constructed  one  of
oiled  cotton  with  a  capacity  of  725.000  cubic  feet ;
but  after  several  unsuccessful  attempts  to  inflate
it,  he  abandoned  the  attempt.  Soon  after  the  be-  |
ginning  of  the  civil  war  he  visited  Washington
for  the  purpose  of  recommending  to  the  govern
ment  the  desirability  of  using  balloons  for  observ
ing  the  movements  of  the  enemy.  He  made  several
captive  ascensions  (those  in  which  the  balloon  is
held  to  the  earth,  and  finally  drawn  down,  by
a  long  rope)  from  the  grounds  of  the  Smithsonian
institution,  and  was  then  made  chief  aeronautic
engineer  of  the  army.  Several  balloons,  in  the
hands  of  his  assistant,  made  ascensions ;  but  as
they  were  independent  of  any  branch  of  the  ser
vice,  their  efficiency  was  greatly  impaired.  Mr.
Lowe  was  the  first  to  make  experiments  in  sending
messages  by  the  electric  telegraph  from  a  balloon
to  the  ground;  but,  although  he  was  successful,  his
device  does  not  appear  to  have  been  put  to  any
satisfactory  employment.  He  invented  and  put
into  practical  use  a  portable  apparatus  for  gener
ating  hydrogen  gas  for  war  balloons.  These  he
had  constructed  from  the  closest  woven  and  strong
est  pongee  silk,  varying  in  capacity  from  15,000
to  20,000  cubic  feet.'  During  Mr.  Lowe's  connec
tion  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  Gen.  Fitz-
John  Porter,  Gen.  George  Stoneman,  and  others
made  ascensions ;  but  Mr.  Lowe's  relations  with
the  military  authorities  became  strained,  on  ac
count  of  his  independent  appointments,  and  many
of  his  bills  remained  unaudited,  owing  to  the  feel
ing  between  him  and  the  engineer  officers,  so  that
he  severed  his  connection  with  the  army  long  be
fore  the  close  of  the  war.  Subsequently  he  made
captive  ascensions  from  Philadelphia  and  Xew
York ;  but  these  proving  financially  unsuccessful,
he  retired  from  aeronautic  pursuits  after  dis
posing  of  his  apparatus  to  the  Brazilian  govern
ment.  Mr.  Lowe  then  turned  his  attention  to  in
venting,  and  obtained  patents  on  various  mechan
ical  devices,  one  of  the  first  of  which  was  an  ice-
making  machine.  Later  he  invented  a  machine
for  making  water-gas  by  the  addition  of  crude  j
petroleum,  which  has  resulted  in  the  production  of
an  illuminant  equal  to  that  obtained  from  coal,  and
at  a  much  less  cost.  One  of  his  more  recent  in
ventions  is  light  produced  by  means  of  a  coil  of
wire  heated  to  incandescence  by  a  jet  of  non-
luminous  water-gas  under  heavy  pressure.  Mr.
Lowe  is  now  (1888)  engaged  in  perfecting  a  system
for  the  use  of  water-gas  as  a  fuel  for  cities,  and  in
the  production  of  appliances  for  cooking  and  heat
ing,  adapted  to  the  use  of  water-gas.

LOWE,  William  Warren,  soldier,  b.  in  Indi
ana,  12  Oct.,  1831.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1853.  commissioned  as  a  lieu
tenant  of  dragoons  on  22  Oct.,  1854,  and  was  en
gaged  in  scouting  and  on  frontier  duty  till  the  be
ginning  of  the  civil  war.  He  was  made  a  captain


of  cavalry  on  9  May,  1861,  served  through  the
Manassas  campaign,  and  during  the  following
winter  organized  the  5th  regiment  of  Iowa  volun
teer  cavalry,  of  which  he  was  made  colonel  on  1
Jan..  1862.  In  February  he  participated  in  the
Tennessee  campaign,  and  was  engaged  in  the  cap
ture  of  Fort  Donelson,  of  which  he  was  comman
dant  till  March,  1863,  repelling  various  attacks.  He
subsequently  commanded  a  brigade  or  a  division
in  cavalry  operations  in  middle  Tennessee,  north
ern  Alabama,  and  Georgia,  receiving  the  brevet  of
major  for  gallantry  in  an  engagement  near  Chicka-
mauga,  Ga.,  and  that  of  lieutenant-colonel  for  a
cavalry  action  near  Huntsville,  Ala.  In  the  ad
vance  from  Chattanooga  he  commanded  the  3d
cavalry  division  until  relieved  by  Gen.  Judson  Kil-
patrick,  and  again  after  that  officer  was  wounded.
From  July,  1864,  till  January,  1865,  he  was  em
ployed  in  remounting  cavalry  at  Nashville,  being
mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service  on  24  Jan.,
1865.  He  subsequently  served  as  chief  mustering
and  disbursing  officer  for  Kansas,  Nebraska,  Da
kota,  and  Colorado.  He  was  brevetted  colonel  and
brigadier-general  for  services  in  the  war,  and  pro
moted  major  on  31  July,  1866.  He  left  the  army
on  23  June,  1869,  organized  smelting  and  refining
works  in  Omaha,  Xeb..  engaged  in  mining  in  tTtah.
constructed  a  railroad,  built  on  the  Salmon  river
the  first  smelting-works  in  Idaho,  and  more  recent
ly  prospected  for  petroleum  in  Wyoming  territory,
and  discovered  a  well  of  lubricating-oil  on  the
Little  Popoagie  river.

LOWELL.  James  Russell,  poet  and  essayist,
b.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  22  Feb.,  1819.  He  is  a  son
of  the  Rev.  Charles  Lowell  (q.  t1.),  and  in  genius
and  character  is  the  hereditary  representative  of
the  heart  and  brains
that  founded  New
England.  He  was  the
youngest  of  five  chil
dren.  From  both  par
ents  were  transmit
ted  high  intelligence,
sound  principles,  and
right  ideals,  but  the
poetic  and  imagina
tive  faculty  came  from
the  mother.  His  birth
place  was  the  old  Tory
mansion  now  called
"  Elmwood,"  a  large,
three  -  story,  square,
wooden  house  in  the
early  colonial  style,
situated  in  spacious
grounds,  surrounded
by  magnificent  elms
and  pines  planted  by  his  father,  with  an  outlook
on  Charles  river.  (See  view  on  page  40.)  Lowell
was  fitted  for  college  by  William  Wells  (who  was
the  senior  of  the  firm  to  whom  we  owe  the  series
of  Wells  and  Lilly  classics),  entered  Harvard
in  his  sixteenth  yea'r.  and  was  graduated  in  1838.
His  first-published  literary  production,  unless  pos
sibly  some  poems  for  "  Harvardiana,"  which  he
edited  in  1837- '8,  was  his  notable  class  poem,  com
posed  under  peculiar  circumstances.  At  the  time
of  writing  it  the  collegiate  senior  was  undergoing
a  brief  period  of  rustication  at  Concord,  in  conse
quence  of  inattention  to  his  text-books.  His  forced
sojourn  in  this  Arcadia  of  scholarship  and  reform
brought  him  into  relationship  with  the  transcen-
dentalists,  who  at  that  day  were  in  the  habit  of
gathering  at  the  home  of  Emerson,  with  whom
then  began  that  friendship  which,  despite  the  play-


40


LOWELL


LOWELL


ful  sallies  of  the  younger  poet  in  his  earlier  writ
ings,  only  terminated  with  the  death  of  the  elder.
The  you'ng  satirist  saw  the  humorous  side  of  the
social  movements  of  the  day,  and  the  class-poem,
scintillating  with  wit,  attacked  the  abolitionists,
Carlyle,  Emerson,  and  the  transcendentalists.  In
the  law-school  of  Harvard,  Lowell  received  the  de
gree  of  LL.  B.,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840.
The  only  record  of  the  practice  of  his  profession
is  found  in  a  story  entitled  "My  First  Client,"
published  in  the  "  Boston  Miscellany."  Hence
forth  he  gave  himself  entirely  to  literature.  In
1841  a  volume  of  poems,  written  under  the  influ
ence  of  affection  for  a  woman  of  genius  who  be
came  his  wife,  was  published  under  the  title  of
"A  Year's  Life."  The  key-note  of  the  poems,
buoyant  with  youth  and  love,  is  in  the  closing
lines :

"  The  poet  now  his  guide  hath  found,

And  follows  in  the  steps  of  Love."
The  volume  was  never  re-published,  and  of  the
seventy  poems  only  a  small  part  have  been  deemed
worthy  of  re-printing  by  the  author.  His  marriage
to  the  woman  who  inspired  these  poems  took  place
in  1844.  Maria  White  was  an  ardent  abolitionist,
and  no  doubt  her  influence  assisted  in  turning  his
thoughts  to  the  serious  side  of  that  cause  to  which
he  rendered  immortal  service.  To  understand
Lowell's  career,  it  is  necessary  to  remember  that
he  was  not  only  a  poet,  a  scholar,  and  a  humorist,
but  always  a  conservative  and  a  critic.  No  man
was  more  thoroughly  imbued  than  he  with  the
fundamental  principles  of  American  democracy —
a  democracy  without  demagogism — no  man  more
jealous  than  he  of  the  untarnished  reputation  of
America  in  politics  and  literature,  no  man  more
quick  to  see  any  departure  from  the  high  ideal  of
the  republic,  and  his  flaming  pen  was  turned  to
attack  whatever  assailed  this  ideal — at  one  time
slavery,  at  another  time  vicious  political  methods
threatening  the  purity  of  democratic  society.  His
radicalism  was  always  conservative,  his  criticism
always  constructive.  Lowell  and  his  wife  were
regular  contributors  to  the  "  Liberty  Bell,"  and  his
name  appears  in  1848  in  "  The  Anti-Slavery  Stand
ard  "  as  corresponding  editor.  In  this  paper,  from
1843  to  1846.  his  poems  during  that  period  mostly
appeared.  Later  the  "  Boston  Courier "  was  the
vehicle  of  his  productions,  and  in  its  columns  the
first  series  of  the  "  Biglow  Papers  "  was  given  to  the
public,  beginning  in  the  issue  for  June,  1846,  and
ending  in  1848.  This  satire  was  an  event  of  the
first  importance  in  the  history  of  the  world's  litera
ture.  In  wit,  scholarship,  and  penetrating  knowl
edge  of  human  nature,  it  took  the  place,  which  it
has  ever  since  maintained,  of  a  masterpiece.  Age
has  only  increased  its  reputation,  and  it  is  a  recog
nized  classic  both  in  England  and  America.  The
test  of  its  power  and  universality  is  the  constant
quotation  from  it  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.
Locally  its  effect  was  amazing.  It  consisted  of  a
series  of  poems  in  the  Yankee  dialect,  ostensibly
by  Mr.  Hosea  Biglow,  and  edited,  with  an  intro
duction,  notes,  glossary,  index,  and  "  notices  of  an
independent  press,"  by  "  Homer  Wilbur,  A.  M.,
pastor  of  the  first  church  in  Jaalam,  and  pro
spective  member  of  many  literary,  learned,  and
scientific  societies."  In  the  main  it  was  a  satire  on
slavery  and  the  Mexican  war,  but  there  was
scarcely  any  cant,  hypocrisy,  or  meanness  in  poli
tics,  the  pulpit,  and  the  press  that  was  not  hit  by
it.  The  hitherto  despised  abolitionists,  the  subject
of  gibes  and  satire,  found  a  champion  who  turned
the  batteries  of  the  scholar,  in  unequalled  wit,  merri
ment,  and  ridicule,  upon  their  enemies  and  the  ene


mies  of  the  free  republic,  exposing  to  the  laughter
of  the  world  the  sneaking  attitude  of  compromis
ing  politicians  and  of  those  who  wore  the  livery  of
heaven  in  the  cause  of  human  slavery.  Thereafter
the  fight  took  on  a  very  different  character;  it
was  respectable  to  be  on  the  side  of  freedom.  The
"  Biglow  Papers  "  will  no  doubt  preserve  the
Yankee  dialect,  and  cause  it  to  be  studied  ages
hence  in  order  to  the  comprehension  of  the  effect
upon  our  national  life  of  one  of  the  most  oppor
tune  allies  that  freedom  ever  had.

His  interest  in  the  anti-slavery  contest  did  not
prevent  Lowell  from  purely  literary  labors.  In
1843  he  undertook  the  editing  of  "  The  Pioneer,  a
Literary  and  Critical  Magazine,"  in  joint  editor
ship  with  Robert  Carter  (q.  v.);  and  Poe,  Haw
thorne,  Neal,  Dwight,  Jones  Very,  Parsons,  Eliza
beth  Barrett  (Mrs.  Browning),  Wmttier,  and  Will
iam  W.  Story  were  contributors.  Only  three  num
bers  were  published,  the  venture  failing  through
financial  disaster  to  the  publishers.  In  this  maga
zine  was  begun  a  series  of  essays  on  the  poets  and
dramatists,  which  afterward  formed  the  material
for  "  Conversations  with  Some  of  the  Old  Poets  "
(Cambridge,  1845).  In  1844  came  a  volume  of  verse,
containing  "  A  Legend  of  Brittany,"  with  thirty-
three  miscellaneous  poems  and  thirty-seven  son


nets  (among  them  sonnets  to  Wendell  Phillips  and
Joshua  R.  Giddings),  written  in  a  vein  that  fore
shadowed  and  even  announced  the  poet's  position
in  the  great  anti-slavery  revolution.  These  were
followed  in  1845  by  "  The  Vision  of  Sir  Launfal,"
one  of  the  most  exquisite  productions  of  his  genius,
a  poem  founded  on  the  legend  of  the  Holy  Grail,
which  is  said  to  have  been  composed  in  a  sort  of
frenzy  in  about  forty-eight  hours,  during  which
the  poet  scarcely  ate  or  slept.  The  "  Conversations
on  the  Poets  "  "was  Lowell's  first  work  in  literary
criticism,  and  was  the  basis  of  his  lectures  before
the  Lowell  institute,  1854-'5,  and  of  his  lectures  in
Harvard  university  during  his  professorship  of
modern  languages  and  belles-lettres.  A  third  vol
ume  of  poems,  containing  many  new  anti-slavery
pieces,  was  published  in  1848,  and  the  same  year
was  brought  out  anonymously  the  "  Fable  for
Critics,"  a  youthfully  daring  but  amusing  and
racy  skit  at  the  American  poets,  in  which  the
laughing  author  did  not  spare  himself.  In  1849  a
collected  edition  of  his  poems  in  two  volumes  was
published,  the  "  Biglow  Papers  "  and  "  A  Year's
Life"  being  omitted.  In  the  mean  time  Lowell
had  been  a  contributor  to  the  "  Dial,"  the  ''  Demo
cratic  Review,"  the  "  Massachusetts  Quarterly  Re
view,"  in  which  he  reviewed  Thoreau's  first  volume
in  1849,  and  to  "Putnam's  Monthly"  in  1853
and  several  years  later.  In  1851  the  poet  and  his
wife  travelled  in  Europe,  visiting  England,  France,
and  Switzerland,  and  residing  for  some  time  in
Italy.  The  chief  fruits  of  this  journey  were  the


LOWELL


LOWELL


41


essays  on  Italian  art  and  literature  and  his  emi
nence  as  a  student  and  interpreter  of  Dante.  In
the  autumn  of  1852  he  was  again  in  America,  and  in
October,  1853,  he  sustained  the  greatest  sorrow  of
his  life  in  the  death  of  his  wife,  who  had  long
been  an  invalid.  In  January,  1855,  on  Mr.  Long
fellow's  resignation,  Lowell  was  appointed  his
successor  as  professor  of  modern  languages  and
belles-lettres  in  Harvard  university,  and  after  two
years'  study  abroad,  during  which  time  he  greatly
extended  his  knowledge  of  Italian,  French,  and
Spanish,  and  became  one  of  the  first  authorities  in
old  French  and  Proven9al  poetry,  he  assumed  the
duties  of  his  professorship.  From  1857  till  1862  he
wrote  many  essays,  not  since  re-published,  for  the
"  Atlantic  Monthly,"  and  in  1803  he  became,  with
Prof.  Charles  Eliot  Norton,  joint  editor  of  the
"  North  American  Review,"  a  connection  which  he
maintained  till  1872.  The  "Atlantic  Monthly,"
founded  in  1857,  of  which  Lowell  was  the  first
editor,  was  set  on  foot  by  Holmes,  Longfellow,
Emerson,  and  Lowell,  and  Emerson's  study  was  the
scene  of  the  gathering  of  the  great  literary  lights
of  Boston,  when  the  enterprise  was  discussed  and
the  character  of  the  magazine  settled  upon.

The  Kansas  struggle,  1856-'8,  enlisted  Lowell's
sympathies ;  he  was  in  accord  with  the  leading  anti-
slavery  men,  and  at  one  time,  says  Frank  B.  San-
born,  contemplated  transferring  his  Hosea  Biglow
to  Kansas  to  report  in  the  vernacular  the  doings
there,  but  "the  flighty  purpose  never  was  o'ertook."
The  outbreak  of  the  civil  war  caused  a  revival  of
the  dramatis  personce,  of  the  "  Biglow  Papers,"
in  which  the  disunionists  at  home  and  their  sym
pathizers  in  England  were  equally  brought  under
the  lash  of  his  stinging  satire.  It  went  straight  to
the  American  heart.  This  second  series  of  "  Biglow
Papers  "  first  appeared  in  the  "  Atlantic,"  and  was
published  in  a  volume  in  1867.  The  "  Fireside
Travels,"  containing  the  pleasant  gossip  about
"Cambridge  Thirty  Years  Ago,"  the  delightful
"  Moosehead  Journal,"  and  notes  of  travel  on  the
Mediterranean  and  in  Italy,  had  appeared  in  the
mean  time.  The  "  Atlantic  "  for  January,  1867,  con
tained  "  Fitz  Adam's  Story,"  a  poem  intended  to
form  part  of  a  longer  one,  "  The  Nooning."  which
has  been  announced  as  about  to  be  published  as
far  back  as  1851,  but  has  never  been  completed.
It  was  omitted  from  "  Under  the  Willows,  and  other
Poems"  (Boston,  1869),  with  the  following  ex
planation  :  " '  Fitz  Adam's  Story,'  which  some
good  friends  will  miss,  is  also  left  to  stand  over,
because  it  belongs  to  a  connected  series,  which  it
is  hoped  may  be  completed  if  the  days  should  be
propitious."  The  volumes  of  prose,  "  Among  my
Books"  and  "  My  Study  Windows,"  issued  in  1870,
comprising  the  choicest  of  Lowell's  literary  essays,
seemed  to  mark  the  close  of  his  greatest  literary  ac
tivity  ;  but  the  appearance  recently  of  such  a  paper
as  that  on  the  poet  Grey  shows  that  only  oppor
tunity  is  needed  for  the  gathering  of  the  maturest
fruits  of  his  critical  genius.  In  1872  he  made
another  visit  to  Europe,  and  on  his  return  the
"  Centennial  "  period  called  out  his  efforts  in  the
production  of  three  patriotic  odes,  the  first  at  Con
cord,  19  April,  1875,  the  second  under  the  Wash
ington  elm.  3  July  of  the  same  year,  and  the
third  for  4  July,  1876.  He  was  a  presidential  elec
tor  in  1876.

In  1877  Mr.  Lowell  was  appointed  by  President
Hayes  to  the  Spanish  mission,  from  which  he
was  transferred  in  1880  to  the  court  of  St.  James.
His  diplomatic  career  closed  with  his  recall  by
President  Cleveland  in  1885.  In  Madrid,  in  an  at
mosphere  congenial  to  him  as  a  student,  he  sus


tained  the  honor  of  the  American  name,  and  re
ceived  the  confidence  and  admiration  that  had
been  formerly  extended  to  Washington  Irving.
His  residence  in  London,  although  clouded  and
saddened  by  the  long  illness  and  by  the  death  in
February,  1885,  of  his  second  wife,  Miss  Frances
Dunlap,  of  Portland,  Me.,  whom  he  had  married  in
September,  1857,  was  as  honorable  to  him  as  to  the
country  he  represented,  an  unbroken  series  of  suc
cesses  in  the  world  of  society  and  the  world  of  let
ters.  Called  upon  to  settle  no  serious  international
differences,  he  bore  himself  with  the  tact  and  dig
nity  that  was  to  be  desired  in  our  representative  to
a  great  and  friendly  power,  mindful  always  that  his
mission  was  to  maintain  cordial  amity  instead  of
seeking  causes  of  alienation.  And  no  man  in  our
generation  has  done  more  than  Lowell  to  raise
American  institutions  and  American  character  in
the  estimation  of  our  English  kin.  His  graceful
and  natural  oratory  was  in  demand  on  scores  of
public  occasions.  The  most  noteworthy  of  his  pub
lic  addresses  was  that  on  Coleridge,  delivered  at  the
unveiling  of  the  bust  of  the  poet  in  Westminster
Abbey  in  May,  1885.  The  volume  entitled  "  Democ
racy  and  other  Addresses  "  (Boston,  1887)  includes
the  foreign  speeches,  and  those  spoken  at  the  dedi
cation  of  the  public  library  of  Chelsea  and  at  the
Harvard  anniversary.  Mr.  Lowell's  political  life  is
confined  within  the  eight  years  of  his  terms  of  office
at  Madrid  and  London.  His  recall  brought  out
expressions  of  deep  regret  in  the  English  press,
and  he  returned  to  the  United  States  to  receive  the
plaudits  of  his  countrymen.  Temporary  political
criticisms  there  were,  but  they  were  such  as  a  man
can  afford  to  leave  to  the  judgment  of  time,  which
will  not  fail  to  compare  his  own  ideal  of  what  the
republic  should  be  with  the  notions  of  his  critics.
Since  his  return  to  private  life  Mr.  Lowell's  home
has  been  with  his  only  child,  the  wife  of  Ed
ward  Burnett,  at  Southboro,  Mass.  He  resumed
his  lectures  at  Cambridge,  and  in  the  winter  of
1887  gave  a  course  on  the  English  dramatists  be
fore  the  Lowell  institute.  The  same  winter  he
read  a  paper  before  the  Union  league  club  of
Chicago  on  the  authorship  of  Richard  III.  In  the
summer  of  1887  he  again  visited  England,  receiv
ing  everywhere  the  highest  honors  that  could  be
paid  to  a  private  citizen.  The  degree  of  D.  C.  L.
was  conferred  upon  him  by  the  University  of  Ox
ford  in  1873,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  the  University
of  Cambridge,  England,  in  1874.  During  his  resi
dence  in  England  as  minister  he  was  elected  rector
of  the  University  of  St.  Andrews.

The  following'  is  a  list  of  his  works  and  their
various  editions:  "Class  Poem"  (Boston,  1838);
"A  Year's  Life"  (1841);  "Poems"  (Cambridge,
1844);  "The  Vision  of  Sir  Launfal"  (Boston,
1845 ;  2d  ed.,  1848,  and-included  in  "  Vest-Pocket
Series ") ;  "  Conversations  on  Some  of  the  Old
Poets"  (1845);  "Poems"  (1848);  "The  Biglow
Papers"  (1848);  "A  Fable  for  Critics"  (1848);
"  Poems  "  (2  vols.,  1849) ;  "  Life  of  Keats,"  pref
acing  an  edition  of  his  w^rks  (1854) ;  "  Poems "
(2  vols.,  1854);  "Poetical  Works"  (2  vols.,  1858):
"  Mason  and  Slidell,  a  Yankee  Idyl  "  (1862) :  "  Fire
side  Travels"  (1864);  "The  President's  Policy"
(1864) ;  "  Ode  recited  at  the  Commemoration  of  the
Living  and  Dead  Soldiers  of  Harvard  University,"
21  July.  1865 ;  "  The  Biglow  Papers,"  2d  series
(1867)  f  "  Under  the  Willows,  and  other  Poems"
( 1869) ;  "  Among  my  Books  "  ( 1870 )  ;  "  The
Courtin'"  (1874);  "Three  Memorial  Poems"
(1876):  "Among  my  Books,"  2d  series  (1876);
and  "  Democracy,  and  other  Addresses "  (1887).
"  The  Literary  World  "  (Boston)  of  27  June,  1885,


LOWELL


LOWELL


is  a  Lowell  number,  containing  estimates  of  Mr.
Lowell's  literary  and  personal  qualities,  with  testi
monies  from  prominent  writers,  and  a  bibliogra
phy.  Francis  H.  Underwood  published  in  1882  a
biographical  sketch ;  and  Stedman's  "  American
Poets,"  a  volume  called  "  Homes  and  Haunts  of
our  Elder  Poets,"  and  Haweis's  "  American  Humor
ists,"  contain  essays  upon  Mr.  Lowell. — James  Rus
sell's  wife,  Maria  White,  poet,  b.  in  Watertown,
Mass.,  8  July,  1821;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  27
Oct.,  1853,  married  Mr.  Lowell  in  1844.  She  pos
sessed  great  beauty  of  person  and  character,  and
was  an  accomplished  linguist.  Her  death,  which
took  place  the  same  night  that  one  of  Mr.  Long
fellow's  children  was  born,  called  forth  from  Long
fellow  his  poem  beginning,

"  Two  angels,  one  of  life  and  one  of  death,

Passed  o'er  our  village,  as  the  morning  broke."
A  volume  of  her  poems,  which  are  characterized  by
tenderness  and  delicacy  of  feeling,  was  printed  pri
vately  after  her  death  (Cambridge,  1855).  The  best
known  of  them  are  "  The  Alpine  Shepherd "  and
"  The  Morning-Glory."

LOWELL,  John,  statesman,  b.  in  Newbury-
port,  Mass.,  17  June,  1743;  d.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,
6  May,  1802.  His  ancestor,  Percival,  a  merchant,
came  from  Bristol,  England,  to  Newbury,  Mass.,  in
1639,  and  his  father,
John,  was  the  first  min
ister  of  Newburyport,
where  he  officiated  in
1726-'67.  The  son  was
graduated  at  Harvard
in  1760,  and  in  1762  ad
mitted  to  the  bar,  where
he  soon  gained  a  high
reputation.  He  repre
sented  Newburyport  in
the  provincial  assembly
in  1776,  and  was  an
officer  of  militia;  but
he  removed  to  Boston
in  1777,  and  served  in
the  legislature  from
that,  city  in  1778.  He

M  was  a  delegate  in  1780

"  to  the  convention  that

framed  the  constitution  of  Massachusetts,  took  an
active  part  in  its  proceedings,  and  served  on  the
committee  that  was  appointed  to  draft  the  consti
tution.  He  secured  the  insertion  of  the  clause
that  declares  that  "  all  men  are  born  free  and  equal,"
avowing  his  belief  that  slavery  would  thus  be  abol
ished  in  the  state.  Mr.  Lowell's  position  was  de
cided  to  be  legal  by  the  state  supreme  court  in
1783,  and  slavery  was  thus  abolished  in  Massachu
setts  through  his  agency.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Continental  congress  in  1782-'3,  and  in  the
former  year  was  appointed  by  that  body  one  of
three  judges  for  the  trial  of  appeals  from  courts  of
admiralty.  He  was  appointed  in  1784  on  the  com
mission  to  decide  boundary  disputes  between  Massa
chusetts  and  New  Yor!;.  In  1789  he  became  U.  S.
judge  for  the  district  of  Massachusetts,  and  in
1801  he  was  appointed  chief  justice  of  the  1st  cir
cuit,  including  Maine,  New  Hampshire,  Massa
chusetts,  and  Rhode  Island.  Judge  Lowell  was
president  of  the  Massachusetts  agricultural  society
for  years,  and  contributed  toward  the  establish
ment  of  the  botanic  garden  at  Cambridge.  Har
vard  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1792.  He
was  for  eighteen  years  a  member  of  its  corpora
tion  and  one  of  the  founders  of  the  American
academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  before  which  he  de
livered,  on  26  Jan.,  1795,  an  oration  on  the  death


/f(?C(?-l^ -t^As  <


of  the  elder  James  Bowdoin.  This  is  prefixed  to
vol.  ii.  of  the  academy's  "  Memoirs."  He  was  also
the  author,  shortly  after  his  graduation  at  Har
vard,  of  an  English  poem  in  the  "  Pietas  et  Gratu-
latio"  (1761). — His  son,  John,  political  writer,  b.
in  Newburyport,  6  Oct.,  1769 ;  d.  in  Boston,  12
March,  1840,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1786,
studied  law,  and,  after  his  admission  to  the  bar  in
1789,  practised  with  success  till  1803,  when  he  vis
ited  Europe.  After  his  return  in  1806  he  devoted
himself  to  literature,  writing  on  politics,  agricul
ture,  theology,  and  other  topics,  under  various  sig
natures,  such  as  "  Citizen  of  Massachusetts,"  "  Mas
sachusetts  Lawyer,"  "  Layman,"  and  "  Yankee
Farmer."  He  attacked  the  supporters  of  the  war  of
1812  with  great  severity  in  his  writings,  in  which
he  showed  both  skill  and  vigor,  and  was  of  emi
nent  service  to  the  Federal  party.  From  1810  till
1828  he  was  a  member  of  the  corporation  of  Har
vard,  which  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  1).  in  1814.
He  was  for  many  years  president  of  the  State
agricultural  society,  inherited  his  father's  love
for  horticulture,  and  has  been  called  the  "  Colu-
mella  of  the  New  England  States."  lie  died  sud
denly  of  apoplexy.  Edward  Everett  said  of  him  :
"  He  possessed  colloquial  powers  of  the  highest
order  and  a  flow  of  unstudied  eloquence  never
surpassed,  and  rarely,  as  with  him,  united  with
the  command  of  an  accurate,  elegant,  and  logical
pen."  Among  his  political  pamphlets,  of  which  he
published  about  twenty-five,  are  "  Peace  without
Dishonor — War  without  Hope,  an  Inquiry  into  the
Subject  of  the  '  Chesapeake ' "  (Boston,  1807) ;
"  Candid  Comparison  of  the  Washington  and  Jef
ferson  Administrations"  (1810);  "  Diplomat  ick
Policy  of  Mr.  Madison  Unveiled  "  (1810) ;  and  "  Mr.
Madison's  War;  a  Dispassionate  Inquiry  into  the
Reasons  alleged  by  Madison  for  declaring  an  Of
fensive  and  Ruinous  War  against  Great  Britain  "
(1812).  His  theological  writings  include  "  Are  you
a  Christian  or  a  Calvinist?"  (1815).  His  funeral
sermon  was  delivered  by  the  Rev.  Francis  W.  P.
Greenwood  (1840). — Another  son,  Francis  Cabot,
merchant,  b.  in  Newburyport,  7  April,  1775;  d.  in
Boston,  10  Aug.,  1817,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1793.  He  visited  England  in  1810,  and  on  his
return  in  1813  became  convinced  that  it  was  prac
ticable  to  introduce  cotton-manufacture  into  the
United  States.  He  proposed  to  his  brother-in-
law,  Patrick  T.  Jackson  (q.  ?-.).  to  make  the  ex
periment,  and  the  result  was  the  establishment
of  factories  at  Waltham,  Mass.,  and  finally,  after
his  death,  the  foundation  of  the  city  of  Lowell,
which  was  named  in  his  honor.  Mr.  Lowell  vis
ited  Washington  in  1816,  and,  by  .his  personal
influence  with  John  C.  Calhoun  and  other  mem
bers  of  congress,  did  much  to  introduce  into  the
tariff  act  of  that  year  the  clause  that  imposed  a
duty  on  cotton  fabrics. — Another  son,  Charlos,
clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,  15  Aug.,  1782  ;  d.  in  Cam
bridge.  Mass.,  20  Jan.,  1861,  was  graduated  at  liar
vard  in  1800,  and  began  to  study  law,  but  aban
doned  it  for  theology.  He  spent  the  years  18()2-'5
abroad,  studying  two  years  in  Edinburgh  and  after
ward  travelling  on  the  continent,  and  after  his  re
turn  he  was  settled,  on  1  Jan.,  1806,  as  pastor  of
the  West  Unitarian  church  in  Boston,  where  he  re
mained  until  his  death.  In  1837,  on  account  of  his
feeble  health,  Dr.  Cyrus  A.  Bartol  was  ordained  as
his  colleague,  and  from  that  year  till  1840  he  trav
elled  extensively  in  Europe  and  the  east.  During  the
latter  part  of  his  life  Dr.  Lowell  officiated  only  occa
sionally  in  his  church.  He  was  much  beloved  by  his
congregation,  a  graceful  and  forcible  orator,  and  a
zealous  opponent  of  slavery.  Harvard  gave  him


LOWELL


LOWELL


43


the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1823.  He  was  a  fellow  of  its
corporation  from  1818  till  1833,  and  a  member  of
literary  societies  in  this  country  and  abroad.  He
contributed  largely  to  periodical  literature  and
published  many  separate  discourses,  a  volume  of
"  Occasional  Sermons,"  and  one  of  "  Practical  Ser
mons"  (Boston,  1855);  "Meditations  for  the  Af
flicted,  Sick,  and  Dying " :  and  "  Devotional  Ex
ercises  for  Communicants."  The  "  Proceedings  "
of  a  parish  meeting  that  was  held  in  his  mem
ory  were  published  (1861).  He  married  Harriet,
daughter  of  Robert  T.  Spence,  of  Portsmouth,
N.  H.,  an  officer  in  the  U.  S.  navy. — Francis  Ca
bot's  son.  John,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Boston,  11
May,  1799;  d.  in  Bombay,  India,  4  March,  1836,
studied  in  the  high-school  of  Edinburgh,  Scotland,
and  entered  Harvard  in  1813,  but  left  in  1815  on
account  of  impaired  health,  and  in  1816-'17  made
two  voyages  to  India.  He  then  engaged  in  com
merce  for  a  few  years ;  but  in  1830-'!  his  wife  and
his  two  daughters,  his  only  children,  died  within  a
few  months,  and  the  remainder  of  his  life  was
spent  in  travel  in  the  United  States,  Europe,  Asia
Minor,  Egypt,  Arabia,  and  Hindostan.  Mr.  Low
ell  was  a  fine  scholar  and  possessed  a  valuable  pri
vate  library.  He  bequeathed  $250,000  for  the
maintenance  in  Boston  of  annual  courses  of  free
public  lectures  on  religion,  science,  and  the  arts.
This  establishment,  the  Lowell  institute,  went  into
operation  in  the  winter  of  1839-'40,  and  has  been
continued  since  that  time  with  eminent  success.
Mr.  Lowell's  will  was  made  while  he  was  in  Egypt,
at  the  ruins  of  Thebes,  and  Edward  Everett  said
(jf  it,  in  an  introduction  to  the  first  course  of  insti
tute  lectures,  31  Dec.,  1839:  "The  few  sentences,
penned  with  a  tired  hand  by  our  fellow-citizen  on
the  top  of  a  palace  of  the  Pharaohs,  will  do  more
for  human  improvement  than,  for  aught  that  ap
pears,  was  done  by  all  of  that  gloomy  dynasty  that
ever  reigned."  See  "  Memoir  of  John  Lowell,  Jr.,"
by  Edward  Everett  (Boston,  1840). — Charles's  son,
Robert  Traill  Spence,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston.
Mass.,  8  Oct.,  1816,  was  at  Round  Hill  school,
Northampton,  Mass.,  in  1823-'8,  under  Joseph  Or.
Cogswell  and  George  Bancroft,  and  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1833.  He  then  took  a  full  course  at
Harvard  medical  school,  and  engaged  in  mercantile
pursuits  for  a  time.  In  1839  he  began  the  study  of
theology  under  advice  of  Dr.  Alonzo  Potter  (after
ward  bishop  of  Pennsylvania),  and  prepared  for  or
ders.  He  was  invited  by  Bishop  Spencer,  of  New
foundland,  to  go  to  Bermuda,  where  he  was  made
deacon  in  December,  1842,  and  priest  in  March,
1843,  and  was  also  appointed  domestic  chaplain  to
the  bishop  and  inspector  of  schools  in  the  colony.
He  went  to  Newfoundland  in  1843,  and  was  ap
pointed  to  the  charge  of  Bay  Roberts  ("  Peterport "
in  his  novel,  "  The  New  Priest ").  While  he  was  oc
cupied  in  duty  here,  a  severe  famine  came  upon  the
people  (1846),  during  which  Mr.  Lowell's  medical
training  proved  to  be  especially  serviceable.  He
was  chairman  of  the  relief  committee  of  the  dis
trict,  and  earned  the  thanks  and  gratitude  of  the
government  and  people.  His  health  and  strength
gave  way,  and  he  found  it  necessary  to  return  to
the  United  States  in  1847.  He  next  began  mission
work  among  the  poorer  people  in  Newark,  N.  J..
gathered  a  congregation  called  Christ  church,  and
built  a  stone  church  in  1849-'50,  which  was  open
and  free  to  all,  with  daily  services.  In  1859  he  ac
cepted  a  call  to  Christ  church,  Duanesburg,  N.  Y..
which  post  he  held  for  ten  years.  Thence  he  went
to  Southborough,  Mass.,  where  for  four  years  he
was  head  master  of  St.  Mark's  school.  In  1873  he
became  professor  of  the  Latin  language  and  litera


ture  in  Union  college,  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  and  dis
charged  the  duties  of  that  department  for  six
years.  Dr.  Lowell's  publications  are  "  The  New
Priest  in  Conception  Bay  "  (Boston,  1858  ;  new  ed.
illustrated  by  F.  0.  C.  Darley,  1863);  "Fresh
Hearts  that  failed  Three  Thousand  Years  Ago,
and  other  Poems "  (1860) ;  "  Antony  Brade,  a
Story  of  School-Boy  Life  "  (1874) ;  "  Burgoyne's
March,"  the  poem  at  the  Saratoga  county  cen
tennial  celebration  at  Bemis  Heights  (1877)  ;
and  "  A  Story  or  Two  from  a  Dutch  Town "
(1878).  He  has  also  been  during  a  large  part  of
his  life  a  frequent  contributor  in  both  verse  and
prose  to  reviews,  magazines,  and  literary  journals.
One  of  his  most  striking  productions,  "  A  Raft  that
no  Man  Made,"  is  an  imaginative  story,  which  a
year  or  two  after  its  publication  was  almost  exactly
paralleled  by  the  actual  experience  of  a  portion  of
the  crew  of  the  "  Polaris."  (See  HALL,  CHARLES
FRANCIS.) — Anna  Cabot,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1819 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  7  Jan.,
1874,  was  the  wife  of  CHARLES  RUSSELL,  anoth
er  son  of  Charles.  Her  maiden-name  wTas  Jack
son.  She  published  "  Theory  of  Teaching  "  (Bos
ton,  1841) ;  "  Edward's  First  Lessons  in  Grammar  "
(1843);  "Gleanings  from  the  Poets,  for  Home  and
School "  (1843) ;  "  Edward's  First  Lessons  in  Geom
etry  "  (1844) ;  "  Olympic  Games  "  (1845) ;  "  Outlines
of  Astronomy,  or  the  World  as  it  Appears  "  (1850) ;
"Letters  to  Madame  Pulksky,  by  an  American
Lady"  (1852);  "Thoughts  on  the  Education  of
Girls  "  (1853) ;  "  Seed-Grain  for  Thought  and  Dis
cussion  "  (1856) ;  and  "  Posies  for  Children,  a  Book
of  Verses"  (1870). — Her  son,  Charles  Russell,
soldier,  b.  in  Boston,  2  Jan.,  1835 ;  d.  near  Middle-
town,  Va.,  20  Oct.,  1864,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1854,  with  the  first  honors,  and  after  several
years  of  European  travel  was  employed  for  some
time  in  steel  and  iron  works,  and  on  the  Burling
ton  and  Missouri  River  railroad.  In  the  spring  of
1861,  while  superintending  iron-woi'ks  in  Cumber
land  valley,  Ma.,  he  offered  his  services  to  the  gov
ernment,  and  on  14  May  he  was  commissioned  cap
tain  in  the  6th  cavalry.  He  served  on  Gen.  Mc-
Clellan's  staff  till  November,  1862,  when  he  organ
ized  the  2d  Massachusetts  cavalry,  and  on  15  April,
1863,  was  made  its  colonel.  He  commanded  a  bri
gade  of  cavalry  in  Virginia,  was  actively  engaged
in  the  pursuit  of  Mosby's  guerillas,  and  afterward
under  Sheridan  in  the  Shenandoah  valley,  and  was
made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  to  date  from
19  Oct.,  1864,  on  recommendation  of  Gen.  Sheri
dan,  for  his  services  in  the  latter  campaign.  In  his
three  years  of  service  twelve  horses  had  been  shot
under'  him,  yet  he  escaped  without  injury  till  the
battle  of  Cedar  Creek,  where  he  was  wounded  while
in  the  advance  of  Gen.  Getty's  division,  but  refused
to  leave  his  command.  In  the  moment  of  victory
he  received  additional  wounds,  which  caused  his
death  on  the  following  day.— His  wife,  Josephine
Shaw,  philanthropist,  b.  in  West  Roxbury,  Mass.,
16  Dec.,  1843,  is  a  daughter  of  Francis  George  Shaw.
She  was  educated  in  schools  in  Europe,  Boston,  and
New  York  city,  and  travelled  in  central  Europe,
Italy,  and  Great  Britain  from  1851  until  1855.  She
was"  married  on  Staten  island  in  October.  1863.
From  1876  until  the  present  time  (1887)  Mrs.  Low
ell  has  officiated  as  one  of  the  three  commissioners
of  the  State  board  of  charities  of  New  York.  She
is  also  one  of  the  council  of  the  Charity  organiza
tion  society  of  New  York  city,  and  favorably  known
for  her  efficiency  in  the  cause  of  public  charities,
and  for  her  private  benevolence  and  untiring  efforts
to  elevate  the  condition  of  the  needy  and  deserv
ing.  Besides  numerous  reports  and  several  pam-


44


LOWENTHAL


LOWNDES


phlets,  she  has  published  "  Public  Relief  and  Pri
vate  Charity  "  (New  York,  1884).— Charles  Russell's
younger  brother,  James  Jackson,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1858,  entered  the  National  service,
and  was  mortally  wounded  at  Glendale,  30  June,
1862.  See  "  The 'Purchase  by  Blood,"  a  tribute  to
his  memory,  by  Rev.  Cyrus  A.  Bartol,  D.  D.  (Boston,
1864),  and  an  address  at  his  funeral  by  George  Put
nam  (Cambridge,  1864). — The  second  John's  grand
son,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  18  Oct.,
1824,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1843,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1846,  and  practised
in  Boston  till  11  March,  1865,  when  he  was  ap
pointed  U.  S.  judge  for  the  district  of  Massachu
setts.  On  18  Dec.,  1878,  he  was  appointed  judge
of  the  U.  S.  circuit  court,  and  held  that  office  till
1  May,  1884,  when  he  resigned.  His  decisions  have
been  published  in  two  volumes  (Boston,  1872-'7),
and  he  has  written  especially  on  the  subject  of
bankruptcy. — Francis  Cabot's  grandson,  Edward
Jackson,  author,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  18  Oct.,  1845,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1867,  and  then  spent
several  years  abroad.  He  practised  law  for  some
time  in  Boston,  but  of  late  years  has  devoted  him
self  exclusively  to  literary  pursuits.  He  is  the
author  of  "  The  Hessians  and  the  other  German
Auxiliaries  of  Great  Britain  in  the  Revolutionary
War "  (New  York,  1884),  which  has  taken  rank  as
an  exhaustive  authority  on  the  subject  of  which
it  treats.  He  has  also  contributed  many  articles
to  reviews  and  magazines,  and  is  the  author  of  the
chapter  in  Winsor's  "  Narrative  and  Critical  His
tory  of  America  "  (Boston,  1884)  on  "  The  Diploma
cy  and  Finance  of  the  Revolution."

LOWENTHAL,  John  Jacob,  chess-player,  b.
in  Buda-Pesth,  Hungary,  in  July,  1810.  About
1841  he  became  known  as  one  of  the  best  analytical
chess-players  in  Europe.  In  1849  he  left  Hungary
for  political  reasons  and  came  to  the  United  States,
arriving  in  New  York  city  on  29  Dec.  There  he
remained  until  the  following  March,  when  he  went
to  Lexington,  Ky.  During  his  sojourn  in  New
York  he  met  all  the  strongest  players  of  the  city,
and  won  a  large  majority  of  the  games  that  he
played  from  all  except  Charles  H.  Stanley,  with
whom  he  made  even  games.  While  in  Lexington
he  encountered  Mr.  Dudley,  the  strongest  western
player  of  the  day,  and  defeated  him  in  three  set
matches.  On  10  April,  1850,  he  left  Lexington
for  Cincinnati,  stopping  on  the  way  at  Frankfort
and  Louisville,  at  both  of  which  places  he  met  and
defeated  the  chief  players.  He  arrived  at  Cincin
nati  on  16  April,  and  left  on  10  May  for  New
Orleans.  On  27  May  he  met  Paul  Morphy,  who
was  then  not  yet  thirteen  years  of  age,  and  of  this
meeting  Mr.  Lowenthal  himself  says :  "  I  do  not
remember  whether  we  played  in  all  two  or  three
games ;  one  was  drawn,  the  other  or  others  I  lost."
In  June,  Lowenthal  returned  to  Cincinnati,  and,
with  the  assistance  of  friends,  established  a  chess
divan  in  connection  with  the  chess  club  there.
Early  in  1851  he  left  Cincinnati  to  take  part  in  the
chess  tournament  in  London,  intending  to  return,
but  never  revisited  this  country.  He  was  after
ward  editor  of  the  chess  department  of  several  Lon
don  journals,  conducted  the  "  Chess-Players'  Maga
zine  "in  1865-' 7,  and  wrote  several  books  on  the
subject.  In  1852  he  was  elected  secretary  of  the
St.  George's,  and  in  1857  president  of  the  St.  James's,
chess  club.  In  1867-'9  he  published  "  Transactions
of  the  British  Chess  Association,"  and  while  in  the
United  States  he  contributed  to  the  "  Book  of  the
First  American  Chess  Congress  "  (New  York,  1859).

LOWNDES,  Charles,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Mary
land  in  1798 ;  d.  in  Easton,  Md.,  14  Dec.,  1885.


He  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  midshipman  in
March,  1815,  was  promoted  lieutenant,  13  Jan.,
1825,  commander,  8  Sept.,  1841,  captain,  14  Sept.,
1855,  and  was  placed  on  the  retired  list,  21  Dec.,

1861,  being commissioned commodore, 16  July,

1862.  In  I860-'!  he  was  in  command  of  the  steam-
sloop  "  Hartford,"  and  he  served  as  a  prize  com
missioner  in  1864-'5. He  was  a  brother-in-law  of
Franklin  Buchanan,  and  was  suspected  of  sympa
thizing  with  the  Confederates,  which  may  explain
his  being  placed  on  the  retired  list  at  the  compara
tively  early  age  of  sixty-three.

LOWNDES,  Rawlins,  statesman,  b.  in  the
British  West  Indies  in  1722 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,
24  Aug.,  1800.  His  parents  having  removed  to
Charleston  when  he  was  very  young,  he  was  edu
cated  there,  studied  law,  and  took  a  high  rank  in
his  profession.  In  1766  he  was  appointed  by  the
crown  associate  judge.  Within  the  succeeding
three  months  he  delivered  the  opinion  of  the  ma
jority  of  the  court,  which  was  contrary  to  that  of
the  chief  justice,  in  favor  of  the  legality  of  public
proceedings  without  the  employment  of  stamped
paper,  waiving  all  consideration  of  the  stamp-act
as  a  constitutional  measure,  and  only  arguing  from
the  common  law  with  reference  to  the  necessities
of  the  case.  In  1768  he  moved  a  resolution,  which
was  passed  in  the  South  Carolina  assembly,  for  the
erection  in  Charleston  of  a  statue  of  William  Pitt,
in  acknowledgment  of  that  statesman's  services  to
the  colonies  and  the  British  constitution.  In  1775
he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  council  of  safety
and  of  the  committee  that  was  appointed  under  it.
In  1776  he  was  one  of  a  committee  of  eleven  in
structed  to  draft  a  constitution  for  the  province,
and  subsequently  a  member  of  the  legislative  coun
cil  created  by  the  constitution.  In  1778  he  was
chosen  president  of  the  province,  and  gave  his  offi
cial  assent  to  the  new  constitution.  Savannah  was
soon  captured  by  the  British  forces,  Georgia  suc
cumbed,  and  South  Carolina  was  threatened.  Mr.
Lowndes  made  a  vigorous  resistance,  but,  having
fewer  than  10,000  men  in  the  field,  he  was  unable
to  oppose  overwhelming  forces  by  sea  and  land.
Charleston  shared  the  fate  of  Savannah,  and
Lowndes  was  captured.  He  was  subsequently  a
member  of  the  South  Carolina  assembly  when  the
U.  S.  constitution  was  submitted  to  the  states  for
adoption.  He  strenuously  opposed  it,  objecting  to
the  restrictions  it  placed  on  the  slave-trade,  which
he  declared  to  be  the  great  source  of  the  strength
and  prosperity  of  the  south  ;  to  the  clause  giving
power  to  congress  to  regulate  commerce;  and  to
the  centralization  of  power  in  the  Federal  govern
ment,  protesting  that  it  would  reduce  the  states  to
the  condition  of  mere  corporations  and  give  a  dan
gerous  superiority  to  the  north.  The  earnestness
of  his  antagonism  may  be  inferred  from  the  closing
sentence  of  one  of  his  speeches :  "  I  wish  for  no
other  epitaph  than  this :  '  Here  lies  one  who  op
posed  the  Federal  constitution,  holding  it  to  be
fatal  to  the  liberties  of  his  country.' " — His  son,
Thomas,  merchant,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  in
1765;  d.  there,  8  July,  1843,  received  an  academi
cal  education,  engaged  in  commercial  pursuits,  a-nd
became  one  of  the  chief  merchants  of  his  native
city.  He  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  7th  and  8th
congresses,  and  served  from  7  Dec.,  1801,  till  3
March,  1805.  —  Another  son,  William  Jones,
statesman,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  7  Feb.,  1782;  d.
at  sea,  22  Nov.,  1822,  was  taken  to  England  when
he  was  seven  years  of  age,  and  sent  for  three  years
to  an  English  grammar-school.  On  his  return  to
Charleston  he  was  graduated  at  Charleston  college,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1804,


LOWREY


LOWRIE


45


but  he  soon  abandoned  his  profession  to  attend
to  his  plantation.  While  still  a  young  man  he
travelled  in  Europe  for  mental  improvement.  It
is  related  that  while  in  London  he  happened  to  be
left  alone  at  his  hotel,  which  was  frequented  by
none  but  men  of  rank  and  distinction,  with  Will
iam  Roscoe,  author  of
the  "  Life  of  Leo  X.,"
who  was  much  his  se
nior.  The  two  fell
into  conversation.,  and
the  elder  gentleman,
leaving  the  room  after
^  "yq  a  time,  met  the  Duke

•~*J  ,  : /,.  of  Argyll  in  the  street.

"f^i^ML  "  I  have  been  spending

^  a  most  agreeable  hour,"

he  said  to  the  duke,
"  with  a  young  Ameri
can  gentleman,  who  is
the  tallest,  wisest,  and
best  bred  young  man  I
have  ever  met."  "  It
must  have  been  Mr.
Lowndes,  of  South  Car
olina,"  replied  the  duke.
"  He  is  such  a  man.  I  know  him,  and  I  know  no
other  like  him.  Return  and  make  his  acquaint
ance."  In  1806  Mr.  Lowndes  was  elected  to  the
lower  house  of  the  general  assembly  of  South  Caro
lina,  retaining  his  seat  until  1810,  when  he  was
chosen  a  member  of  congress  as  a  Democrat,  and
re-elected  five  times  successively,  serving  from  4
Nov.,  1811,  till  8  May,  1822,  when  failing  health
compelled  his  resignation.  He  was  an  earnest
supporter  of  the  war  of  1812-'lo,  and  spoke  fre
quently  on  matters  pertaining  to  the  army,  the
navy,  the  finances,  the  national  bank,  the  Missouri
compromise,  the  Spanish  treaty,  and  the  tariff.
His  friends  regarded  him  as  a  suitable  candidate
for  the  presidency,  and  he  was  nominated  by  the
legislature  of  South  Carolina.  His  health  having
been  benefited  by  a  visit  to  England  in  1819,  he
decided  to  return  to  that  country,  and  had  em
barked  with  his  family  from  Philadelphia,  but  did
not  live  to  complete  the  voyage.  As  a  debater  he
occupied  the  front  rank,  in  spite  of  a  weakness  of
voice  caused  by  diseased  lungs,  while  his  memory
was  remarkably  retentive.  It  is  said  that  Henry
Clay  expressed  the  opinion  that  Mr.  Lowndes  was
"  the  wisest  man  he  had  ever  known  in  congress."
The  only  portrait  of  Mr.  Lowndes  was  by  Morse,
and  is  in  the  Corcoran  gallery,  Washington.  See
illustration  above.

LOWREY,  George,  Cherokee  chief,  b.  on  Ten
nessee  river  about  1770 ;  d.  20  Oct.,  1852.  He  was
one  of  the  delegates  that  visited  Washington  in
1791,  was  present  at  the  signing  of  the  treaty  of
1817,  a  member  of  the  convention  that  framed  the
constitution  of  the  Cherokee  nation  in  1827,  and
was  chosen  assistant  principal-chief.  He  filled
various  local  offices,  and  was  regarded  as  an  honest
man  and  a  patriot.  He  wrote  a  tract  on  temper
ance  in  the  Cherokee  tongue,  and  assisted  in  trans
lating  the  Scriptures  into  that  language.

LOWRIE,  Walter,  senator,  b.  in'" Edinburgh,
Scotland,  10  Dec.,  1784 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  14
Dec..  1868.  He  was  brought  to  the  United  States
when  eight  years  of  age  by  his  parents,  who  settled
in  Huntingdon  county,  Pa.,  but  subsequently  re
moved  to  Butler  county.  Young  Lowrie  received
a  good  education,  but  prosecuted  his  studies  amid
many  difficulties.  At  the  age  of  eighteen,  he  began
a  course  of  study  with  a  view  to  entering  the  min
istry,  but  was  led  to  change  his  purpose.  He  was


subsequently  a  member  of  the  legislature  for  sev
eral  years,  and  was  afterward  elected  U.  S.  senator
from  Pennsylvania,  and  served  from  6  Dec.,  1819,
till  3  March,  1825.  On  the  expiration  of  his  term
he  was  elected  secretary  of  the  U.  S.  senate,  an
office  he  held  for  twelve  years.  While  in  the  lat
ter  body  he  made  his  influence  felt  as  a  decided
and  earnest  religious  man.  He  was  a  founder  of
the  Congressional  prayer-meeting  and  the  Con
gressional  temperance  society,  and  for  many  years
served  as  a  member  of  the  executive  committee  of
the  American  colonization  society.  In  1836  he  be
came  corresponding  secretary  of  the  Western  for
eign  missionary  society,  afterward  the  Presbyterian
board  of  foreign  missions.  He  continued  in  the
charge  of  his  various  duties  until  he  was  disabled
by  old  age  in  1868. — His  son,  John  Cameron,
clergyman,  b.  in  Butler,  Pa.,  16  Dec.,  1808,  was
graduated  at  Jefferson  college  in  1829,  prepared
for  the  ministry  at  the  Western  and  Princeton
theological  seminaries,  and  was  licensed  to  preach,
21  June,  1832.  On  23  May,  1833,  he  was  ordained
a  missionary  and  was  sent  out  by  the  Western  for
eign  missionary  society  to  northern  India,  but  his
health  failed,  and  he  returned  in  1836.  In  1838
Dr.  Lowrie  was  made  assistant  secretary  of  the
board  of  foreign  missions,  his  father  being  secre
tary.  In  1845  he  was  called  to  take  charge  of  the
42d  street  Presbyterian  church  in  New  York  city,
a  connection  he  continued  to  maintain  until  1850,
when  he  was  elected  one  of  the  corresponding  sec
retaries  of  the  board  of  foreign  missions.  In  1865
he  was  chosen  moderator  of  the  general  assembly
of  his  church.  He  is  the  author  of  "Travels  in
North  India,  etc."  (Philadelphia,  1841  ;  same  work
issued  in  New  York,  1850,  under  title  of  "  Two
Years  in  Upper  India  ") ;  "  A  Manual  of  the  For
eign  Missions  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  in  the
United  States  of  America"  (New  York.  1855;  3d
ed.,  1868) ;  and  "  Missionary  Papers  "  (1882),  besides
many  reports,  sermons,  and  articles  in  the  "  Prince
ton  Review." — Another  son,  Wralter  Macon,  mis
sionary,  b.  in  Butler,  Pa,,  18  Feb.,  1819;  d.  19
Aug.,  1847,  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  in  1837,
studied  at  Princeton  theological  seminary,  and
was  ordained  in  November,  1841.  On  19  Jan.,
1842.  he  sailed  for  China  to  join  the  Presbyterian
mission  there.  After  laboring  about  two  years  in
Macao,  he  removed  to  Ningpo  in  1845.  Having
occasion  to  attend  a  conference  of  missionaries  at
Shanghai,  he  visited  that  city  during  the  summer
of  1847,  and  on  the  voyage  back  to  Ningpo  his  ves
sel  was  attacked  by  pirates,  and  he  was  thrown  into
the  sea.  He  was  the  author  of  "  The  Land  of
Sinim,  or  an  Exposition  of  Isaiah  xlix,  12"  (Phila
delphia,  1850),  and  "  Sermons  Preached  in  China  "
(New  York,  1851).  See  "  Memoir  of  W.  M.  Lowrie"
(New  York,  1849;  Philadelphia,  1854-'5  and  1880),
edited  by  his  father.  —  Another  son.  Jonathan
Roberts,  lawyer,  b.  in  Butler,  Pa.,  16  March,  1823 ;
d.  in  Warrior's  Mark.  Pa,,  10  Dec.,  1885,  was  gradu
ated  at  Jefferson  college  in  1842,  and  studied  law
with  his  cousin.  Judge  Walter  H.  Lowrie.  He  at
first  settled  in  Hollidaysburg,  Blair  co.,  Pa.,  but
soon  removed  to  Warrior's  Mark,  Huntingdon  co.,
where  he  passed  the  remainder  of  his  life.  There
he  became  the  legal  adviser  of  a  firm  owning  one
of  the  largest  estates  in  central  Pennsylvania.  He
spent  much  time  in  the  study  of  the  natural  sci
ences,  especially  botany,  and  converted  the  grounds
attached  to  his  residence  into  an  arboretum,  made
large  collections  of  the  rarer  plants,  and  discovered
one  new  species.  Primus  Alleghaniensis,  and  several
others  that  had  not  previously  been  found  in  the
state. — Another  son,  Reuben,  missionary,  b.  in


46


LOWRIE


LOY


Butler,  Pa.,  24  Nov.,  1827 ;  d.  in  Shanghai,  China,
26  April,  I860,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
the  city  of  New  York  in  1840.  served  there  one
year  as  tutor,  and  studied  theology  at  Princeton,
being  graduated  from  the  seminary  in  1849.  He
was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  Luzerne,  Pa.,  pres
bytery  in  1851,  at  which  time  he  was  engaged  in
missionary  work  among  the  Choetaw  Indians.  He
was  ordained  as  a  missionary  in  1853,  and  sailed  for
Shanghai,  where  he  applied  himself  to  the  study
of  Chinese,  and  translated  the  "  Shorter  Cate
chism  "  and  a  "  Catechism  on  the  Old  Testament
History"  into  that  language.  He  devoted  much
time  to  the  completion  of  a  "Dictionary  of  the
Four  Books,"  that  had  been  begun  by  his  brother
Walter,  and  had  also  nearly  finished  a  "  Commen
tary  on  the  Gospel  of  Matthew  "  in  Chinese  when
he  died. — Walter's  nephew,  Walter  Hogre,  jurist,
son  of  Mathew  B.,  b.  in  Armstrong  county,  Pa.,  3
March,  1807 ;  d.  in  Meadville,  Pa.,  14  Nov.,  1876,
was  graduated  at  the  Western  university  of  Penn
sylvania  in  1826,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  4  Aug.,  1829.  In  August,  1846,  he  was  ap
pointed  to  the  judgeship  of  the  district  court  of
Alleghany  county,  Pa.,  and  occupied  that  office
until  he  was  elected  to  the  supreme  court  of  Penn
sylvania  in  1851.  He  remained  upon  the  bench
twelve  years,  officiating  during  the  last  six  years
as  chief  justice.  He  then  practised  law  for  a  few
years  in  Pittsburg,  and  subsequently  was  chosen
president  judge  of  a  judicial  district  in  western
Pennsylvania,  where  he  remained  until  his  death.
Judge  Lowrie  was  a  contributor  to  the  Princeton
"Repertory"  and  other  periodicals.  Several  of  his
papers  that  he  read  before  the  American  philosophi
cal  society  have  been  printed,  including  those  on  the
"Origin  of  the  Tides"  and  "Cosmical  Motion."—
Another  nephew,  John  Marshall,  clergyman,  son
of  Mathew  B.,  b.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  16  July,  1817;
d.  in  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.,  26  Sept.,  1867,  was  gradu
ated  at  Lafayette  in  1840.  He  studied  theology  at
Princeton,  was  ordained,  and  in  1843  installed  pas
tor  of  the  churches  of  Blairstown  and  Knowlton,
N.  J.  He  was  subsequently  settled  at  Wcllsville
and  Lancaster,  Ohio,  and  at  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.  In
addition  to  frequent  contributions,  both  poetical
and  prose,  to  the  periodical  press,  Dr.  Lowrie  pub
lished  "Adam  and  his  Times"  and  "Esther  and
her  Times"  (Philadelphia.  1862);  "The  Hebrew
Lawgiver  "  and  "  A  Week  with  Jesus  "  (1866) ;  "  The
Translated  Prophet"  (1868);  and  "The  Prophet
Elijah  "  and  "  Life  of  David  "  (1869).  He  is  also  the
author  of  a  tract  entitled  '•  Christian  in  the  Church  "
(1879).— A  grand-nephew,  Samuel  Thompson,
clergyman,  son  of  Walter  II.,  b.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,
8  Feb.,  1835,  was  educated  at  the  Western  univer
sity  of  Pennsylvania  and  at  Miami  university,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1852,  after  which  he  studied
theology  at  the  Presbyterian  seminary  in  Alleghany
City  in  1852-'6,  and  in  Heidelberg,  Germany,  in
1857.  On  his  return  to  the  United  States  lie  was
called  to  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Alexandria,
Pa.,  where  he  remained  until  1863.  and  subsequent
ly  held  pastorates  in  Philadelphia  in  1865-'9;  in
Abington,  Pa.,  in  1869-'74;  and  in  Ewing,  N.  J.,
in  1879-'85 ;  also  occupying  the  professorship  of
New  Testament  literature  and  exegesis  in  the  West
ern  theological  seminary  in  Alleghanv  City  during
1874-'8.  Prof.  Lowrie  now  (1887)  holds  the  office
of  chaplain  to  the  Presbyterian  hospital  in  Phila
delphia.  He  was  associated  in  the  translation  of
the  volumes  on  "  Isaiah  "  (1879)  and  "Numbers"
(1880),  of  "  Lange's  Commentaries"  (New  York),
wrote  "  Explanation  of  Hebrews  "  (1884),  and  trans
lated  Cremer's  "  Beyond  the  Grave"  (1885).


LOWRY,  Robert,  clergyman,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  12  March,  1826.  He  was  graduated  at
Lewisburg  university,  Pa.,  in  1854,  studied  theol
ogy,  entered  the  Baptist  ministry,  and  has  had
charge  of  churches  in  New  York  city  and  Brook
lyn,  N.  Y.,  West  Chester  and  Lewisburg,  Pa.,  and
Plainfield,  N.  J.  While  at  Lewisburg  he  acted  as
professor  of  literature  in  the  university.  From
1880  till  1886  he  was  president  of  the  New  Jersey
Baptist  Sunday-school  union.  He  took  part  in  the
Robert  Raikes  centennial  in  London  in  1880.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Lewisburg  uni
versity  in  1875.  Dr.  Lowry  is  a  composer  of  music
and  a  hymn-writer.  He  has  edited  "  Chapel  Melo
dies  "  (New  York,  1868):  "Bright  Jewels"  (1869);
"  Pure  Gold  "  and  "  Hymn  Service  "  (1871) ;  "  Royal
Diadem  "  and  "  Temple  Anthems  "  (1873) ;  "  Tidal
Wave"  (1874);  "Brightest  and  Best"  (1875);
'•  Welcome  Tidings  "  and  "  Fountain  of  Song "
(1877);  "Chautauqua  Carols"  (1878);  "Gospel
Hymn- and  Tune-Book  "  (1879) ;  "Good  as  Gold"
(1880);  "Our  Glad  Hosanna"(1882):  "Joyful  Lays"
(1884);  and  "Glad  Refrains"  (1886).  He  has  also
written  many  Christinas  and  Easter  services,  and
single  songs.  More  than  3,000,000  copies  of  his
compositions  have  been  issued.

LOWTHER,  George,  English  buccaneer,  b.  in
England ;  d.  on  Blanco  island,  off  the  coast  of
Venezuela,  in  1722.  He  was  an  officer  on  one  of
the  ships  belonging  to  the  Royal  company  of  Africa,
and  in  1721,  while  stationed  at  the  mouth  of  the
Gambia,  seized  the  vessel  with  the  aid  of  Capt.
Massey,  an  oflicer  of  infantry.  Lowther  harangued
his  followers,  showing  them  that  it  would  be  mad
ness  to  return  to  England,  and  that  it  was  better
to  seek  their  fortunes  on  the  high  seas  than  expose
themselves  to  certain  death.  The  crew  applauded,
and  a  covenant  was  signed  by  them  with  their
leader  and  sworn  to  on  the  Bible.  They  sailed  for
the  Antilles,  where  they  made  several  captures.  A
quarrel  then  took  place  between  Lowther  and  Mas
sey,  who  wished  to  attack  the  French  colonies,  and
the  latter  was  allowed  to  take  charge  of  a  captured
sloop,  with  ten  men.  He  sailed  for  Jamaica,  where
the  governor  treated  him  kindly  and  gave  him
money  to  go  to  London.  He  confessed  his  mis
deeds  to  the  African  company,  and  was  tried  and
executed  in  July,  1723.  Meanwhile  Lowther  seized
many  ships,  but  afterward,  when  he  had  put  into
Porto  Mayo  to  rest  and  refit,  was  attacked  by  the
inhabitants,  and  forced  to  retreat  with  loss.  After
this  Lowther  was  for  some  time  very  successful,
but  afterward  he  attacked  a  vessel  that  beat  him
off  and  pursued  him,  and  he  was  forced  to  run  his
vessel  aground  in  order  to  escape  by  land  with  his
crew.  He  lost  so  many  men  in  this  action  that  he
was  obliged  to  retire  to  a  small  island,  where  he
passed  the  winter  of  1722.  On  the  return  of  spring
he  sailed  for  Newfoundland.  The  pirates  stopped
on  the  way  at  Blanco  island,  off  the  coast  of  Vene
zuela,  whe're  Capt.  Walter  Moore,  who  commanded
a  vessel  belonging  to  the  South  sea  company,  at
tacked  them  and  took  many  prisoners,  but  Lowther
and  some  others  escaped  to  land.  Moore  sailed  to
Cumana,  and  afterward  to  St.  Kitt's,  with  his  pris-
soners,  most  of  whom  were  hanged.  The  Spanish
governor  of  Cumana  sent  a  detachment  of  soldiers
to  Blanco  island,  where  Lowther  was  discovered
dead,  having  probably  committed  suicide.

LOY,  Matthias,  theologian,  b.  in  Cumberland
county,  Pa.,  17  March,  1828.  He  is  the  son  of
Matthias  and  Christina  Loy.  He  received  his  clas
sical  education  at  Harrisburg  academy,  was  grad
uated  at  the  Theological  seminary,  Columbus,  Ohio,
in  1849,  and,  entering  the  Lutheran  ministry  in


LOYAUTE


LOZANO


47


that  year,  became  pastor  at  Delaware,  Ohio.  In
1805  he  resigned  to  become  professor  in  the  Theo
logical  seminary  and  Capital  university,  Colum
bus,  Ohio,  and  in  1881  he  was  elected  president  of
Capital  university.  In  1887  Muhlenberg  college
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  Prof.  Loy  has  been
editor  of  the  '•  Lutheran  Standard  "  since  18(54,  and
in  1881  he  began  the  publication  of  the  '•  Columbus
Theological  Magazine,"  of  which  he  is  still  (1887)
editor-in-chief.  He  has  published  "  The  Doctrine
of  Justification  "  (Columbus,  1862) ;  "  Life  of  Lu
ther,"  translated  (1869) ;  and  '•  Essay  on  the  Minis
terial  Office"  (1870).  He  edited  a  translation  of
"  Luther's  House  Postil  "  (3  vols.,  1874-'84).

LOYALTE,  Anne  Philippe  Dieudonng  de
(lo-yo-tay),  French  soldier,  b.  in  Metz  in  1750;  d.
in  La  Fleche  in  1830.  He  enlisted  in  the  army
when  scarcely  eleven  years  old,  and  served  in  Ger
many  in  1761-'3.  He  was  commissioned  lieuten
ant  in  1764.  and  captain  in  1776,  when  he  came  to
this  country  with  50  cannon  and  10,000  muskets
from  the  French  government.  He  served  during
the  whole  of  the  war  for  independence  as  inspec
tor-general  of  the  artillery  of  the  army  and  forti
fications  of  Virginia,  and  was  rewarded  by  Louis
XVI.  with  the  cross  of  Saint  Louis  in  1784.  He
emigrated  in  1 790,  and  served  in  the  army  of  Con-
de.  In  an  attempt  to  capture  Strasburg,  15  Nov.,

1791,  he  fell  a  prisoner,  but  escaped  to  England  in

1792,  and  in 1796  was  appointed  by  the  British
government  commander  of  the  artillery  in  Santo
Domingo,  and  a  few  months  later  general  inspector
of  the  British  army  in  the  island. He  afforded
valuable  aid  to  the  invaders,  and  but  for  him  it  is
hardly  probable  that  the  English  could  have  main
tained  their  hold  in  the  colony. After  1798  he  re
mained  in  Santo  Domingo  as  a  private  citizen,  re
turning  to  France  in  1802. He  served  during  the
Russian  campaign  in  1812-'13,  and  in  1825  became
director  of  the  military  school  of  La  Fleche. He
published  "  Memoires  pour  servir  a  1'histoire de
1'occupation  Anglaise  de  1'ile  de  Saint  Domingue  "
(2  vols.,  Paris.  1824).

LOYOLA,  Martin  Garcia  Onez  de  (lo-yo'-lah),
Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Biscay  in  1553 ;  d.  in  Chili,
22  Nov.,  1598.  In  1569  he  "came  to  Peru  with  the
viceroy  Francisco  de  Toledo.  By  the  capture  in
the  Andes,  in  1572,  of  the  last  inca  of  Peru,  Tupac
Amaru,  he  obtained  the  hand  of  the  Princess  Clara
Beatriz  de  Coya.  the  only  daughter  and  heiress  of
the  inca  Sayri  Tupac.  In  1579  he  was  appointed
governor  of  Potosi,  and  in  1591  governor-general  of
Chili,  arriving  at  Valparaiso  with  an  army  in  Sep
tember,  1592.  Soon  afterward  he  began  operations
against  the  Araucanians,  which  were  continued  with
varying  fortunes.  In  1594  he  founded  near  Angol
the  city  of  Coya.  in  honor  of  the  princess,  his  wife,
and  established  there  colleges,  churches,  convents,
and  other  public  buildings,  and  two  forts  for  the
protection  of  the  city  and  the  mines  of  Relacoyan.
In  1595-'0  he  fought  several  battles  against  the
Araucanian  toqui  Caillamachu.  In  1597  he  founded
a  colony  in  the  province  of  Cuyo  (now  in  the  Ar
gentine  Republic),  with  the  name  of  San  Luis  de
Loyola.  In  the  same  year  he  had  several  encoun
ters  with  Caillamachu,  who  forced  him  to  retire
from  Angol  to  Imperial.  He  was  returning  to  the
seat  of  war  near  the  Bio-Bio,  accompanied  by  forty
officers  and  invalids  and  three  clergymen,  when
Caillamachu,  who  had  followed  his  steps,  surprised
him  in  the  valley  of  Curalaba  and  attacked  him
during  the  night,' killing  him,  with  all  his  party.

LO/A,  Jose  Manuel  (lo'-thah),  Bolivian  lawyer,
b.  in  Copacabana  in  1799;  d.  in  La  Paz  in  1862.
He  studied  in  the  universities  of  La  Plata  and  La


Paz  of  Ayacucho,  and  was  graduated  as  doctor
in  canonical  and  civil  law  and  literature,  becom
ing  teacher  of  philosophy,  and  successively  vice-
rector  and  rector  of  the  College  of  La  Paz.  In
1845  he  was  vice-chancellor  of  the  University  of
San  Andres  of  La  Paz,  and  in  the  years  1849  and
1861  was  its  chancellor.  He  was  honorary  minis
ter  of  the  supreme  court  of  Lima  in  1837.  attorney-
general  of  the  judicial  court  of  Cochabamba  in
1839,  president  of  the  superior  court  of  La  Paz  in
1848,  a  member  of  the  commission  that  compiled
the  mercantile  code  of  Santa  Cruz,  and  general
auditor  of  the  army  of  the  confederation  in  1834—'5.
He  was  also  secretary  to  the  Bolivian  legation
that  signed  the  treaty  of  Fiquina  in  1831,  and  to
the  Bolivian  commission  that  examined  in  Sucre
the  treaty  with  France,  and  negotiated  the  treaty
of  intervention  in  Peruvian  territory,  under  the
form  of  a  political  convention,  between  Bolivia  and
Peru.  At  different  times  he  has  been  deputy  to
congress  and  senator,  diplomatic  agent  in  Peru  and
Chili,  and  minister  of  public  instruction  and  pub
lic  works.  He  has  published  "  Oda  en  verso  latino
y  Castellano  a  la  Concepcion  immaculada,"  which
was  awarded  a  prize  in  the  University  of  Rome,
"  El  libro  del  pueblo,"  "  La  inviolabilidad  de  la  vida
humana,"  "  Memorias  biograficas  de  Bolivar,"  and
'•  La  mujer  en  sus  relaciones  domesticas  y  sociales,"
which  has  been  translated  into  French  and  Italian.

LO/AXO,  Francisco  Ruiz  (lo-thah'-no),  Peru
vian  astronomer,  b.  in  Lima  in  1607;  d.  there  in
1677.  He  studied  mathematics  and  astronomy  with
the  Jesuits  in  Lima  and  Mexico,  and  returning  to
Lima  in  1655  with  the  viceroy,  Count  Alba  de
Aliste,  was  appointed  by  him  captain  of  Spanish
infantry,  and  afterward  commander  of  the  South
sea.  A'S  the  principal  cosmographer  of  that  coast,
Lozano  was  the  first  director  of  the  nautical  school
that  was  founded  in  Lima,  in  1657,  at  the  Hospital
of  Espiritu  Santo.  Soon  after  establishing  his
school  he  gave  greater  security  to  navigation  in
the  Pacific  by  publishing  sailing  directions.  In
1660  he  observed  ihe  comet  of  that  year,  and  this
astronomical  work  was  the  first  that  was  done  in
South  America,  being  published  in  the  same  year,
before  it  was  observed  in  Europe  by  Hebel.  Lo
zano  served  for  several  years  as  director  of  the
Hospital  of  Espiritu  Santo,  improving  its  building
and  the  condition  of  its  treasury.

LOZANO,  Pedro,  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in
Spain  toward  the  end  of  the  17th  century;  d.,
probably,  in  South  America.  He  entered  the  Jesuit
order  at  an  early  age,  and  as  soon  as  his  studies
were  finished  was  sent  as  a  missionary  to  South
America.  Immediately  after  his  arrival  he  was
appointed  professor  in  the  College  of  Cordova  in
Tucuman.  His  works  are  "Descripcion  corogra-
fica  de  terreno,  rios,  arboles  y  animales  de  las
dilatadisimas  provincias  del  Gran  Chaco  Gualamba,
y  de  los  ritos  y  costumbres  de  las  innumerables
naciones  barbaras  e  infieles  que  le  habitan,  con  un
mapa  del  Chaco,"  copies  of  which,  accompanied  by
the  map,  which  was  engraved  by  J.  Petroschi  in
1733,  are  very  rare  (Cordova,  1733) ;  "  Historia  de
la  compania  de  Jesus  en  la  provincia  del  Paraguay,"'
whose  value  is  impaired  by  the  diffuseness  of  the
style  and  the  author's  credulity,  and  which  was
bitterly  attacked  on  its  appearance  on  account  of
its  exposures  of  the  cruelties  of  the  conquerors
toward  the  natives  (2  vols.,  Madrid,  1753);  and
••  Diario  de  un  viaje  a  la  costa  de  la  mar  Magal-
lanica  en  1745,"  which  is  translated  by  Charlevoix
in  his  "  Histoire  du  Paraguay,"  is  also  found  in  the
"  Histoire  generale  des  voyages  "  of  the  Abbe  Pre-
vost,  and  forms  part  of  the  first  volume  of  the


48


LOZIER


LUCAS


fffice~*~*~

'


"  Coleccion  de  obras  y  documentos  "  published  by
De  Angelis  (Buenos  Ayres,  1836).  The  same  vol
ume  contains  a  letter  of  Lozano  to  Father  Juan  de
Alzola  on  the  mysterious  city  of  the  Cassars.  writ
ten  in  1746,  which  would  seem  to  justify  Ihe
charge  of  credulity  that  was  made  against  the
author  by  Spanish  writers.  Lozano  also  wrote  a
narrative'  that  gives  a  very  vivid  and  interesting
account  of  the  death  of  the  Jesuit  Castanares,  who
was  assassinated  by  the  Mataguayos  Indians  on
the  banks  of  the  Pilcomayo.  It  is  dated  1  May.
1747,  and  is  published  in  the  "  Lettres  edifiantes."
LO/IER,  Clemence  Sophia,  physician,  b.  in
Plainfield,  N.  J..  11  Dec.,  1812;  d.  in  New  York
city,  26  April,  1888.  She  was  the  youngest  daugh
ter  of  David  Harned,  and  in  1829  married  Abraham
W.  Lozier,  of  New  York,  but  soon  afterward,  her
husband's  health  failing,  she  opened  a  select  school
and  taught  for  eleven  years.  During  this  time  she

was  associated  with
Mrs.  Margaret  Pry-
or  in  visiting  the
poor  and  aban
doned,  under  the
auspices  of  the  Mo
ral  reform  society.
After  her  husband's
death  she  deter
mined  to  study
medicine,  attended
her  first  lectures  at
Rochester  eclectic
medical  college  in
1849,  and  was  grad
uated  at  the  Syra
cuse  medical  college
in  1853.  Dr.  Lozier
at  once  began  prac
tice  as  a  homoeopathist  in  New  York,  where  she
continued  to  reside,  and  in  the  surgery  required
by  the  diseases  of  her  own  sex  displayed  peculiar
skill,  performing  many  capital  operations  in  the
removal  of  tumors.  In  1860  she  began  a  course  of
lectures  on  medical  subjects  in  her  own  parlors,
which  in  1863  resulted  in  the  founding  of  the  New
York  medical  college  and  hospital  for  women,
where  she  was  clinical  professor  of  diseases  of
women  and  children,  and  also  dean  of  the  faculty,
for  more  than  twenty  years.  This  institution  was
the  first  distinctively  woman's  medical  college  to
be  established  in  New  York  state.  Dr.  Lozier
took  an  active  interest  in  all  that  pertains  to  the
elevation  of  her  sex,  for  thirteen  years  was  presi
dent  of  the  New  York  city  woman  suffrage  so
ciety,  and  for  four  years  of  the  National  woman
suffrage  society.  She  also  held  office  in  other
philanthropic  and  reform  associations,  and  was  an
occasional  contributor  to  medical  journals. — Her
daughter-in-law,  Charlotte  Irene,  physician,  b.
in  Milburn,  N.  J.,  15  March,  1844;  d.  in  New
York  city,  3  Jan.,  1870,  was  the  daughter  of  Jacob
S.  Denman,  and  was  graduated  in  1867  at  the
New  York  medical  college  and  hospital  for  women.
In  1868  she  was  called  to  fill  the  chair  of  physiol
ogy  and  hygiene  in  that  institution,  which  relation
she  held  until  her  death.  Dr.  Lozier  took  an  ac
tive  part  in  the  struggle  to  secure  for  female  stu
dents  the  privilege  of  attending  the  clinics  of
Bellevue  hospital,  leading  them  herself  to  the
wards  and  operating-rooms.  She  was  an  able  lec
turer,  an  original  investigator  in  anatomy  and
physiology,  a  skilful  practitioner,  and  an  energetic
worker  in  all  movements  for  the  elevation  of  her
sex.  In  1866  she  married  Dr.  Abraham  W.  Lozier,
son  of  Dr.  Clemence  S.  Lozier.


LTJACES,  Joaquin  Lorenzo  (loo-ah'-thes),
Cuban  author,  b.  in  Havana,  21  July,  1826;  d.
there.  17  Nov.,  1867.  After  finishing  his  education
in  Havana  he  devoted  his  time  exclusively  to
literary  pursuits,  and  published  a  volume  of
poems  (Havana.  1857)  which  won  for  him  a  wide
recognition  and  placed  him  at  once  among  the  best
lyrical  poets  in  the  Spanish  language.  In  1865
his  historical  drama,  "  El  mendigo  rojo,"  was  per
formed  in  Havana  with  great  success.  In  the
following  year  he  published  his  classical  tragedy
"  Aristodemo,"  which  was  favorably  received.
Among  the  other  productions  of  Luaces  are  his
comedies  "  Los  dos  amigos,"  "  El  becerro  de  oro,"
and  "  El  fantasmon  de  Caravaca,"  and  his  drama
"Arturo  de  Osberg."

LUAR1),  Richard  George  Ainherst,  British
soldier,  b.  in  England  in  1829.  He  was  the  eldest
son  of  Lieut.-Col.  John  Luard,  a  peninsular  and
Waterloo  officer ;  and  was  educated  at  the  Royal
military  college,  Sandhurst,  from  which  he  ob
tained  his  commission  in  1845,  without  purchase.
He  served  in  India,  the  Crimea,  and  China,  was
stationed  at  Halifax,  N.  S..  1873-'5,  as  assistant
military  secretary  to  Sir  William  0.  G.  Haly,  and
became  major-general,  1  Oct.,  1877.  He  was  ap
pointed  to  the  command  of  the  militia  of  Canada,
with  the  rank  of  major-general,  on  5  Aug.,  1880.
His  rigorous  application  of  the  discipline  and  regu
lations  of  the  regular  army  rendered  him  unpopu
lar  with  some  of  the  officers  and  men  of  that  service.

LUBBOCK,  Francis  Richard,  governor  of
Texas,  b.  in  Beaufort,  S.  C.,  16  Oct..  1815.  He
was  educated  chiefly  in  Beaufort  and  Charleston,
S.  C.,  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits,  in  1834  re
moved  to  New  Orleans,  and  in  1836  to  Texas.  lie
settled  in  1837  in  Houston,  Tex.,  building  the
third  house  in  that  place,  was  clerk  of  the  Texas
house,  of  representatives  in  1838,  then  appointed
comptroller  by  President  Houston,  and  while  serv
ing  in  this  office  was  made  adjutant  of  the  force
for  the  protection  of  the  frontier.  Pie  returned  to
Houston  in  1839,  was  comptroller  again  in  1841,
and  clerk  of  Harris  county  in  1843-'56.  He  was
chosen  lieutenant-governor  in  1857,  and  governor
in  1861,  but  declined  a  renomination  in  1863,  and
at  the  expiration  of  his  term  entered  the  Confeder
ate  army  as  lieutenant-colonel.  He  was  appointed
on  the  staff  of  Jefferson  Davis  in  1864,  with  the
rank  of  colonel,  was  with  Mr.  Davis  when  he  was
captured,  and  was  confined  in  Fort  Delaware  till
December,  1865.  He  resumed  business  in  Houston
in  1866,  and  removed  in  1867  to  Galveston,  where
he  served  three  terms  as  city  treasurer.  Mr.  Lub-
bock  was  chosen  state  treasurer  of  Texas  in  1878.
and  was  re-elected  in  1882, 1884,  and  1886.  In  this
office  he  has  broken  up  the  custom  of  speculating
with  comptroller's  warrants,  and  has  thus  im
proved  the  financial  standing  of  the  state.

LUCAS,  Daniel  Bediiiger,  lawyer,  b.  in
Charlestown,  Va.  (now  W.  Va,),  16  March,  1830.
His  father,  William,  was  a  member  of  congress
from  Virginia  in  1839-'41  and  1843-'5,  and  his
uncle,  Edward,  in  1833-'7.  When  the  son  was  an
infant  his  negro  nurse  let  him  fall  from  her  arms,
causing  a  permanent  spinal  injury.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1855,  and  in
law  at  Washington  college,  Va.,  in  1858,  and  began
to  practise  in  Charlestown,  Va.,  but  in  1860  re
moved  to  Richmond.  He  served  on  the  staff  of
Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise  in  the  Kanawha  valley  in  the
civil  war,  and  in  1867  resumed  the  practice  of  his
profession  in  Charlestown,  W.  Va.,  where  he  has
since  resided.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the
Democratic  ticket  in  1872,  1876,  and  1884,  chosen


LUCAS


LITCE


49


to  the  legislature  in  1884-'6,  and  in  1887  was  ap
pointed  to  the  U.  S.  senate  by  the  governor.  The
legislature  subsequently  elected  Charles  J.  Faulk
ner,  and  the  senate  gave  the  seat,  to  the  latter.  Mr.
Lucas  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the

University  of  West
Virginia  in  1838.
He  has  obtained  a
reputation  as  a  pub
lic  speaker.  He  has
published  "  Memoir
of  John  Yates  Bell "
(Montreal,  1865) ;
"  The  Wreath  of  Eg
lantine  and  Other
Poems,"  including
several  by  his  sister
(Baltimore,  1869);
"  The  Maid  of  Nor-
-^  thumberland "  (New

7) /^T  ^ York< 1879); and

^  \S  &<  ^L.*.  ct^f.  u  Ballads  and  Madri
gals"  (1884).  His
poem  "  The  Land  where  we  were  Dreaming,"  writ
ten  in  1865,  attracted  much  attention  at  the  south.

LUCAS,  George  Washington,  musician,  b.  in
Glastonbury,  Conn.,  12  April,  1800 ;  d.  in  Hamp
shire  county,  Mass..  about  1880.  He  studied
music  for  two  years  under  Thomas  Hastings  in
Albany,  X.  Y.,  and  lectured  and  taught  on  this
subject  throughout  the  United  States  and  Canada.
He  delivered  more  than  1,000  public  lectures,
taught  more  than  50,000  people  to  sing,  and  ar
ranged  and  conducted  the  music  on  more  than
1,000  public  occasions.  He  was  president  of  the
National  musical  convention  in  Boston  in  1843.
He  published  much  music,  including  an  "  Ordina
tion  Anthem."

LUCAS,  John  Baptiste  Charles,  jurist,  b.
in  Normandy,  France,  in  1762;  d.  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  17  Aug.,  1842.  He  studied  law  in  the  Univer
sity  of  Caen,  where  he  was  graduated  as  D.  C.  L.
in  1782,  and  after  practising  his  profession  in  his
native  land  came  to  the  United  States  in  1784
and  settled  on  a  farm  near  Pittsburg,  Pa.  He
served  in  the  Pennsylvania  legislature  in  1792-'8,
was  made  a  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in
1794,  and  in  1802  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Democrat.  He  was  re-elected  in  1804,  but  resigned
before  taking  his  seat,  and  removed  to  St.  Louis,
as  he  had  been  appointed  judge  of  the  U.  S.  court
for  the  northern  district  of  Louisiana.  He  was
also  a  member  of  the  commission  for  the  adjust
ment  of  land-titles  in  that  territory  from  1805  till
f he  dissolution  of  the  commission  in  1812.  After
his  retirement  from  the  bench,  Judge  Lucas  resid
ed  on  a  farm  near  St.  Louis  till  his  death.

LUCAS,  Robert,  statesman,  b.  in  Shepherds-
town,  Va.,  1  April,  1781 ;  d.  in  Iowa  City,  Iowa,
7  Feb.,  1853.  His  father  was  a  descendant  of
William  Penn,  and  a  captain  in  the  Revolutionary
army.  The  son  removed  to  Ohio  in  1800,  and  rose
to  the  rank  of  major-general  of  militia.  He  was
commissioned  captain  in  the  19th  U.  S.  infantry,
14  March,  1812,  and  lieutenant-colonel,  20  Feb.,
1813,  but  resigned  on  31  June,  and  served  as  briga
dier-general  of  Ohio  militia  in  defence  of  the
frontier  from  25  July  till  19  Sept.  of  that  year
He  was  a  member  of  the  Ohio  legislature  in  1814.
and  in  1832  presided  over  the  Democratic  national
convention  that  nominated  Andrew  Jackson  for  a
second  term.  Gen.  Lucas  was  governor  of  Ohio  in
1832-'6,  and  in  1838-'41  was  first  territorial  gov
ernor  of  Iowa.  He  was  an  active  Freemason  and
a  man  of  strong  impulses,  but  of  strict  integrity.
VOL.  iv. — 1


LUCAS,  Thomas  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Lawrence-
burg,  Ind..  9  Sept..  1826.  His  father,  Frederick,  a
native  of  Rennes,  France,  and  a  soldier  of  Napo
leon's  later  campaigns,  came  to  this  country  after
the  battle  of  Waterloo  and  settled  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  where  he  learned  the  trade  of  a  watchmaker.
He  afterward  removed  successively  to  Marietta
and  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  and  Lawrenceburg,  Ind.,
where  he  married  and  passed  the  rest  of  his  life.
The  son  learned  his  father's  trade,  but  enlisted  for
the  Mexican  war  as  a  drummer-boy  in  the  4th  In
diana  volunteers,  and  rose  to  be  lieutenant  and  ad
jutant.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  resumed  his
former  occupation,  which  he  continued  till  1861.
He  then  raised  a  company,  was  chosen  its  captain,
and  joined  the  16th  Indiana  regiment,  of  which  he
was  commissioned  lieutenant-colonel.  After  the
battle  of  Ball's  Bluff  he  covered  the  retreat  of  the
National  forces,  crossing  the  Potomac  in  the  last
boat,  and  was  promoted  colonel.  He  opposed
Kirby  Smith's  advance  at  Richmond,  Ky.,  and
then  took  part  in  all  the  operations  around  Vicks-
burg,  where  he  was  wounded  three  times.  After
ward  he  was  ordered  to  New  Orleans  and  placed
at  the  head  of  a  cavalry  brigade,  with  which  he  did
good  service  in  the  Red  river  expedition,  first  in
the  advance,  next  in  covering  the  retreat  of  Banks's
army  to  Alexandria,  and  then  in  the  advance  again
to  the  Mississippi.  He  was  promoted  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  10  Nov.,  1864,  and  com
manded  a  division  of  cavalry  in  the  operations
around  Mobile,  investing  Fort  Blakely,  defeating
the  Confederates  at  Claiborne,  and  leading  raids
into  western  Florida,  southern  Georgia,  and  Ala
bama.  He  was  brevetted  major-general  of  volun
teers  on  26  March,  1865,  and  after  his  command
was  mustered  out  he  was  ordered  to  New  Orleans,
by  request  of  Gen.  Sheridan,  to  await  the  issue  of
the  threatened  complications  with  the  French  in
Mexico.  He  left  the  service  on  15  Jan.,  1866,  and
returned  to  his  home.  He  was  employed  in  the
U.  S.  revenue  service  in  187o-'81,  and"  from  the
latter  year  till  31  Dec.,  1885,  was  postmaster  of  his
native  town.  In  1886  he  was  an  unsuccessful  Re
publican  candidate  for  congress.

LUCE,  Stephen  Bleecker,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Albany,  N.  Y.,  25  March,  1827.  He  entered  the
navy  as  midshipman  in  1847,  and  was  commis
sioned  lieutenant  in  1855,  lieutenant-commander  in
1862,  commander  in  1866,  captain  in  1872,  com
modore  in  1881,  and  rear-admiral  in  1885.  In
1862  he  served  on  the  frigate  "  Wabash,"  which
was  attached  to  the  blockading  squadron  on  the
coast  of  South  Carolina,  participating  in  the  bat
tles  of  Hatteras  Inlet  and  Port  Royal;  and  he  com
manded  a  howitzer  launch  during  a  reconnoissance
in  force  and  engagement  with  the  Confederates  at
Port  Royal  ferry.  S.  C.  He  commanded  the  moni
tor  "  Nantucket,"  of  the  North  Atlantic  squad
ron,  in  October,  1863,  engaged  Fort  Moultrie  and
Fort  Sumter  several  times,  and  from  1  Sept.,

1864,  till  9  June,  1865,  commanded  the  "Pontiac,"
of the North  Atlantic squadron. In January.

1865,  he  reported  to  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman  at
Savannah,  Ga.,  for  duty  in  connection with the
army. With  difficulty  he  got  the  "Pontiac"  up
Savannah  river  as  far  as  Sisters'  ferry,  about  forty
miles  from  the  city,  and  protected  the  pontoon
bridge  from  the  Confederate  gun- boats  while  Gen.
Henry  W.  Sloe-urn's  command  passed  into  South
Carolina. He  was  on  the  steam-sloop  "  Juniata,"  of
the  European  squadron,  in  1869-'70,  was  president
of  the  U.  S.  naval  war  college  in 1884-'6,  and
since  June,  1886.  has  been in  command  of  the
North  Atlantic  station. In  July.  1887,  he  issued  a


50


LUCIO


LUDLOW


circular  to  American  fishermen  in  regard  to  the
restrictions  that  were  imposed  upon  foreign  fishing-
vessels  by  Canadian  laws.  Admiral  Luce  was  a
founder  of  the  U.  S.  naval  war  college,  and  was
instrumental  in  the  establishment  of  the  U.  S.
naval  training  system.  He  is  now  (1887)  at  the
head  of  the  list  of  rear-admirals  on  the  active  list.
He  has  published  "  Seamanship "  (New  York,
1863),  and  edited  "  Naval  Songs  "  (1883).

LUCIO,  Rafael  (loo'-the-o),  Mexican  physician,
b.  in  Jalapa,  2  Sept.,  1819 :  d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico.
30  May,  1886.  He  received  his  primary  education
in  his  native  city,  and  continued  his  studies  at  San
Luis  Potosi,  but  before  they  were  completed  his
father  died,  and  his  mother  became  the  wife  of  Dr.
Manuel  Salas,  under  whom  Lucio  began  the  study
of  medicine.  He  removed  to  the  city  of  Mexico  in
1839,  was  graduated  at  the  School  of  medical  sci
ence  in  1842,  and  in  1855  and  1868  visited  Europe.
In  1843  the  government  appointed  him  director
of  the  Hospital  de  San  Lazaro,  where  he  remained
eighteen  years,  making  a  study  of  leprosy,  and  pub
lished,  with  Dr.  Ignacio  Alvarado,  "La  Elefan-
ciasis  de  los  Griegos,  6  el  Mai  de  San  Lazaro "
(Mexico,  1851).  In  1845  he  entered  the  School  of
medicine  as  assistant  professor,  and  in  1847  he  was
appointed  professor  of  medical  jurisprudence  and
the  practice  of  surgery.  In  1851  he  obtained  the
chair  of  practice  of  medicine,  which  he  filled  till  a
short  time  before  his  death.  He  was  also  appointed
director  of  the  school,  but  declined.  In  1864  Dr.
Lucio  revived  the  Academia  de  medicina,  and  in
1869,  1880,  and  1881  he  was  its  president.

LUCKENBACH,  Abraham,  missionary,  b.  in
Lehigh  county.  Pa.,  5  May,  1777;  d.  in  Bethlehem,
Pa.,  8  March,  1854.  He  was  educated  at  Nazareth
Hall,  Pa.,  taught  there  in  1797,  and  in  1800  became
a  missionary  of  the  Moravian  church  among  the
Delaware  Indians,  laboring  till  1843,  when  he  re
tired  to  Bethlehem.  He  edited  the  second  edition
of  David  Zeisberger's  "Delaware  Hymn-Book"
(1847),  and  published  in  the  Delaware  huiguage
"  Select  Narratives  from  the  Old  Testament."

LUC  KEY,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rensse-
laerville,  Albany  co.,  N.  Y.,  4  April,  1791 ;  d.  in
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  11  Oct.,  1869.  He  entered  the
ministry  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1811
at  Ottawa,  Canada,  and  was  pastor  of  churches  in
western  New  York  from  1812  till  1821.  He  was
principal  of  the  Genesee  Wesleyan  seminary  in
1822-'6,  and  for  the  next  ten  years  officiated  suc
cessively  in  churches  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  and
Brooklyn  and  Albany,  N.  Y.,  and  as  presiding  elder
of  the  New  Haven  district.  He  became  editor  of
the  "  Christian  Advocate  and  Journal "  in  1836,
was  also  senior  editor  of  the  Methodist  publishing
society,  and,  returning  to  the  ministry  after  four
years,  was  from  1842  till  his  death  a  presiding  elder
in  the  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  circuit,  and  for  nine  years
chaplain  of  the  Monroe  county  penitentiary.
Union  gave  him  the  degrees  of  M.'A.  and  D.  D.  in
1821,  and  in  1847  he  was  appointed  a  regent  of  the
University  of  New  York.  He  published  a  "  Trea
tise  on  the  Sacrament  "  (New  "\  ork,  1859).

LUDDEN,  Patrick  Anthony,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
near  Castlebar,  County  Mayo,  'Ireland,  in  1838.
After  studying  for  some  time  in  St.  Jarlath's  col
lege,  Tuam,  he  came  to  the  United  States  at  the
age  of  eighteen,  afterward  entered  the  Grand  Semi-
naire,  Montreal,  Canada,  and  was  ordained  priest  by
Bishop  Bourget  in  1864.  His  first  mission  was  as
assistant  at  the  Immaculate  Conception  cathedral,
Albany,  and  he  was  then  Bishop  McCloskey's  sec
retary  and  chancellor,  and  afterward  pastor  of
Malone,  Franklin  co.,  N.  Y.  In  1877  he  was  ap


pointed  rector  of  the  Albany  cathedral  and  vicar-
general  of  the  diocese,  and  in  May,  1880,  he  be
came  pastor  of  St.  Peter's  church,  Troy.  He  was
particularly  interested  in  education,  and  built  large
schools  in  his  parish.  He  was  consecrated  first
bishop  of  Syracuse,  1  May.  1887,  in  the  city  of
Syracuse,  where  he  held  his  first  diocesan  synod  on
4  Oct.  following.  Bishop  Ludden  was  present  at
the  oecumenical  council  at  Rome  in  1809,  and  was
theologian  to  the  bishop  of  Albany  at  the  last
plenary  council  of  Baltimore.  He  is  an  eloquent
preacher,  very  austere  in  his  habits,  but  popular
among  his  clergy.  He  has  published  a  work  on
"  Church  Property  "  (Albany.  1882).

LUDEWItr,  Hermann  Ernst,  author,  b.  in
Dresden,  Saxony,  14  Oct..  1809;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y..  12  Dec./  1856.  He  was  educated  at  the
universities  of  Leipsic  and  Gottingcn.  studied  law,
and  engaged  in  its  practice,  and  during  his  leisure
devoted  much  time  to  bibliog7-aphical  studies  and
to  books  of  travels.  He  removed  to  the  United
States  in  1844,  and,  after  spending  nearly  two  years
in  travel,  became  naturalized  and  settled  in  New
York  city  in  the  practice  of  his  profession.  Pre
vious  to  his  removal  to  the  United  States  he  had
published  two  valuable  catalogues  of  European
libraries,  "  Le  Livret  des  Ana "  (Dresden,  1837)
and  "  Zur  Bibliothekekonomie  "  (1840),  and  in  1846
he  contributed  to  the  Leipsic  "  Serapeum  "  articles
on  American  libraries  and  bibliography  that  were
considered  as  pioneer  sketches  on  these  topics.  In
1854  he  communicated  to  the  Societe  de  geographic
of  Paris  an  article  entitled  "  De  Fhistoire  des  abo-
rigenes  du  Mexique,"  which  was  printed  in  the  9th
volume  of  its  bulletins.  His  other  works  include
"Literature  of  American  Local  History  "  (printed
privately.  New  York,  1846);  "Supplement  relating
to  Local  History  of  New  York  "  (1848):  and  "Lit
erature  of  American  Aboriginal  Linguistics."  edited
by  Nicolaus  Triibner,  with  additions  by  William
W.  Turner  (London,  1858),  which  is  the  first  vol
ume  of  Triibner's  "  Bibliotheca-Glottica.''

LUDLOW,  Fitz  Hiigrh,  author,  b.  in  New  York
city,  11  Sept.,  1836;  d.  in  Geneva,  Switzerland,  12
Sept.,  1870.  His  father,  Rev.  Henry  G.  Ludlow,
was  a  minister  of  the  Presbyterian  church  for
forty  -  five  years.
The  son  was  grad
uated  at  Union  in
1856.  His  literary
life  began  the  same
year,  when  he  pub
lished  the  "  Apoca
lypse  of  Hasheesh"
in  "  Putnam's
Monthly."  This
was  soon  followed
by  the  "  Hasheesh
Eater"  (New  York,
1857).  From  that
time  until  1861  his
publications  were
chiefly  stories  con
tributed  to  maga
zines.  While  in
college  he  wrote
some  of  the  best
American  student
songs.  He  was  an  editor  of  "  Vanity  Fair "  in
1858-'60,  at  the  same  time  studied  law  under  Will
iam  Curtis  Noyes,  and  supported  himself  by  writ
ing.  He  was  "admitted  to  the  bar  in  1859,  but
abandoned  it  for  a  purely  literary  career,  was  con
nected  in  1860-'61  with  'the  "  New  York  World  "
and  the  "  Commercial  Advertiser,"  and  for  the  lat-


LUDLOW


LUDLOW


51


ter  wrote  a  series  of  letters  from  Florida,  entitled
"  Due  South,"  that  greatly  added  to  his  reputation.
He  was  for  a  time  dramatic,  art,  and  musical  critic
of  the  "  Evening  Post,"  and  long  a  contributor  to
it.  occupied  a  similar  place  on  the  "  Home  Jour
nal"  in  1862,  and  in  1863  made  a  journey  across
the  plains  to  California  and  Oregon,  the  results  of
which  appeared  in  a  succession  of  articles,  one
of  which.  "•  Through  Tickets  to  San  Francisco,  A
Prophecy,"  projected  a  course  for  the  Pacific  rail
road  that  was  identical  in  its  principal  particulars
with  that  which  was  finally  adopted.  Upon  the
establishment  of  the  "  Northern  Lights  "  magazine
in  Boston,  he  became  a  contributor,  and  wrote  for
it  his  two  most  popular  stories,  "  Little  Briggs
and  I "  and  "  Fleeing  to  Tarshish."  He  dramatized
"  Cinderella."  and  trained  the  amateur  company  of
children  that  acted  it,  for  the  benefit  of  the  New
York  sanitary  fair  in  1864.  His  subsequent  writ
ings  included  a  wide  range  of  subjects,  and  in  1867
he  published  a  magazine  article  called  "  What  shall
they  do  to  be  Saved  I "  which  was  a  scientific  state
ment  of  the  nature  of  the  opium-habit,  a  warning
of  its  dangers,  and  suggestions  for  its  treatment,
which  he  enlarged  and  published  in  book-form,
"  The  Opium-Habit  "  (New  York,  1868).  He  went
to  Europe  in  June.  1870,  for  relief  from  pulmonary
disease,  but  died  in  a  few  months.  His  numerous
poems  have  not  been  collected.  His  "Hymn  of
Forbearance"  was  widely  copied.  His  "Bessie's
School  "  is  included  in  "  Whittier's  Poems  of  Child
Life,"  and  that  on  Thomas  Starr  King  in  the  me
morial  volume  to  that  clergyman.  His  other
works  include  "  Little  Brother,  and  Other  Genre
Pictures  "  (Boston,  1867),  and  "  The  Heart  of  the
Continent  "  (New  York  and  London,  1870).

LUDLOW,  George  Duncan,  jurist,  b.  on  Long
Island.  N.  Y..  in  1734;  d.  in  Fredericton,  N.  B.,  13
Nov.,  1808.  He  was  an  apothecary  in  early  life,
but  studied  law,  and,  not  withstanding  a  serious  im
pediment  of  speech,  became  eminent  as  an  advo
cate.  Previous  to  the  Revolution  he  exercised
much  influence  in  the  colony,  and  was  councillor
and  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  in  1769  ;  and  to
compensate  him  for  the  loss  of  the  office  of  chief
justice,  to  which  he  was  entitled  by  the  law  of
succession,  public  opinion  induced  Lieut.-Gov.  An
drew  Elliott  in  1778  to  appoint  him  master  of  the
rolls  and  superintendent  of  police  on  Long  Island,
'•  with  powers  and  principles  of  equity  to  hear  and
to  determine  controversies  until  civil  government
can  be  declared."  Ludlow  was  a  strong  loyalist,
and  the  previous  year  his  house  at  Hempstead  had
been  plundered,  and  it  is  said  that  he  escaped  im
prisonment  by  climbing  on  the  roof  through  the
scuttle  and  hiding  behind  the  chimney.  The
Whigs  had  organized  a  government  as  early  as
1777.  but  Ludlow  was  sustained  in  office  by  the
loyalists  until  the  peace,  when  he  was  comp'elled
to  leave  the  country,  and  his  seat  at  Hyde  Park
and  his  other  property  were  confiscated."  After  a
visit  to  England  he  settled  in  New  Brunswick,
where  he  was  a  member  of  the  first  colonial  coun
cil,  administered  the  government  as  senior  coun
cillor,  and  in  1784  became  the  first  chief  justice
of  the  supreme  court.— His  brother.  Gabriel  G.,
b.  in  New  York  city.  16  April,  1736;  d.  in  Carle-
ton,  N.  B.,  12  Feb.,  1808,  entered  the  military  ser
vice  of  the  crown  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revo
lution,  and  was  colonel  and  commandant  of  De
Lancey's  3d  battalion  in  1782.  At  the  close  of  the
war  his  estate  of  140  acres  in  Hyde  Park  was  con
fiscated,  and  he  was  banished.  'After  a  short  resi
dence  in  England,  he  removed  to  New  Brunswick
with  his  brother,  Judge  Ludlow,  and  drew  three


lots  at  Carleton.  He  was  a  member  of  the  first
council  of  St.  John,  its  first  mayor,  and  on  the  or
ganization  of  the  court  of  vice-admiralty  in  1787,
although  not  a  member  of  the  bar.  was  appointed
judge.  In  1803.  on  the  embarkation  of  Gov.
Thomas  Carleton  for  England,  Ludlow.  being  sen
ior  councillor,  became  president  and  commander-
in-chief.  His  residence  in  Carleton  is  still  standing,
and  is  known  as  the  '•  old  government  house." — His
great-nephew.  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Acquacka-
nonck.  N.  J..  13  Dec.,  1793  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,
8  Sept.,  1857,  was  the  grandson  of  Richard,  who
adhered  to  the  patriot  cause  during  the  Revolution.
John  was  graduated  at  Union  college  in  1814.  at
New  Brunswick  theological  seminary  in  1817,  and
on  his  ordination  became  pastor  of  'the  Reformed
Dutch  church  there.  He  was  professor  of  biblical
literature  and  ecclesiastical  history  in  New  Bruns
wick  seminary  in  1819-r23,  and  at  the  latter  date
accepted  the  charge  of  the  1st  Reformed  Dutch
church  of  Albany,  N.  Y.  He  was  provost  of  the
E'niversity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1834,  delivered  sev
eral  courses  of  lectures  before  the  Smithsonian
institution  and  other  scientific  and  literary  bodies,
and  in  1854  returned  to  New  Brunswick  theologi
cal  seminary,  as  professor  of  ecclesiastical  history
and  church  government.  Union  college  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1827,  and  subsequently
that  of  LL.  D. — John's  son,  James  Reily,  jurist,
b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  3  May,  1825 ;  d.  in  Philadel
phia.  Pa.,  20  Sept.,  1886,  was  graduated  in  1843  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  which  in  1870
conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  In  1846
he  was  admitted  to  the  Philadelphia  bar,  and  in
1857  he  was  chosen  judge  of  the  court  of  common
pleas  in  that  city.  He  filled  this  office  until  1875,
when,  under  the  new  constitution  of  the  state,  he
was  transferred  to  the  president  judgeship  of  the
court  of  common  pleas,  which  place  he  held  ut  the
time  of  his  death.  Although  he  was  a  Democrat
of  well-known  partisan  conviction,  on  two  occa
sions  he  was  elected  to  the  office  by  the  votes  of
all  parties.  He  was  a  member  of  the  American
philosophical  society  and  of  the  Historical  society
of  Pennsylvania,  and  for  a  long  period  of  time  one
of  the  trustees  of  Jefferson  medical  college.  With
John  M.  Collins  he  edited  an  American  edition  of
"Adams  on  Equity  "  (Philadelphia,  1852).

LUDLOW,  Noah  Miller,  actor,  b.  in  New  York
city,  4  July,  1795 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  9  Jan.,  1886.
He  began  his  theatrical  career  in  the  melodrama
of  "  The  Two  Thieves,"  shortly  afterward  joining,
at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  under  Alexander  Drake,  the  first
company  that  undertook  a  tour  of  the  western
states.  Their  first  performance  was  at  Olean,
N.  Y.,  where  they  acted  by  candle-light  in  a  barn,
and  afterward,  descending  the  Alleghany  in  a  flat-
boat,  they  played  in  the  small  settlements  on  the
bank  of  "Mississippi  river  as  far  as  New  Orleans,
where  they  arrived  in  1817.  He  took  the  first
regular  dramatic  company  to  St.  Louis  in  1819,
and,  merging  a  rival  company  into  his  own  the
next  year,  presented  a  series  of  standard  dramas.
He  associated  himself  with  Sol  Smith  and  the
Field  brothers  in  1834,  and  after  a  partnership  of
twenty  years  retired,  appearing  subsequently  only
in  benefit  performances.  He  published  his  me
moirs  under  the  title  of  '•  Dramatic  Life  as  I  found
It "  (St.  Louis,  1880).

LUDLOW,  Roger,  statesman,  b.  in  Dorchester,
England,  about  1590 ;  d.  in  Virginia  about  1665.
He  was  a  lawyer  of  good  family,  and,  on  his  ap
pointment  as  assistant  by  the  general  court  of
Massachusetts  in  1630,  removed  to  Boston,  and  oc
cupied  that  office  for  four  years.  He  became


LUDWICK


LUGO


deputy  governor  in  1634,  but,  having  been  defeat
ed  by 'John  Haynes  in  his  contest  for  the  governor
ship,"  he  removed  with  a  Massachusetts  colony  to
Windsor,  Conn.,  where  for  many  years  he  held
public  offices,  and  was  probably  the  first  lawyer
that  practised  in  the  state.  In  January,  1039,  he
was  a  member  of  the  Connecticut  constitutional
convention,  and  is  believed  to  have  drafted  that
document.  In  August  of  this  year  he  was  sent
by  the  general  court  as  an  adviser  of  the  Connecti
cut  forces  in  the  second  expedition  of  the  Pequot
war,  accompanying  John  Mason's  command.  Since
April  of  this  year  he  had  been  deputy  governor  of
Connecticut,  but  on  the  election  as  governor  of
his  old  adversary,  John  Haynes,  whom  he  described
as  his  "  evil  genius."  he  left  Windsor  and  founded
the  town  of  Pail-field.  Here  he  occupied  each  im
portant  public  office,  was  several  times  a  commis
sioner  to  the  New  England  congress,  and  in  1646
was  appointed  by  the  general  court  to  prepare  a
revision  of  the  law  of  Connecticut,  which  was  af
terward  published  (Cambridge,  1672).  The  situa
tion  of  Fairfield  particularly  interested  Ludlow  in
the  protection  of  the  frontier  against  the  Dutch
and  Indians,  and  with  other  New  England  com
missioners,  in  consequence  of  an  alleged  plot  of
the  Dutch,  he  voted  in  1653  to  make  war  against
them,  but  Massachusetts  refused  to  concur.  The
Manhadoes  also  threatened  Fairfield,  and  the  citi
zens  then  declared  war,  appointing  Ludlow  com-
mander-in-chief ;  but  the  general  court  of  New
Haven  discountenanced  the  project,  and  punished
his  officers  for  attempting  an  insurrection  and  for
raising  volunteers.  Ludlow,  in  consequence  of
this  reflection  on  his  patriotism,  became  incensed
against  the  government,  declared  that  he  would  no
longer  live  under  its  jurisdiction,  and  in  April,
1654,  embarked  with  his  family  for  Virginia,  carry
ing  all  the  town-records  with  him.  The  remainder
of  his  life  was  passed  in  obscurity,  and  the  place
and  time  of  his  death  are  unknown.  He  was  the
brother-in-law  of  John  Endicott.  Ludlow,  al
though  ambitious  and  of  a  morbid  and  suspi
cious  temper,  was  one  of  the  most  learned  and
gifted  of  the  early  colonists,  and  rendered  to  Con
necticut  important  public  service.

LUDWICK,  Christopher,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Germany  in  1720 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1801.
He  was  a  baker  by  trade,  but  in  early  life  enlisted
in  the  Austrian  army  and  served  in  the  war  against
the  Turks.  He  endured  the  hardships  of  the  seven
teen  weeks'  siege  in  Prague,  and,  on  its  capture  by
the  French  and  Bavarians  in  1741,  he  entered  the
Prussian  army.  When  peace  was  declared  he  be
came  a  sailor,  and  between  1745  and  1752  he  made
many  voyages.  In  1753  he  sailed  for  Philadelphia,
taking  with  him  £25  worth  of  clothing.  Making
£60  by  this  venture,  he  returned  to  London,  but  in
the  following  year  became  a  gingerbread-baker  and
confectioner  in  Philadelphia.  In  this  occupation
he  amassed  a  fortune,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the
Revolution  he  gave  his  money  freely  to  aid  the
patriot  cause.  On  one  occasion,  when  it  had  been
proposed  by  Gen.  Thomas  Mifflin  to  purchase  fire
arms  by  private  subscription,  which  caused  dissent.
Ludwick  silenced  opposition  by  saying,  '•  Let  the
poor  gingerbread-baker  be  put  down  for  £200 ! "
In  the  summer  of  1776  he  enlisted  as  a  volunteer,
and  was  of  no  little  service  in  persuading  his  Hes
sian  fellow-countrymen  to  desert  from  the  British
ranks  and  become  residents  of  Philadelphia.  In
1777  he  was  appointed  by  congress  baker-general
to  the  American  army.  It  was  stipulated  that  he
should  return  one  pound  of  bread  for  every  pound
of  flour  delivered  to  him,  but  he  at  once  replied,


"  Not  so ;  I  must  not  be  enriched  by  the  war.  1
shall  return  one  hundred  and  thirty-five  pounds  of
bread  for  every  one  hundred  pounds  of  flour."  He
was  often  invited  to  dine  at  Washington's  large
dinner-parties,  and  frequently  consulted  with  him
in  relation  to  the  bread-supplies  of  the  army.  The
commander-in-chief  iisually  addressed  him  in  com
pany  as  "  My  honest  friend,"  and  in  1785  gave  him
a  certificate  of  good  conduct  in  his  own  handwrit
ing.  He  delighted  to  discover  objects  of  charity
and  relieve  their  wants.  During  the  yellow-fever
epidemic  in  Philadelphia  in  1793,  he  worked  at
bread-baking  gratuitously  to  aid  in  relieving  the
wants  of  the  destitute.  At  his  death  he  divided
his  fortune  among  charities,  and  left  a  special  fund
for  the  education  of  poor  children.

LUER8,  John  Henry,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  near
Minister,  Westphalia,  29  Sept.,  1819;  d.  in  Cleve
land,  Ohio,  29  June,  1871.  His  childhood  was  spent
in  great  poverty,  to  escape  which  he  came  with  his
parents  to  the  United  States  in  1833.  His  family
settled  on  a  farm  at  Piqua,  Ohio,  and  John  became
clerk  in  a  store.  He  showed  a  tendency  to  lead  a
wild  life,  and  became  neglectful  of  religion  for  a
time,  but  in  1835  he  experienced  a  complete  change.
An  accidental  meeting  with  Archbishop  Purcell
decided  him  to  become  a  priest,  and,  after  study
ing  by  himself  and  in  the  Seminary  of  St.  Francis
Xavier,  Ohio,  he  was  ordained  on  11  Nov.,  1846,  and
appointed  pastor  of  St.  Joseph's  church,  Cincinnati.
He  completed  the  church,  freed  the  parish  from
debt,  and  built  several  schools.  In  1857  the  dio
cese  of  Fort  Wayne  was  created,  comprising  the
northern  part  of  Indiana,  and  Father  Luers  was
selected  as  its  first  bishop,  and  consecrated  by  Arch
bishop  Purcell,  10  Jan.,  1858.  The  new  diocese
comprised  about  20,000  Roman  Catholics  and  four
teen  priests.  There  were  twenty  churches  which
were  not  able  to  accommodate  half  their  congre
gations,  while  many  places  had  neither  churches
nor  priests.  Bishop  Luers,  under  these  circum
stances,  endeavored  to  make  up  by  his  own  minis
try  for  the  want  of  priests.  In  two  years  he  had
ordained  eight  and  had  also  eight  ecclesiastical
students  in  various  seminaries,  built  the  present
cathedral  at  Fort  Wayne  and  many  churches,  and
in  1863  he  held  a  synod  at  the  University  of  Notre
Dame,  at  which  statutes  were  enacted  that  resulted
in  the  abolition  of  the  system  of  lay  trustees.  He
visited  Rome  in  1864,  where  he  obtained  power  to
separate  the  Sisters  of  the  Holy  Cross  in  the  United
States  from  the  mother-house  in  France,  and  to
draw  up  a  new  constitution  and  order  for  the
American  branch.  On  his  return  he  founded  the
Academy  of  St.  Ignatius  at  Fort  Lafayette,  and
introduced  the  above-named  sisterhood,  who  have
charge  of  St.  Mary's  home  in  Jay  county.  In  1865
he  purchased  land  in  the  suburbs  of  Fort  Wayne,
and  afterward  at  Rensselaer,  and  in  1868  erected
there  an  asylum  for  soldiers'  orphans.  He  also  es
tablished  the  Catholic  clerical  benevolent  associa
tion  for  pensioning  aged  priests.  Bishop  Luers
attended  the  provincial  councils  of  Cincinnati,  and
was  present  at  the  plenary  council  of  Baltimore  in
1866.  At  his  death  there  were  sixty-nine  priests,
ninety-one  churches,  and  six  religious  institutions
in  his  diocese,  besides  a  hospital,  a  college,  and  an
orphan  asylum,  while  the  Roman  Catholic  popula
tion  exceeded  50,000.

LUtrO,  Bernardo  de  (loo-go),  Spanish  mission
ary,  b.  in  Lugo,  Spain,  late  in  the  16th  century  ;
d.  in  Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico.  He  became  a  Do
minican  monk,  was  sent  by  his  superiors  to  Span
ish  America,  and  devoted  his  life  to  missionary
work  among  the  Indians.  He  learned  the  Ian-


LUGO


LUMPKIN


53


guage  of  the  natives  of  Xew  Grenada,  and  pub
lished  a  grammar  of  it  under  the  title  "  Gra-
matica  de  la  lengua  general  del  nuevo  reyno  de
Granada,  llamada  Mosca"  (Madrid,  1629)."  This
work  is  very  rare.  Toward  the  close  of  his  life  he
withdrew  into  a  convent  in  Santa  Fe,  Xew  Mexico.
Pinelo  in  his  "  Bibliotheca "  attributes  to  him  a
work  on  "  Confession  "  in  the  Mosca  dialect.

LUGO,  Francisco  de.  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in
Madrid  in  1580:  d.  in  Valladolid,  17  Dec".  1652.
He  was  graduated  in  law  at  Salamanca  in  1600,  be
came  a  Jesuit  two  years  later,  and  was  professor  of
theology  in  Mexico"  from  1616  till  1632,  and  after
ward  in  Santa  Fe  de  Bogota.  Xew  Granada.  To
avoid  ecclesiastical  honors  that  were  tendered  him
he  left  for  Europe  in  1638.  but  was  captured  by
the  Dutch  fleet  off  Havana,  and  lost  most  of  his
manuscripts.  After  a  long  captivity  he  was  set  at
liberty,  and  arrived  in  Spain  in  1645,  and  in  the
next  year  was  sent  by  the  Jesuit  province  of  Cas
tile  to  Rome  as  representative  in  the  eighth  gen
eral  congregation  of  the  order.  He  was  there  ap
pointed  censor  of  theological  works,  and  theologian
of  the  general  of  the  Jesuits,  and  when  appointed
by  the  pope  to  a  higher  dignity  declined,  and  re
tired  to  the  College  of  Valladolid,  of  which  he
was  rector  at  his  death.  He  published  "  Discursus
pnevius  ad  theologicam  moralem  "  (2  vols.,  Mexico,
1631 ;  1  vol.,  Madrid,  1645) :  "  Questiones  morales
de  Sacramentis  "  (2  vols.,  Granada,  1644  ;  revised
ed.,  Madrid  and  Mexico,  3  vols.,  1649) ;  "  Historia
de  la  Conquista  de  Xueva  Espana  "  (5  vols.,  Valla
dolid,  1650) ;  and  several  other  theological  works.
He  left  also  in  manuscript  a  "  Relatiode  Christiani-
tate  in  America,  et  de  rebus  gestis  patrum  Socie-
tatis  Jesu  in  provincia  Xovae  Hispania3,"  which  was
afterward  published  in  the  "  Bibliotheca  Scripto-
ruin  Societatis  Jesu."

LUKENS,  Henry  Clay,  journalist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  18  Aug.,  1838.  He  was  educated
at  the  public  schools  of  his  native  city,  and  as  early
as  1855  contributed  to  daily  and  weekly  news
papers.  In  1858  he  was  part  owner  and  editor  of
an  illustrated  monthly  called  "  The  School  Jour
nal."  During  the  civil  war  he  saw  active  service.
From  1877  till  1884  he  was  an  associate  editor  of
the  "  Xew  York  Daily  Xews,"  and  he  is  now  (1888)
managing  editor  and  one  of  the  publishers  of"  The
Journalist,"  Xew  York.  He  has  written  under  the
pen-name  of  "  Erratic  Enrique,"  which  he  first
signed  to  letters  from  Uruguay  in  1874~'5.  He  has
published  "  The  Marine  Circus  at  Cherbourg,  and
Other  Poems  "  (Xew  York,  1865) ;  "  Lean  Xora,"
a  travesty  of  Biirger's  "  Lenore  "  (Philadelphia,
1870);  "Story  of  the  Types"  (Xew  Haven,  1881);
and  "  Jets  and  Flashes  "'  (Xew  York,  1883).  He  is
now  (1888)  compiling  "  Records  of  the  Xew  York
Press  Club."

LULL.  Edward  Phelps,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Windsor,  Vt.,  20  Feb.,  1836 ;  d.  in  Pensacola,  Fla.,
5  March.  1887.  His  mother  was  left  a  widow  in
straitened  circumstances  with  a  large  family  of
children,  and  removed  to  Wisconsin,  from  which
state  her  son  was  appointed  acting  midshipman  in
the  navy,  7  Oct.,  1851.  He  was  promoted  midship
man  in  1855,  passed  midshipman  and  master  in
1858.  and  lieutenant  in  1860.  On  his  return  from  '
his  second  cruise  in  the  latter  year  he  became  as
sistant  professor  of  ethics  at  the  Xaval  academy,
and  teacher  of  fencing.  In  May.  1861,  he  was
ordered  to  the  "  Roanoke,"  and  thus  took  part  in
the  engagement  between  that  frigate  and  the  Con
federate  forts  at  Hatteras  inlet  in  the  following
July.  In  September  he  was  sent  back  to  the
academy,  where  he  remained  until,  in  1863,  he  be


came  commandant  of  midshipmen  and  executive
officer  of  that  institution.  In  July,  1862.  he  had
been  promoted  lieutenant-commander,  and  in  De
cember,  1863,  he  was  ordered  to  active  service,  par
ticipating  in  the  battle  of  Mobile  Bay  and  subse
quent  engagements.  He  was  successively  in  com
mand  of  the  captured  Confederate  "  Tennessee,"
at  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Morgan  in  August,
1864,  the  3d  division  of  the  Mississippi  squadron,
the  "  Seminole  "  in  the  blockade  of  Galveston,  and
the  iron-clad  "Lafayette."  After  the  war  he  was
again  at  the  naval  academy  in  1867-'9,  had  com
mand  of  the  Xicaragua  survey  expedition  in
1872-'3,  was  a  member  of  the  interoceanic  ship-
canal  commission  in  1873-'4,  and  the  following
year  had  charge  of  a  special  survey  of  the  Panama
canal  route.  From  1875  till  1880  he  was  hydro-
graphic  inspector  of  coast  survey,  and  in  1881  he
was  made  captain,  having  reached  the  grade  of
commander  in  1870.  Capt.  Lull  was  a  member  of
several  learned  societies.  He  received  the  degree
of  A.  M.  from  Princeton  in  1868.

LUMPKIN,  Wilson,  statesman,  b.  in  Pittsyl-
vania  county,  Vs.,  14  Jan.,  1783  ;  d.  in  Athens.  Ga.,
28  Dec.,  1870.  He  removed  to  Oglethorpe  county,
Ga.,  with  his  father,  in  1784,  and,  the  latter  having
been  appointed  in  1797  clerk  of  the  superior  court
there,  the  son  became  an  assistant  in  his  office,
studied  law.  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised
at  Athens,  Ga.  When  about  twenty-one  years  of
age  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature,  and  was  sub
sequently  re-elected  several  times.  In  1823  he  was
appointed  by  President  Monroe  to  mark  out  the
boundary-line  between  Georgia  and  Florida,  and
he  was  afterward  one  of  the  first  commissioners
under  the  Cherokee  treaty  of  1835.  He  served  in
congress  from  1815  till  1817,  and  from  1827  till
1831 :  and  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  to  which  he  was
elected  in  place  of  John  P.  King,  resigned,  from
13  Dec.,  1837,  till  3  March,  1841.  He  was  elected
governor  of  Georgia  in  1831  and  1833,  and  was  one
of  the  original  members  of  the  board  of  public
works  that  was  created  by  the  legislature. — His
brother.  Joseph  Henry,  jurist,  b.  in  Oglethorpe
county,  Ga.,  23  Dec..  1799 ;  d.  in  Athens,  Ga.,  4
June,  1867,  was  educated  at  the  University  of
Georgia,  and  at
Princeton,  where
he  was  graduated
in  1819.  In  1820
he  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and
began  practice  at
Lexington,  where
he  soon  gained
eminence  in  his
profession.  In
1844  he  retired
from  the  bar  in
consequence  of  ill
health,  and  short
ly  afterward  vis
ited  Europe.  In
1845,  during  his
absence,  the  su
preme  court  of  Georgia  was  reorganized,  and  he
was  elected  justice,  and  afterward  became  chief  jus
tice,  which  office  he  held  until  his  death.  Judge
|  Lumpkin  was  elected  professor  of  rhetoric  and
oratory  in  the  University  of  Georgia  in  1846,  but
!  declined ;  and  subsequently  was  elected  professor
1  of  law  in  the  institution  attached  to  the  univer-
!  sity,  which  was  named  Lumpkin  law-school  in  his
honor.  He  discharged  the  duties  of  his  professor-
I  ship  successfully  until  the  civil  war  disbanded


54


LUNA Y  ARELLANO


LUNDY


the  institution,  and,  afterward  resuming  his  chair,
retained  it  till  his  death.  In  1855  President  Pierce
tendered  him  a  seat  on  the  bench  of  the  court
of  claims,  which  he  declined,  as  he  did  also  the
chancellorship  of  the  University  of  Georgia,  to
which  he  was  elected  in  1860.  He  was  an  advo
cate  of  the  cause  of  temperance,  and  for  many
years  a  trustee  of  the  State  university.  He  held
a  high  place  as  a  judge  and  as  an  advocate  at
the  bar  in  criminal  cases,  and  his  appeals  to  the
sympathy  of  jurors  have  been  rarely  equalled.  He
was  one'of  the  compilers  of  the  penal  code  of
Georgia  in  1833.— Wilson's  son,  John  Henry,
jurist,  b.  in  Oglethorpe  county,  Ga.,  13  June,  1812 :
d.  in  Rome,  Ga.,  6  June,  1860,  was  educated  at
Franklin  and  Yale  colleges,  studied  law,  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  March,  1834,  and  began  prac
tice  at  Rome,  Ga.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state
house  of  representatives  in  1835,  and  was  solicitor-
general  of  the  Cherokee  circuit  in  1838.  He  was
elected  to  congress,  serving  by  successive  elections
from  4  Dec.,  1843,  till  3  March,  1849,  and  from  3
Dec.,  1855,  till  3  March,  1857,  and  was  for  several
years  a  judge  of  the  state  supreme  court.

LUNA  Y  ARELLANO,  Tristan  de  (loo'-nah),
Spanish  explorer,  b.  in  Borobia,  Aragon,  in  1519;
d.  in  Yucatan  in  1571.  He  came  about  1550  to
Mexico,  and  in  1559  was  appointed  by  the  viceroy,
Luis  de  Velasco,  commander  of  a  fleet  of  thirteen
ships,  which  he  sent  to  conquer  and  colonize
Florida.  His  landing  force  consisted  of  about
1,500  infantry  and  nearly  200  cavalrv,  and  with
some  Dominican  friars,  among  them  Domingo  de
la  Anunciacion,  Pedro  de  Feria,  and  Domingo  de
Salazar,  he  sailed  from  Vera  Cruz  in  July,  1559.
The  fleet  arrived  on  15  Aug.  in  a  bay  which,  by  a
former  explorer,  Guido  de  Labezares  (q.  v.),  had
been  called  Filipina,  but  was  named,  by  Luna,  Santa
Maria,  on  account  of  his  arrival  on  the  feast  of  the
Virgin.  On  21  Aug.  a  violent  hurricane  destroyed
all  the  vessels  at  anchor  except  one,  which  was
driven  ashore  by  the  waves.  Notwithstanding  this
mishap,  Luna  began  the  exploration  of  the  interior
and  reached  Ninicapua,  a  large  abandoned  Indian
town,  which  he  named  Santa  Cruz.  In  1560  he
discovered  the  river  Olibahali,  and  a  province
called  Coza  by  the  natives:  but  the  difficulties  of
the  territory,  the  hostility  of  the  Indians,  and  the
want  of  provisions  impelled  many  of  the  adven
turers  to  return  to  the  coast,  whence  they  went  to
Cuba  to  ask  for  help.  Others,  under  the  leader
ship  of  Juan  Ceron,  rose  in  a  mutiny,  which  Luna
had  much  trouble  to  quell.  In  1561  re-enforce
ments  from  Cuba  arrived,  and  explorations  were
continued  as  far  as  the  point  of  Santa  Elena;  but,
seeing  that  success  was  doubtful,  some  of  the
captains  called  a  council  of  war  and  returned  to
Cuba.  Luna,  with  some  faithful  followers,  con
tinued  his  explorations  till  in  December,  1562,  he
was  recalled  by  the  viceroy  to  Mexico.  In  1563  he
was  appointed  governor  of  the  province  of  Yuca
tan,  which  place  he  held  till  his  death.

LUNDY,  Benjamin,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Hard-
wick,  Warren  co.,  N.  J.,  4  Jan.,  1789 ;  d.  in  Lowell,
La  Salle  co.,  111.,  22  Aug.,  1839.  His  parents  were
members  of  the  Society  of  Friends.  When  he  was
about  nineteen  years  of  age  he  removed  to  Wheel
ing,  Va.,  where  he  remained  for  four  years,  work
ing  the  first  eighteen  months  as  an  apprentice  to  a
saddler.  While  there  his  attention  was  first  di
rected  to  the  evils  of  slavery,  and  determined  his
future  course  as  an  Abolitionist.  On  leaving  Wheel
ing  he  went  to  Mt.  Pleasant,  Ohio,  and  then  to
St.  Clairsville  in  that  state,  where,  in  1815.  he  origi
nated  an  anti  -  slavery  association,  called  the


"  Union  humane  society,"  and  wrote  an  appeal  on
the  subject  of  slavery.  Soon  afterward  he  became
a  contributor  of  anti-slavery  articles  to  the  "Phi
lanthropist"  newspaper,  published  at  Mt.  Pleas
ant.  In  the  autumn  of  1819  he  removed  to  St.
Louis,  Mo.,  at  the
time  that  the  Mis
souri  question  was
attracting  universal
attention,  and  de
voted  himself  to  an
exposition  of  the  evils
of  slavery  in  the
newspapers  of  that
state  and  Illinois.
Returning  to  Mt.
Pleasant,  he  began  in
January,  1812,  the
publication  of  the
"  Genius  of  Univer
sal  Emancipation,"  a
monthly,  the  office  of
which  was  soon  re
moved  to  Jonesbor-
ough,  Tenn..  and
thence  to  Baltimore  in  1824,  when  it  became  a  week
ly.  In  the  latter  part  of  1825  Mr.  Lundy  visited
Hayti  to  make  arrangements  with  the  government
of  that  island  for  the  settlement  of  such  freed  slaves
as  might  be  sent  thither.  In  1828  he  visited  the
eastern  states,  where  he  lectured  and  formed  the
acquaintance  of  William  Lloyd  Garrison,  with
whom  he  afterward  became  associated  in  editing
his  journal.  In  the  winter  of  1828-'9  he  was  as
saulted  for  an  alleged  libel  and  nearly  killed  in
Baltimore  by  a  slave-dealer  named  Austin  Wool-
folk.  Lundy  was  indirectly  censured  by  the  court
and  compelled  to  remove  his  paper  to  Washington,
and  finally  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  gave  it  the
name  of  "The  National  Inquirer,"  and  finally  it
merged  into  "  The  Pennsylvania  Freeman."  In
1829  he  went  a  second  time  to  Ilayti,  and  took
with  him  several  slaves  that  had  been  emancipated
for  that  purpose.  In  the  winter  of  1830  he  visited
the  Wilberforce  colony  of  fugitive  slaves  in  Canada,
and  then  went  to  Texas  to  provide  a  similar  asylum
under  the  Mexican  flag,  renewing  his  visit  in  1833,
but  was  baffled  by  the  events  that  led  to  the  an
nexation  of  Texas.  In  1838  his  property  was
burned  by  the  pro-slavery  mob  that  fired  Pennsyl
vania  Hall,  Philadelphia.  In  the  winter  of  1838-'9
he  removed  to  Lowell,  La  Salle  co.,  111.,  with  the
intention  of  publishing  the  "  Genius "  there,  but
his  design  was  frustrated  by  his  death.  He  was
the  first  to  establish  anti-slavery  periodicals  and
to  deliver  anti-slavery  lectures,  and  probably  the
first  to  induce  the  formation  of  societies  for  the
encouragement  of  the  produce  of  free  labor.  See
"The  Life,  Travels,  and  Opinions  of  Benjamin
Lundy."  by  Thomas  Earl  (Philadelphia,  1847).

LUNDY,  John  Patterson,  clergyman,  b.  in
Danville,  Pa.,  3  Feb.,  1823.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1846,  and  after  pursuing  the  theo
logical  course  in  the  seminary  was  ordained  as  a
Presbyterian  minister  on  13  Feb.,  1849.  Two
years  later,  after  holding  a  pastorate  at  Sing  Sing,
N.  Y.,  he  entered  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,
was  ordained  deacon,  in  St.  Paul's  church.  Sing
Sing,  N.  Y.,  25  Oct.,  1854,  by  Bishop  Upfold,  and
priest,  in  All  Saints'  church,  Philadelphia,  28  Oct.,
1855,  by  Bishop  Alonzo  Potter.  During  his  diaco-
nate  he  was  in  charge  of  Briar  Cliff  chapel,  and
was  also  chaplain  of  the  state-prison  in  Sing  Sing.
In  1855  he  became  rector  of  All  Saints'  church,
Philadelphia,  and  two  years  later  of  P^mmanuel


LUNGREN


LUPTON


church,  Holmesburg,  Pa.  In  1869  he  became  rec
tor  of  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Apostles,  New  York
city,  but  in  1875  he  was  compelled  to  resign  on  ac
count  of  failure  of  health.  Dr.  Lundy's  chief  pub
lication  is  entitled  "  Monumental  Christianity,  or
the  Art  and  Symbolism  of  the  Primitive  Christian
Church "  (New  York,  1876).  He  also  printed  a
volume  on  "  Forestry "  (1880).  and  is  now  (1888)
preparing  a  work  on  "  Prehistoric  Worship."

LUNUREN,  Samuel  Smith,  physician,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  22  Aug.,  1827.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Jefferson  medical  college  in  1850,  and  at  the
Homoeopathic  medical  college  of  Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia,  in  1852.  Subsequently  he  settled  in
Toledo,  Ohio,  where  he  has  practised  medicine  and
surgery,  making  a  specialty  of  the  diseases  of
women.  His  greatest  success  has  been  with  the
Crvsarean  section,  which  he  has  performed  with
favorable  issue  on  three  occasions,  and  but  twelve
operations  of  that  nature  have  ever  been  performed
in  Ohio.  His  most  celebrated  case  is  one  in  which
the  section  was  performed  originally  in  1875,  and
again  on  the  same  person  in  1880.  The  woman
and  her  two  children  are  now  (1887)  living  and  in
good  health.  Dr.  Lungren  has  contributed  numer
ous  articles  to  the  medical  press,  and  is  the  author
of  a  memoir  on  the  "  Caesarean  Section  "  (Toledo,
1881). — His  son,  Charles  Marshall,  inventor,  b.
in  Hagerstown,  Md.,  13  Dec.,  1853,  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Michigan  in  1874  as  a  civil
engineer.  He  first  turned  his  attention  to  journal
istic  work,  and  for  some  time  was  a  member  of
the  staff  of  the  "  Popular  Science  Monthly."  Mr.
Lungren  has  studied  the  problems  connected  with
artificial  illumination,  and  has  invented  several
appliances  that  have  come  into  extended  use,  nota
bly  a  regenerative  gas-lamp.  He  is  a  member  of
scientific  societies,  and,  besides  writing  magazine
articles,  has  edited  the  American  edition  of  Al-
glave  and  Boulard's  "  Electric  Light "  (New  York,
1883). — Another  son.  Ferdinand  Harvey,  artist,
b.  in  Toledo,  Ohio,  13  Nov.,  1857,  studied  at  the
University  of  Michigan,  but  came  to  New  York  be
fore  his  graduation,  in  order  to  follow  art.  He  has
made  many  illustrations,  principally  for  the  "Cen
tury  "  and  "  Wide  Awake,"  and  his  paintings  in
clude  "Shadows  on  the  Snow."

LUNT,  George,  author,  b.  in  Newburyport,
Mass.,  31  Dec.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Boston,  17  May,"  1885.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1824  with  special
distinction  in  Greek,  studied  law,  and  began  prac
tice  in  Newburyport  in  1827.  He  was  elected  suc
cessively  representative  for  Newburyport  and  sena
tor  from  Essex  coun
ty  in  the  legislature,
was  an  active  mem
ber  of  the  conven
tion  that  nominated
Gen.  Zachary  Taylor
for  the  presidency,
and  was  appointed
U.  S.  district  attor
ney  under  Taylor's
administration.  He
eventually  resumed
the  private  practice
of  his  profession,  de
voting  his  leisure
to  literary  pursuits.
Prior  to  and  during
the  civil  war  he  was
editor  of  the  Boston
in  conjunction  with  George  S.  Hillard.
Again  returning  to  the  practice  of  his  profession,
he  appeared  frequently  in  the  state  courts,  and  was


Courier '


counsel  before  congressional  committees  in  refer
ence  to  French  claims,  preparing  a  bill  and  efficient
ly  pressing  it  for  the  action  of  congress.  Mr.  Lunt's
later  years  were  marked  by  labors  in  behalf  of  har
bors  of  refuge,  notably  at  Scituate,  on  the  south
shore  of  Boston  bay.  By  persevering  effort  he  suc
ceeded  in  securing  very  considerable  appropriations
from  congress  to  this  end,  and  the  harbor  at  Scitu
ate  will,  when  completed,  be  a  fitting  monument  to
his  intelligence,  energy,  and  zeal.  In  earlier  life
Mr.  Lunt  was  an  active  member  of  the  Whig  party,
and  in  its  interests  was  distinguished  as  a  public
speaker.  On  the  dissolution  of  that  party  he  be
came  a  Democrat.  He  was  a  man  of  firm  convic
tions  in  both  political  and  religious  matters,  and
fearless  and  manly  in  their  expression.  As  a  writer
his  style  was  marked  by  strength,  dignity,  and
grace.  Besides  orations  and  addresses,  he  published
"  Poems  "  (New  York,  1839) ;  "  The  Age  of  Gold  "
(Boston,  1843);  "The  Dove  and  the  Eagle"  (1851);
"  Lyric  Poems  "  (1854) ;  "Julia  "  (1855) ;  "  Eastford,
or  Household  Sketches"  (1855);  "Three  Eras  of
New  England"  (1857);  "Radicalism  in  Religion,
Philosophy,  and  Social  Life"  (1858);  "The  Union,
a  Poem  "  (I860) ;  "  Origin  of  the  Late  War"  (New
York,  1866);  "Old  New  England  Traits"  (1873);
and  "Miscellanies,  Poems,  etc."  (1884).

LUNT,  William  Parsons,  clergyman,  b.  in
Newburyport,  Mass.,  21  April,  1805 ;  d".  in  Akabah,
Arabia  Petra?a,  20  March,  1857.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Harvard  in  1823.  taught  fora  year  at  Plym
outh,  and  studied  law  for  a  short  time  at  Boston.
He  entered  Cambridge  divinity-school  in  1825,  and
was  pastor  of  the  2d  Unitarian  church  of  New  York
city  in  1828-'33.  On  3  June,  1835.  he  became  as
sociate  pastor  of  the  Unitarian  church  in  Qtiincy,
Mass.,  in  which  connection  he  continued  till  his
death.  His  writings  display  a  singularly  pure  taste
and  classic  refinement,  and  have  been  much  ad
mired.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Discourse  at  the  In
terment  of  John  Quincy  Adams  "  (Boston,  1846) ;
"  Union  of  the  Human  Race  "  (1850) ;  "Sermon  on
Daniel  Webster"  (1852);  and  "  Gleanings,"  edited
by  his  daughter  and  published  by  his  son  (1874).
He  also  compiled  "The  Christian  Psalter."

LUPTON,  Nathaniel  Thomas,  chemist,  b.  in
Frederick  county,  Va.,  19  Dec.,  1830.  He  was
graduated  at  Dickinson  college  in  1849,  spent  two
winters  in  Heidelberg,  studying  chemistry  under
Bunsen,  and  was  professor  of  chemistry  and  geolo
gy  in  Randolph  Macon  college  in  1857-'8  and  in
the  Southern  university,  Greensborough,  Ala.,  in
1858-'71.  In  1871  he  was  called  to  the  presidency
of  the  University  of  Alabama,  with  the  chair  of
chemistry,  and  three  years  later  was  made  professor
of  chemistry  in  Yanderbilt  university,  becoming
also  dean  of  the  faculty  of  pharmacy.  For  eleven
years  he  continued  in  these  offices,  devoting  con
siderable  time  to  the  improvement  of  the  sanitary
and  other  economic  conditions  of  life  in  Nashville
and  in  Tennessee.  In  1885  he  was  appointed  state
chemist  of  Alabama,  and  professor  of  chemistry  in
the  Agricultural  college  of  Alabama,  in  Auburn.
He  received  the  honorary  degree  of  M.  D.  from
Vanderbilt  university  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  the
University  of  Alabama  in  1875.  Prof.  Lupton  is  a
member  of  scientific  societies,  was  vice-president  of
the  American  chemical  society  in  1880,  chairman  of
the  section  on  chemistry  of  the  American  associa
tion  for  the  advancement  of  science  in  1877,  and
vice-president  of  that  association  in  1880.  In  1874
he  attended  the  congress  of  Orientalists  in  London.
Besides  his  minor  contributions  to  technical  liter
ature  he  has  published  "  The  Elementary  Princi
ples  of  Scientific  Agriculture"  (New  York,  1880).


56


LUQUE


LUSSAN


LUQUE,  Fernando  de  (loo'-kay),  Spanish  cler
gyman,  b.  in  Olvera.  Andalusia,  in  1484 ;  d.  in
Panama  in  1531.  He  left  San  Lucar,  Spain,  14
July,  1514,  and  arrived  on  20  June  in  the  colony  of
Tierra  Firme,  with  the  bishop  of  Santa  Maria  de
la  Antigua  and  the  governor,  Pedro  Arias  Davila.
After  the  discovery  of  the  Pacific' and  the  removal
of  the  capital  to  Panama,  he  was  appointed  canon
professor  of  divinity  of  the  cathedral  in  that  city.
When  Pizarro  and"  Almagro  undertook  the^  dis
covery  of  the  large  and  fertile  territories  in  South
America,  they  associated  themselves  with  Luque,
who,  as  a  person  of  great  influence  and  ample
means,  was  the  best  partner  for  the  accomplish
ment  of  their  enterprise.  To  win  the  good-will
of  the  governor,  Pedro  Arias,  Luque  and  his  two
companions  lent  him  money  for  the  expedition  to
conquer  Nicaragua,  and  thus  obtained  permission
for  Pizarro  to  leave  Panama  for  the  exploration  of
Peru.  On  10  March,  1526,  Luque,  Pizarro,  and
Almagro  formed  a  contract  of  partnership.  Luque
advanced  $20,000  in  gold  bars,  and  they  agreed
to  take  each  one  third  of  everything  they  could
acquire,  and  also  to  enjoy  equally  all  the  honors
that  the  sovereign  might  bestow  upon  them.  Luque
was  the  agent  of  the  two  adventurers  and  their
adviser  in  the  difficulties  that  arose  from  their
undertaking.  He  counselled  Pizarro  to  stay  on  the
island  of  Gallo,  when  the  latter  was  ordered  to  re
turn  to  Panama.  In  the  spring  of  1528  he  gave
to  Pizarro  $1.500  in  gold  for  a  visit  to  Spain  to
obtain  a  royal  charter.  In  1529  Luque  was  ap
pointed  provisor  and  ecclesiastical  governor  of
Darien,  and  after  the  interview  between  Pizarro
and  the  queen  he  was  nominated  bishop  of  Tum-
bez,  and  appointed  universal  protector  of  the  Pe
ruvian  Indians.  On  0  Aug.,  1531,  Luque  declared
that  the  money  he  had  advanced  for  the  conquest
of  Peru  belonged  to  Gaspar  Espinosa  (q.  t1.),  and
that  the  latter  might  claim  his  third.  He  died
before  his  confirmation  arrived  from  Rome.

LUSIGNAN,  Jean  Baptiste  Alphonse,  Cana
dian  lawyer,  b.  in  St.  Denis,  St.  Hyacinthe  co.,
Quebec,  27  Sept.,  1843.  He  was  educated  at  St.
Ilyacinthe  college  and  at  Laval  university,  Quebec,
studied  divinity  for  three  years,  and  subsequently
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in
December,  1868.  He  became  assistant  editor  of  the
"  Tribune  "  and  of  the  "  Journal  de  St.  Ilyacinthe  "
in  1863,  in  1865  assistant  editor  of  '•  L'Union  na-
tionale,"  and  the  same  year  editor-in-chief  of  "  Le
Pays,"  the  chief  French  newspaper  of  the  Liberals
of  Montreal.  In  1874  he  became  private  secretary
to  Sir  Antoine  Aime  Dorion,  and  afterward  acted
in  a  similar  capacity  for  the  minister  of  inland
revenue.  He  was  crown  prosecutor  at  Aylmer.
Quebec,  in  1878,  president  of  L'Institut  Canadian
Fran9ais  of  Ottawa  in  1881,  and  founded,  in  the
spring  of  1885,  the  St.  Lawrence  fishing  company.
He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Royal  society  of
Canada  in  May,  1885,  and  was  appointed  secretary
of  the  French  section.  lie  has  published  "  La
confederation,  couronnement  de  dix  annees  de
mauvaise  administration "  (Montreal,  1867)  ;  a
continuation  to  Judge  Ramsay's  "  Digest  of  Re
ported  Cases  "  in  Lower  Canada  (1872) ;  and  "  Coups
d'ceil  et  coups  de  plume  "  (Ottawa,  1884).

LUSK,  John,  soldier,  b.  on  Staten  island,  N.  Y.,
5  Nov.,  1734;  d.  near  McMinnville,  Tenn.,  8  June,
1838.  He  began  his  military  career,  when  he  was
about  twenty  years  old,  at  the  conquest  of  Acadia.
He  was  present  at  the  siege  of  Quebec,  saw  Gen.
Wolfe  fall  on  the  plains  of  Abraham,  and  served
in  Arnold's  expedition  to  Canada.  He  was  en
gaged  in  the  erection  of  Fort  Edward,  and  was


wounded  there ;  was  at  the  battle  of  Saratoga,  the
surrender  of  Burgoyne,  and  also  that  of  Cornwal-
lis,  and  subsequently  served  under  Wayne  in  the
campaign  against  the  Indians.

LUSK,  William  Thompson,  physician,  b.  in
Norwich,  Conn.,  23  May,  1838.  He  was  for  a  time
at  Yale,  in  1858-'61  studied  medicine  in  Heidel
berg  and  Berlin,  and  on  his  return  to  the  United
States  he  served  in  the  U.  S.  volunteer  army  in
1861-'3,  and  rose  from  the  ranks  to  be  assistant
adjutant-general.  He  was  graduated  at  Bellevue
hospital  medical  college  in  1864,  afterward  spent  a
year  and  a  half  in  study  in  Edinburgh,  Paris,
Vienna,  and  Prague,  and  in  1865  began  practice
in  New  York.  He  was  professor  of  physiology  in
Long  Island  college  hospital  from  1868  till  1871,
in  1870-'!  lecturer  on  physiology  in  Harvard  medi
cal  school,  and  became  professor  of  obstetrics  in
Bellevue  hospital  medical  college  in  1871,  and  in
the  latter  year  editor  of  the  "New  York  Medical
Journal."  He  is  a  member  of  various  British  and
American  medical  societies,  has  contributed  to  cur
rent  professional  literature,  and  is  the  author  of
"  The  Science  and  Art  of  Midwifery  "  (New  York,
1881 ;  enlarged  eel.,  1885),  which  has  been  trans
lated  into  several  European  languages.

LUSSAN,  Raveiiean  de,  French  buccaneer,  b.
in  Paris  in  1663  ;  d.  in  France.  He  belonged  to  a
noble  but  impoverished  family,  and  embraced  a
military  career  at  the  age  of  fourteen.  In  1679  ho
embarked  for  Santo  Domingo  in  search  of  fortune,
but  was  unsuccessful,  and  joined  the  buccaneers
under  Cornelius  Laurent  (q.  v.),  sailing  from  Petit-
Goave,  22  Nov.,  1684.  He  soon  left  Laurent  at  the
head  of  a  band  of  his  own,  and  in  1685  pillaged
the  town  of  Realejo  in  Guatemala.  In  1686  his
band  took  part  in  the  capture  of  Grenada,  and,  not
finding  the  booty  they  expected,  set  fire  to  the  city.
After  this  Lussan  separated  from  the  English  pi
rates,  but  he  joined  them  again  for  the  purpose  of
attacking  Guayaquil,  which  they  took  with  much
booty.  Lussan  and  a  part  of  his  followers  then
sailed  for  Tehuantepec,  which  they  captured,  and
went  as  far  north  as  Acapulco.  They  returned  to
Mapala,  a  port  north  of  Realejo,  anil  deliberated
on  the  route  they  should  take  to  reach  the  An
tilles.  It  was  agreed  to  march  to  Nueva  Segovia,
a  town  situated  on  the  Yara  or  Cape  river,  which
empties  into  the  Atlantic.  Of  this  expedition  Vol
taire  said  :  "  The  retreat  of  the  ten  thousand  will
always  be  more  celebrated,  but  is  not  to  be  com
pared  to  it."  Lussan  formed  four  companies,  of
seventy  men  each,  and  made  them  swear  to  observe
the  severest  discipline.  On  2  Jan.,  1688,  after  pray
ing  together,  and  sinking  their  boats  for  fear  they
might  fall  into  the  power  of  the  Spaniards,  they
began  their  march,  and  in  ten  days,  during  which
they  were  almost  constantly  engaged  in  fighting
superior  numbers,  they  reached  Nueva  Segovia.
One  evening,  in  a  defile  surrounded  by  rocks  of
great  height  on  which  the  Spaniards  had  intrenched
themselves,  the  buccaneers  sought  hopelessly  for  a
way  of  escape.  Lussan  proposed  that,  leaving
eighty  men  to  guard  the  sick,  they  should  get  in
the  rear  of  the  mountains  and  then  surprise  the
enemy.  His  advice  was  at  first  rejected,  but  was
adopted  when  their  case  became  desperate.  They
found  a  path  which  led  behind  the  mountains,  and,
favored  by  a  thick  fog,  they  forced  the  intrench-
ments  of  the  Spaniards  and  put  them  to  flight.
After  this  victory  they  chanted  a  Te  Deum.  They
then  descended  the  Yara  on  the  wretched  boats  of
the  country,  and  came  in  sight  of  Cape  Gracias-a-
Dios  on  9  Feb.  Lussan  embarked  on  an  English
lugger  on  14  Feb.,  and  reached  Santo  Domingo  on


LUTZ


LYBRAND


57


6  April.  He  had  marched  nearly  1,000  miles,  con
stantly  harassed  by  the  Spaniards,  although  the
distance  from  the  point  where  he  started  to  that
which  he  wished  to  reach  was  but  240  miles  in
a  straight  line.  Lussan  published  "Journal  du
voyage  fait  a  la  mer  du  Sud  avec  les  flibustiers  de
1'Ameriqu'e  "  (Paris,  1688, 1690,  1705).  It  was  dedi
cated  to  the  minister  of  the  navy,  who,  in  common
with  most  Frenchmen  of  the  time,  appeared  to  con
sider  the  exploits  of  Lussan  worthy  of  approval.
Although  the  work  is  confused,  it  contains  curious
and  interesting  details  on  the  productions  and
manners  of  the  natives  of  the  countries  he  visited.

LUTZ,  Nicholas,  soldier,  b.  in  the  Palatinate,
Germany,  20  Feb.,  1740;  d.  in  Reading.  Pa.,  28
Nov.,  1807.  He  was  captain  of  a  battery  at  the
battle  of  Long  Island,  where  he  was  taken  prison
er,  but  was  exchanged  in  1779.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  Pennsylvania  convention  to  ratify  the  Fed
eral  constitution  in  1787,  a  member  of  the  Penn
sylvania  house  of  representatives  in  1783-'94,  and
was  appointed  assistant  justice  of  Berks  county
courts  on  6  Feb.,  1795.

LUZ-CABALLERO,  Jos6  de  la  (looth),  Cuban
educator,  b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  11  July,  1800;  d.
there,  22  June,  1862.  He  studied  in  his  native
city,  began  in  1827  a  tour  through  the  United
States  and  Europe,  and  in  his  travels  came  in  con
tact  with  the  chief  scientific  and  literary  celebrities
of  the  time,  including  the  German  philosopher
Krause,  who  paid  a  public  tribute  to  Luz's  scien
tific  and  philosophical  views.  With  Humboldt  he
arranged  to  establish  in  Cuba  a  magnetic  observa
tory  in  correspondence  with  like  institutions  in
Germany.  In  1831  he  returned  to  Cuba,  and  de
voted  all  his  time  and  energies  to  the  cause  of  edu
cation,  assuming  the  direction  of  a  college  from
1834  till  1839.  In  1848  he  founded  the  College  el
Salvador,  where  many  that  have  attained  reputa
tion  in  Cuba  in  literature,  science,  or  politics  have
been  educated.  La  Luz  is  by  general  consent  the
man  who  has  done  most  for  public  education  in
Cuba.  There  is  a  movement  to  erect  a  monument
to  his  memory  in  Havana.  Among  his  works  are
a  translation  of  Volney's  "  Travels  in  Egypt  and
Syria,"  with  notes  and  additions  (Paris,  1829);  Sieg-
ling's  "  Public  Prisons  and  their  Reforms,"  from
the  German  (1837);  and  numerous  memoirs  and
pamphlets  on  educational,  scientific,  and  philo
sophical  subjects.  There  are  several  biographies
of  La  Luz,  the  best  being  that  in  Spanish  by  Jose
Ignacio  Rodriguez  (New  York,  1874).

LUZENBERtc,  Charles  Aloysius,  physician.
b.  in  Verona,  Italy,  31  July,  1805 :  d.  in  Cincin
nati,  Ohio,  15  July,  1848.  He  was  educated  at
Landau,  and  at  Weissenburg  college,  Alsace,  and
in  1819  accompanied  his  father,  who  had  been
commissary  in  the  Austrian  army,  to  Philadel
phia.  He  attended  lectures  at  Jefferson  medical
college  in  1825,  removed  to  New  Orleans  in  1829,
and  became  surgeon  to  the  Charity  hospital.  He
soon  became  well  known  in  his  profession,  estab
lished  the  New  Orleans  medical  school,  of  which
he  was  the  first  dean,  and  founded  the  Society  of
natural  history  in  1839,  and  in  1843  the  Louisiana
medico-chirurgical  society,  being  of  both  first
president.  In  1832-'4  he  visited  Europe,  and  was
made  a  corresponding  member  of  the  Academy  of
Paris.  He  performed  successfully  many  of  the
most  difficult  surgical  operations,  such  as  the  ex
tirpation  of  the  parotid  gland,  the  excision  of  six
inches  of  ilium,  and  the  tying  of  the  primitive
iliac  artery.  Dr.  Luzenberg  is  also  credited  with
being  the  first  physician  on  this  continent  to  pre
vent  pitting  in  small-pox  by  exclusion  of  light.


LUZURIAGA,  Toribio  (lu-thu-re-ah'-gah),  Ar
gentine  soldier,  b.  in  Juaraz,  Peru,  in  1770 ;  d.  in
Buenos  Ayres  in  1837.  Pie  took  part  in  all  the
battles  against  the  English  army  in  1806-'7  in
Buenos  Ayres  and  Montevideo,  made  the  cam
paign  of  upper  Peru  during  1810,  under  Gen.
Balcarce,  and  was  present  at  the  famous  retreat  of
the  patriot  army,  under  Castelli,  in  Desaguadero.
In  1816  he  joined  the  army  of  the  Andes,  where  he
rendered  important  service  to  the  cause  of  Span
ish-American  independence.  He  was  elected  gov
ernor  of  the  province  of  Cuyo  in  1816,  and  went  to
Chili  in  1820.  and  afterward  joined  the  Peruvian
army,  serving  in  these  two  countries  as  a  general,
and  being  elected  marshal  of  Chili.  He  was  com
missioned  by  San  Martin  to  the  congress  that  was
about  to  be  established  in  the  United  Provinces  of
the  River  Plate,  and  afterward  continued  to  serve
his  country  till  his  death.

LYALL,  James,  inventor,  b.  in  Perthshire,
Scotland,  13  Sept.,  1836.  He  came  to  the  United
States  when  he  was  three  years  old,  and,  after  a
school  education,  worked  in  his  father's  shop,  mak
ing  and  mounting  Jacquard  machines  for  weaving.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  served  with
the  12th  New  York  infantry  in  the  defences  of
Washington.  In  1863  he  invented  a  simple  mix
ture  for  enamelling  cloth,  which  was  approved  by
the  U.  S.  government,  and  led  to  his  receiving  large
contracts  for  the  manufacture  of  knapsacks  and
haversacks.  He  and  his  brother  William  employed
upward  of  4,000  men  in  filling  the  orders  that  they
received.  In  1868  he  invented  the  Lyall  positive-
motion  loom,  which  has  since  been  adopted  by  the
largest  mills  in  the  United  States,  and  also  in  Eu
rope,  China,  and  Japan.  Its  advantages  are  the
abolition  of  the  picking  sticks  ;  a  positive  motion
to  the  shuttle  from  any  point  in  its  course ;  the
great  width  of  the  fabric  that  may  be  woven  ;  the
variety  of  fabrics  that  may  be  produced,  from  the
finest  silk  to  the  heaviest  carpet ;  the  almost  total
absence  of  wear,  and  the  very  small  amount  of
power  required  to  operate  the  looms.  There  has
been  no  corresponding  advance  in  weaving  since
the  application  of  power  to  the  loom,  and  it  is
claimed  that  no  invention  in  any  field  has  exceeded
this  in  importance  and  value  to  humanity.  Mr.
Lyall  received  the  gold  medal  of  honor  in  1869
from  the  American  institute  of  New  York,  which
was  the  first  award  of  this  prize.  He  founded  with
his  brother  William  in  1861  the  firm  of  J.  and  W.
Lyall,  which  still  carries  on  the  manufacture  of
looms  and  machines.  Later  he  established  the
Brighton  mills  to  weave  figured  cotton  goods,  and
the  Chelsea  mills  for  jute  goods.  These  enterprises
are  in  New  York  city,  and  are  now  (1887)  under
his  direct  management.

LYBRAND,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  3  Oct.,  1793  ;  d.  there,  24  April,  1845.
His  parents  were  Lutherans,  but  he  became  a
Methodist  when  about  ten  years  of  age,  and,  after
receiving  a  good  education,  was  admitted  in  1811
as  a  candidate  on  probation  for  the  ministry.
From  that  time  until  1842  he  labored  as  an  itiner
ant  Methodist  preacher,  exclusively  within  the  ju
risdiction  of  the  Philadelphia  conference.  As  a
pulpit  orator  Mr.  Lybrand  took  high  rank.  _  "  Of
the  many  sermons  I'have  heard  him  preach,"  said
one  who"  knew  him  over  twenty  years,  "  I  do  not
remember  one  that  was  deficient  in  logical  struc
ture,  impassioned  appeal,  or  chaste  and  beautiful
[  illustration.  His  voice  possessed  great  compass,
and  was  round,  full,  and  susceptible  of  the  most
j  tender  modulations."  So  strong  was  his  convic-
|  tion  that  it  was  his  duty  to  engage  in  no  other


58


LYDIUS


LYLE


work  than  that  of  preaching,  that  he  declined  to
accept  some  of  the  most  important  offices  in  the
gift  of  his  denomination.

LYDIUS,  Johannes,  clergyman,  b.  in  Holland;
d.  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  1  March,  1709.  He  had
held  the  pastorate  of  a  Reformed  church  in  Ant
werp,  Belgium,  but  came  to  this  country  in  1700,
and  was  settled  at  Albany.  He  also  labored  in
Schenectady  after  1705,  and  from  1702  till  his  death
did  missionary  work  among  the  Indians.  Robert
Livingston,  the  Indian  agent,  had  promised  the
Mohawks  in  1700  that  he  would  engage  Lydius  to
learn  their  language  and  preach  the  gospel  to
them,  and  that  he  hoped  soon  to  have  the  Bible
translated  for  their  benefit.  In  1702  the  "  praying  |
Indians"  represented  to  the  agent  that  Lydius
"  had  exhorted  them  to  live  as  Christians,"  and
that  his  teachings  had  so  wrought  on  their  spirits
that  "  they  were  all  now  united  and  friends."  They
returned  hearty  thanks  for  the  pains  that  he  had
taken  with  them,  which  they  acknowledged  with  a
belt  of  wampum,  and  when  Lydius  died  they  pre
sented  four  beaver-skins  to  the  agent  as  an  expres
sion  of  condolence.  Lydius  ministered  among  the
tribes  of  the  Five  Nations,  and  received  from  the
governor  and  council  suitable  compensation  for
his  services.  About  thirty  Indian  communicants
were  connected  with  his  church  when  Lydius  died.
The  latter  is  represented  by  Thomas  Barclay,  his
contemporary,  and  a  clergyman  of  the  Church  of
England,  as  "  a  good,  pious  man,"  who  "  lived  in
entire  friendship "  with  him,  and  "  sent  his  own
children  to  be  catechized." — His  son.  John  Henry,
Indian  trader,  b.  in  Antwerp,  Belgium,  in  1093  ;
d.  near  London,  England,  in  1791,  became  an  In
dian  trader  in  the  province  of  New  York,  and  un
derstood  several  native  dialects,  among  them  Cher
okee,  Choctaw,  and  Catawba,  besides  speaking
Dutch,  French,  and  English  fluently.  He  was  a
counsellor  of  Sir  William  Johnson,  and  for  several
years  governor  at  Fort  Edward.  An  English
writer  is  responsible  for  the  statement  that  the
Lydius  family  were  possessed  of  considerable  land
ed  property  in  the  province  under  an  original  grant
from  James  I.,  and  that  the  Indians,  grateful  for
the  services  of  the  father  as  a  missionary,  added  to
these  domains  a  large  tract  of  country  in  central
New  York.  Lydius  is  said  to  have  gone  to  Eng
land  in  1776  to  solicit  arrears  for  services  that  he
had  rendered  the  government  and  money  that  he
had  expended,  and  to  visit  Holland.  Before  leav
ing  New  York  he  gave  homesteads  to  many  fami
lies,  and  urged  his  children  to  pursue  the  same
policy.  He  never  returned  to  this  country,  but
resided  in  Kensington,  London,  until  his  death.

LYELL,  Sir  Charles,  bart.,  English  geologist,  b.
in  Kinnordy,  Forfarshire,  14  Nov.,  1797  :  d.  in  Lon
don,  22  Feb.,  1875.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of
Charles  Lyell,  of  Kinnordy,  and  was  graduated  at
Oxford  in  1819.  He  then  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  but  abandoned  the  profession
and  gave  himself  to  his  favorite  study  of  geology.
He  made  extensive  geological  tours  in  Europe  in
1824,  and  again  in  1828-'30,  giving  the  results  of
his  observations  in  the  "  Transactions  of  the  Geo
logical  Society  "  and  elsewhere.  In  1830  appeared
the  first  volume  of  his  great  work,  "  The  Princi
ples  of  Geology,"  which  in  scientific  circles  at
tracted  much  attention.  The  second  volume  ap
peared  in  1832,  and  the  third  in  1833.  Meantime
he  was  named  professor  of  geology  at  King's  col
lege,  London,  but  he  filled  the  office  only  for  a
short  time.  Another  remarkable  work  from  his  pen
appeared  in  1838,  entitled  "  The  Elements  of  Ge
ology."  These  works,  which  effected  a  revolution


in  geological  science,  went  counter  to  the  univer
sally  accepted  Huttonian  theory,  that  the  former
changes  of  the  earth  and  its  inhabitants  were  due
to  causes  differing  in  kind  and  intensity  from
those  now  in  operation,  and  taught  that  the  true
key  to  the  interpretation  of  the  geological  move
ments  was  to  be  found  in  a  correct  knowledge  of
the  changes  now  going  on.  Sir  Charles  visited
this  continent  on  two  occasions,  and  made  exten
sive  explorations  in  the  United  States,  Canada,  and
Nova  Scotia.  His  "Travels  in  North  America"
appeared  in  1841,  and  his  "  Second  Visit  to  the
United  States,"  in  which  he  treats  of  the  social  as
well  as  geological  characteristics  of  the  New  World,
was  published  in  1845.  Sir  Charles  was  president
of  the  Geological  society  in  1830  and  1850,  and
in  1864  of  the  British  association.  In  1848  he
was  honored  with  knighthood,  and  in  1864  he  was
made  a  baronet.  In  1855  his  own  university  con
ferred  upon  him  the  title  of  D.  C.  L.,  and  from
Cambridge  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  His
latest  work  was  4>  The  Geological  Evidences  of  the
Antiquity  of  Man,  with  Remarks  on  Theories  of
the  Origin  of  Species  by  Variation  "  (1863).

LYELL,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Richmond
county,  Va.,  13  May,  1775;  d.  in  New  York  city,
4  March,  1848.  His  parents  were  members  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church,  but,  as  there  were  no
clergyman  of  that  denomination  in  the  neighbor
hood,  young  Lyell  was  early  thrown  with  the
Methodists.  When  only  fifteen  years  old  he  be
gan  to  exhort,  and  after  teaching  for  two  years
he  saved  enough  money  to  purchase  a  horse,  and
in  1792.  after  examination,  was  admitted  to  preach
on  trial  as  an  itinerant.  He  labored  on  the  Fred
erick  circuit  in  Virginia,  and  subsequently  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  and  was  chaplain  to  congress
during  the  closing  years  of  the  administration  of
John  Adams  and  the  early  part  of  that  of  Thomas
Jefferson.  Pie  often  spoke  of  the  shock  he  experi
enced  at  the  first  official  dinner  that  was  given  by
the  latter  on  finding  the  usual  blessing  omitted,
although  both  congressional  chaplains  were  pres
ent.  Subsequently  Mr.  Lyell  received  orders  in
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  from  Bishop
Claggett  in  1804,  and  at  the  close  of  that  year  he
became  rector  of  Christ  church,  New  York  city,
where  he  remained  for  over  forty  years.  He  was
given  the  degree  of  A.  M.  by  Brown  in  1803  and
that  of  D.  D.  by  Columbia  in  1822.  lie  was  sec
retary  of  the  convention  of  the  diocese  from  1811
until  he  declined  re-election  in  1816,  a  member  of
the  diocesan  standing  committee  from  1813  until
his  death,  a  deputy  to  the  general  convention  from
1818  until  1844,  a  trustee  of  the  General  theological
seminary  from  1822,  and  an  active  member  of
nearly  all  the  institutions  of  his  diocese.

LYLE,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rockbridge
county,  Va..  20  Oct.,  l'769 ;  d.  in  Paris,  Ky.,  22
July,  1825.  He  was  graduated  at  Liberty  Hall  in
1794,  and  after  teaching,  studied  theology,  and  was
licensed  to  preach  as  a  Presbyterian  in  1797.  He
was  ordained  two  years  later,  and  in  1800  took
charge  of  the  churches  of  Salem  and  Sugar  Ridge,
in  Clark  county,  where  he  remained  several  years
and  opened  a  school.  In  May,  1807,  he  removed  to
Paris,  Ky.,  where  he  established  an  academy,  at
the  same  time  preaching  to  the  churches  of  Cane
Ridge  and  Concord.  About  1810  he  withdrew
from  the  academy,  as  well  as  from  the  churches,
and  soon  after  began  preaching  near  Cynthiana,
Harrison  co.  He  subsequently  gave  up  pastor
al  work  and  devoted  the  rest  of  his  life  to  mis
sionary  labors.  Mr.  Lyle  was  a  thorough  scholar
and  did  much  for  the  cause  of  education  in  the


LYLE


LYMAN


59


west.  He  was  the  first  to  establish  schools  exclu
sively  for  the  education  of  young  women,  and  also
the  first  to  suggest  the  circulation  of  the  scrip
tures  by  means  of  colporteurs.  During  the  relig
ious  excitement  that  began  in  the  southwest  in
1800,  accompanied  by  violent  physical  manifesta
tions,  he  did  all  in  his  power  to  curb  the  extrava
gances  of  the  revival.

LYLE,  William,  poet,  b.  in  Edinburgh,  Scot
land,  17  Nov.,  1822.  He  was  taken  at  the  age  of
twelve  to  Glasgow,  where  he  was  subsequently  ap
prenticed  to  a  potter.  He  continued  to  study  by
himself  and  in  night-schools,  made  rapid  progress,
and  on  completing  his  apprenticeship  soon  obtained
work  as  a  journeyman.  In  18(52  he  was  offered  a
place  in  England,  and  while  there  he  published
various  poems  in  the  Scottish  dialect.  Among
these  was  one  entitled  "  The  Grave  of  Three  Hun
dred,"  having  reference  to  the  Barnsley  mine  dis
aster.  It  was  issued  in  book-form  and  had  an  ex
tensive  sale.  Mr.  Lyle  subsequently  came  to  the
United  States,  and  became  manager  in  a  manufac
turing  business  at  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  where  he  has
since  resided.  His  poems  are  well  known  to  Scot
tish  residents  both  in  this  country  and  in  Canada.
Besides  writing  in  the  Scottish  dialect,  Mr.  Lyle  is
the  author  of  several  English  poems,  including  his
"  Diotima."  Pie  has  also  published  "  The  Martyr
Queen  and  other  Poems  "  (New  York,  1888).

LYMAN,  Benjamin  Smith,  mining  engineer,
b.  in  Northampton,  Mass.,  11  Dec.,  1835.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1855,  after  which  he  was
assistant  on  the  Iowa, state  geological  survey,  and
then  studied  at  the  Ecole  des  mines  in  Paris  in
1859-'61,  and  at  the  Freiberg  mining-school  in
1861-'2,  after  which  he  resumed  the  practice  of  his
profession  in  the  United  States  and  British  Ameri
ca.  In  1870  he  made  a  survey  of  the  oil  lands  in
the  Punjaub  for  the  government  of  India.  In
1873-'5  he  was  chief  geologist  and  mining  engineer
of  the  geological  survey  of  Hokkaido  in  Japan,  and
in  1876-'7  of  the  oil  lands  of  Japan,  finally  filling
a  similar  office  on  the  geological  survey  of  Japan
in  18?8-'9.  It  is  said  of  him  that  "  he  has  surveyed
and  described  in  printed  reports  a  large  part  of  the
Japanese  empire,  and  knows  more  about  it  than
any  other  living  white  man."  At  the  end  of  1880
he  left  Japan,  and  went  to  live  in  Northampton,
Mass.,  where  he  has  since  held  several  offices  in  the
local  government.  In  1887  he  joined  the  corps  of
the  geological  survey  of  Pennsylvania,  with  head
quarters  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.  Mr.  Lyman  has  intro
duced  several  improved  forms  of  surveying  instru
ments — such  as  the  topographer's  transit,  level  rod
notation,  mine  stadia,  solar  transit,  and  the  use
of  equidistant  curves,  or  contour-lines,  for  map
ping  the  structure  of  rock-beds.  He  is  a  mem
ber  of  scientific  societies,  and  has  published  about
one  hundred  professional  papers.  Among  them
the  more  important  are  "  General  Report  on  the
Punjaub  Oil  Lands  "  (Lahore,  1878) ;  "  Preliminary
Report  on  the  First  Season's  Work  of  the  Geo
logical  Survey  of  Yesso  "  (Tokio,  1874) ;  "  A  Geo
logical  Trip  through  and  around  Yesso  in  1874,
and  Four  other  Reports  "  (1875) ;  "  Report  of  Prog
ress  of  the  Yesso  Geological  Surveys  for  1875,  and
Seven  Coal  Survey  Reports  "  (1877) ;  "  A  General
Report  on  the  Geology  of  Yesso  "  (1877) ;  "  A  Re
port  of  Progress  for  the  First  Year  of  the  Oil  Sur
veys  "  (1877) ;  "  Report  on  the  Second  Year's  Prog
ress  of  the  Survey  of  the  Oil  Lands  of  Japan  "
(1878) ;  "  Geological  Survey  of  Japan  ;  Reports  of
Progress  for  1878  and  1879  "  (1879) ;  also  sixteen
maps  of  surveys  in  Japan,  and  "  Logarithms  of
Numbers,  Sines,  and  Cosines  "  (Northampton,  1885).


LYMAN,  Chester  Smith,  educator,  b.  in  Man
chester,  Conn.,  13  Jan.,  1814.  He  early  showed  a
fondness  for  astronomy  and  acquired  a  knowledge
of  that  and  kindred  sciences  without  a  teacher,  con
structing,  while  yet  a  boy,  various  astronomical  and
optical  apparatus.  In  1829  he  computed  almanacs
for  the  two  following  years,  and  also  the  eclipses
of  the  next  fifteen  years.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1837,  after  which  he  was  head  teacher  of
the  school  in  Ellington,  Conn.,  and  then  studied  at
Union  theological  seminary  in  New  York  and  at
Yale  theological  seminary  during  1839-'42.  In
1843-'5  he  was  settled  as  pastor  over  the  1st  Con
gregational  church  in  New  Britain,  Conn.,  but  fail
ing  health  compelled  him  to  relinquish  this  charge,
and  he  spent  several  years  in  travel.  In  1846-'7
he  visited  the  Hawaiian  islands,  where  for  a  time
he  had  charge  of  the  Royal  school  at  Honolulu,
and  explored  the  volcano  Kilauea.  He  then  spent
three  years  in  California  as  a  surveyor,  being  one
of  the  first  to  send  to  the  eastern  states  authentic
accounts  of  the  discovery  of  gold  on  the  Pacific
coast.  He  then  returned  to  New  Haven,  where  he
at  first  was  occupied  in  the  revision  of  Webster's
Dictionary,  having  charge  of  the  scientific  terms  in
the  edition  of  1864.  In  1858  he  became  associated
in  the  development  of  the  scientific  department  of
Yale  (now  the  Sheffield  scientific  school),  and  was
assigned  to  the  chair  of  industrial  mechanics  and
physics,  which  he  held  till  1871.  He  then  was
made  professor  of  astronomy  and  physics,  and  so
continued  until  1884,  and  has  since  had  charge  of
astronomy  only.  His  special  work  has  included
the  invention  of  the  combined  zenith  telescope  and
transit  for  latitude,  longitude,  and  time,  which  was
designed  and  mainly  constructed  in  1852,  and  in
1867  he  invented  and  patented  an  apparatus  for
illustrating  the  dynamics  of  ocean  waves.  About
1871  he  constructed  an  apparatus  for  describing
acoustic  curves,  also  making  improvements  in
clock  escapement,  compensating  pendulums,  and
similar  apparatus.  Prof.  Lyman  was  the  first  to
observe  the  planet  Venus  as  a  delicate  luminous
ring  when  seen  in  close  proximity  to  the  sun  near
inferior  conjunction.  He  is  a  member  of  various
scientific  societies,  was  president  of  the  Connecti
cut  academy  of  arts  and  sciences  during  1857-'77,
and  is  also  an  honorary  member  of  the  British  asso
ciation  for  the  advancement  of  science.  His  writ
ings  have  been  confined  to  scientific  papers,  which
have  appeared  principally  in  the  "  American  Jour
nal  of  Science  "  and  in  "  The  New  Englander."

LYMAN,  Daniel  Wanton,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Providence,  R,  1.,  24  Jan.,  1844 ;  d.  there,  19  Dec.,
1886.  He  was  a  lineal  descendant  of  Gov.  Wan
ton,  of  Rhode  Island.  He  was  for  a  time  a  mem
ber  of  the  class  of  1864  in  Brown  university,  but
was  not  graduated.  For  several  terms  he  repre
sented  the  town  of  North  Providence  in  the  gen
eral  assembly.  In  addition  to  $50,000  that  he  be
queathed  to  Brown  university,  Mr.  Lyman  left  by
his  will  $60,000  to  the  Society  for  the  prevention
of  cruelty  to  children.  $25,000  to  the  Providence
lying-in  hospital,  $5,000  to  the  Providence  nursery,
$"10,000  to  the  city  of  Providence  for  a  monument
to  his  grandfather,  Elisha  Dyer,  $5,000  to  the  town
of  North  Providence  for  a  soldier's  monument,  and
many  other  legacies.

LYMAN,  David  Belden,  missionary,  b.  in  New
Hartford,  Conn.,  28  July,  1803  ;  d.  in  Ililo,  Hawaiian
islands,  4  Oct.,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams
in  1828,  studied  theology  at  Andover,  and  was  or
dained  in  Hanover,  N.  H.— On  3  Nov..  1831,  he
married  Sarah  Joiner,  of  Royalton,  Vt,  b.  there,
29  Nov.,  1805  ;  d.  in  Hilo,  6  Dec.,  1885,  and  the  next


CO


LYMAN


LYMAN


day  they  joined  at  Boston  a  party  of  nineteen
missionaries  that  were  about  to  sail  for  the  Hawai
ian  islands.  Arriving  there  in  May  of  the  following
year,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lyman  were  assigned  to  the  sta
tion  at  Hilo,  then  one  of  the  remotest  of  the  group,
but  now  a  beautiful  and  thriving  town.  Even  be
fore  Mr.  Lyman  had  entirely  mastered  the  language
he  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  Hilo  church  and
of  its  outlying  dependencies.  Here  he  preached,
taught,  aiid  travelled  incessantly,  and  with  the
most  promising  results.  In  1836  two  co-laborers,
Titus  and  Fidelia  Coan  (q.  v.),  arrived,  and  the
growing  pastoral  work  was  assigned  to  the  former,
while  Mr.  Lyman  established  an  academy  for  young
men,  in  which  he  was  aided  by  his  wife.  A  farm
was  cultivated  under  Mr.  Lyman's  supervision,  and
the  pupils  were  thus  supplied  with  food  mainly
through  their  own  labor.  Mr.  Lyman  continued
his  work  until  failing  strength  compelled  him  in
1873  to  give  up  the  charge  of  the  school  to  younger
hands.  His  entire  career  as  a  missionary  covered  a
period  of  fifty-two  years,  unbroken  by  any  vaca
tion  or  by  any  absence  from  his  field  of  labor
other  than  that  required  by  attendance  at  mission
ary  meetings  at  Honolulu. — His  son,  Henry  Mnn-
80H,  physician,  b.  in  Hilo,  Hawaiian  islands,  26
Nov.,  1835,  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1858,
and  at  the  New  York  college  of  physicians  and
surgeons  in  1861.  He  was  house-surgeon  in  Belle-
vue  hospital,  New  York  city,  in  1861-'2.  During
the  latter  year  he  volunteered  in  the  National  army
as  acting  assistant  surgeon,  serving  as  such  in  the
military  hospitals  at  Nashville,  Tenn.,  and  in  1863
resigned  and  began  practice  in  Chicago,  where  he
has  since  resided,  paying  especial  attention  to  dis
eases  of  the  nervous  system.  From  1870  till  1875
he  was  professor  of  chemistry  in  Rush  medical
college,  Chicago,  and  since  1875  has  been  professor
of  physiology  and  of  nervous  diseases  in  the  same
institution.  During  the  latter  period  he  has  also
occupied  the  chair  of  the  theory  and  practice  of
medicine  in  the  Chicago  women's  medical  college.
Dr.  Lyman  is  a  member  of  various  professional
associations,  and  has  published  "  Anaesthesia  and
Anaesthetics"  (New  York,  1881)  and  "Insomnia
and  Other  Disorders  of  Sleep  "  (Chicago.  1885).

LYMAN,  Henry,  missionary,  b.  in  Northamp
ton,  Mass.,  23  Nov.,  1809 ;  d.  in  the  island  of  Su
matra,  28  June,  1834.  He  was  graduated  at  Am-
herst  in  1829,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary
in  1832,  ordained,  11  Oct.,  1832,  and  sailed  the
following  spring  for  Sumatra,  being  one  of  the
first  missionaries  that  were  sent  to  the  East  Indian
archipelago  by  the  American  board  of  commission
ers  for  foreign  missions.  He  had  scarcely  begun
his  work  when,  with  his  companion,  Rev.  Samuel
Munson,  he  was  murdered  by  the  savage  Battahs
among  whom  he  was  laboring.  Mr.  Lyman  com
piled  a  tract  entitled  "  Condition  and  Character  of
Females  in  Pagan  and  Mohammedan  Countries "
(Boston,  1832;  reprinted  by  the  American  tract
society,  1834).  See  "  Memoir  of  Henry  Lyman,"
by  his  sister  (New  York,  1857). — His  sister,  Han
nah  Willard,  educator,  b.  in  Northampton,  Mass.,
in  1816 ;  d.  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  21  Feb.,  1871,
received  a  thorough  education,  began  life  early  as
a  teacher,  and  soon  attained  a  high  reputation.
Prior  to  1865  she  had  been  for  many  years  known
as  a  successful  and  thorough  educator  in  Montreal,
Canada.  She  left  that  city  six  years  before  her
death  to  become  vice-principal  of  Vassal*  college,
and  to  assist  in  its  organization.  She  remained  at
her  post  till  her  health  gave  way  shortly  before  her
death.  Miss  Lyman  published  a  memoir  of  her
brother,  which  is  mentioned  above.


LYMAN,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lebanon,
Conn.,  14  April,  1749;  d. 'in  Hatfield,  Mass.,  27
March,  1828.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1767,
served  as  tutor  there  in  1770-'!,  studied  the
ology,  and  on  4  March,  1772.  was  ordained  pastor
of  the  Congregational  church  in  Hatfield,  Mass.,
where  he  remained  until  his  death.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Williams  in  1801.  Dr.
Lyman  was  one  of  the  earliest  patrons  of  the
Hampshire  missionary  society,  and  in  1812  was
chosen  its  president.  He  was  also,  from  the  be
ginning,  a  member  of  the  American  board  of  com
missioners  for  foreign  missions,  its  vice-president
in  1819,  and  its  president  in  1823.  He  was  out
spoken  in  his  earnest  patriotism  during  the  Revo
lutionary  war,  and  offended  many  of  his  congre
gation  by  this  course.  In  1826  he  was  given  an
assistant.  Dr.  Lyman  published  seventeen  occa
sional  sermons  (1774-1821).

LYMAN,  Joseph,  artist,  b.  in  Ravenna.  Ohio,
26  July,  1843.  He  studied  under  John  H.  Dolpli
and  Samuel  Colman,  exhibited  first  at  the  National
academy  in  1876,  and  was  elected  an  associate  in
1886.  He  visited  Europe  in  1866,  1870,  and  1883.
His  more  important  works  are  "Summer  Night";
"Evening"  (1880);  "Perec  Rock,  Gulf  of  St.
Lawrence  "  (1881) ;  "  Moonlight  at  Sunset  on  the
Maine  Coast"  (1882);  "Waiting  for  the  Tide"
(1883) :  "  Street  in  St.  Augustine,  Florida  "  (1884) :
and  "  Under  her  own  Fig-Tree  "  (1885).

LYMAN,  Joseph  Bardwell,  agriculturist,  b.
in  Chester,  Mass.,  6  Oct.,  1829;  d.  in  Richmond
Hill,  L.  I.,  28  Jan.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1850,  taught  three  years,  and  studied  law.
He  was  graduated  from  the  law-school  of  the  Uni
versity  of  Louisiana  in  1856,  practised  his  profes
sion  in  New  Orleans  until  1861,  and  then  removed
to  Stamford,  Conn.  There  he  engaged  in  hor
ticulture,  also  writing  for  the  "Agriculturist"
and  other  journals.  Subsequently  he  removed  to
New  York  city,  and  in  1867  became  agricultural
editor  of  the  "  World."  In  1868  he  was  manag
ing  editor  of  "  Hearth  and  Home,"  and  a  few
months  later  joined  the  editorial  staff  of  the  "  Trib
une."  on  which  he  served  until  his  death.  He
was  an  active  member  of  the  Farmers'  and  Rural
clubs,  one  of  the  managers  of  the  American  in
stitute,  and  connected  in  an  honorary  capacity
with  numerous  horticultural  and  agricultural  as
sociations.  Mr.  Lyman  had  a  thorough  acquaint
ance  with  the  improved  agriculture  of  New  Eng
land,  the  more  extensive  tillage  of  the  west,  and
the  less  diversified  system  of  the  south.  He  was
an  easy  and  forcible  speaker.  During  his  resi
dence  at  Stamford  he  wrote,  with  his  wife,  "  The
Philosophy  of  Housekeeping "  (Hartford,  1867).
He  also  published  "  Resources  of  the  Pacific
States"  (Hartford,  1865):  "Women  of  the  War"
(1866) ;  and  "  Cotton  Culture  "  (New  York,  1867) ;
and  left  several  unfinished  works  on  agriculture. —
His  wife.  Laura  Elizabeth  Baker,  journalist,  b.
in  Kent's  Hill,  Kennebec  co.,  Me.,  2  April.  1831,
was  graduated  at  the  Wesleyan  academy,  Wilbra-
ham,  Mass.,  in  1849.  She  married  Mr.  Lyman  on  14
July,  1858,  and  in  1870  became  known  by  a  series
of  articles  that  were  published  in  "  Hearth  and
Home  "  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Kate  Hunnibee."
In  1875  she  was  president  of  the  Woman's  physi
ological  society  of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  She  edited  the
"Home  Interest"  department  in  the  New  York
"Tribune"  in  1869-'87,  and  the  "  Dining-Room
Magazine,"  in  1876-'7.

LYMAN,  I'll  i  was,  soldier,  b.  in  Durham,  Conn.,
in  1716:  d.  near  Natchez,  Miss.,  10  Sept.,  1774.
He  was  bred  to  the  trade  of  a  weaver,  but  subse-


LYMAN


LYMAN


61


quentlv  prepared  for  college,  and  was  graduated
from  Yale  in  1738,  remaining  there  three  years  as
tutor,  and  also  studying  law.  After  his  admission
to  the  bar  he  settled  in  Suffield,  then  a  part  of
Massachusetts,  and  at  once  took  high  rank  in  his
profession.  Through  his  exertions  Suffield  was  in
1749  added  to  Connecticut.  He  was  for  seven
years  elected  to  the  upper  house  of  the  legislature,
and  during  that  period  was  repeatedly  charged
with  important  civil  trusts.  In  March,  1755,  he
was  appointed  major-general  and  commander-in-
chief  of  the  Connecticut  forces,  1,000  in  number,
that  were  sent  against  Crown  Point,  and  in  accept
ing  he  gave  up  the  largest  law  practice  in  the  col
ony.  In  the  following  summer  a  fort  was  built
under  his  direction  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Hud
son,  and  was  at  first  called  Fort  Lyman  in  his
honor,  although  the  name  was  afterward  changed
to  Fort  Edward.  In  the  important  battle  that
was  fought  at  the  head  of  Lake  George,  8  Sept.,
1755,  the  command  devolved  on  Gen.  Lyman  al
most  at  the  beginning  of  the  action.  Sir  William
Johnson,  his  superior  officer,  having  been  wounded
and  compelled  to  retire.  Although  Lyman  fought
gallantly  for  five  hours  and  a  half,  frequently
showing  himself  in  front  of  the  defences  to  en
courage  his  men,  he  received  no  credit,  his  name
not  appearing  in  Gen.  Johnson's  official  report.
In  1756  he  was  again  placed  in  command  of  the
Connecticut  contingent,  this  time  composed  of
2.500  men,  to  operate  against  Crown  Point,  but
the  plan  was  finally  abandoned.  In  the  campaign
of  1757  he  was  for  a  time  in  command  at  Fort
Edward,  and  in  1758,  at  the  head  of  5,000  Connec
ticut  troops,  he  shared  in  Gen.  Abercrombie's  re
pulse,  and  was  with  Lord  Howe  when  he  fell.  In
1759  he  was  again  commissioned  major-general,
and,  at  the  head  of  4,000  Connecticut  troops,  aided
Gen.  Amherst  in  taking  possession  of  Ticonder-
oga  and  Crown  Point.  He  was  also  present  at  the
reduction  of  Fort  Louis  at  Oswego  and  the  cap
ture  of  Montreal.  In  1761  he  was  ordered  to  Can
ada,  and  in  1762  he  was  sent  with  2,300  men  to  as
sist  in  the  capture  of  Havana,  and  subsequently
placed  in  command  of  the  entire  provincial  force
during  that  unlucky  expedition.  At  its  close  he
was  deputed  by  the  surviving  officers  and  soldiers
to  proceed  to  England  and  receive  the  part  of  the
prize  money  that  remained  due.  A  company  of
"  Military  Adventurers  "  had  also  been  formed  by
his  exertions,  chiefly  composed  of  those  who  had
served  in  the  late  wars,  whose  object  was  to  obtain
from  the  British  government  a  tract  of  land  on
the  Mississippi  and  Yazoo  rivers.  Soon  after  his
arrival  in  England  in  1763  a  change  of  ministry
took  place,  and  so  many  obstacles  appeared  in  the
way  of  accomplishing  his  design  that  he  remained
abroad  until  1772,  unwilling  to  return  home  and
admit  failure.  He  was  at  last  taken  back  by  his
son,  the  wreck  of  his  former  self,  but  not  until  he
had  obtained  permission  from  the  crown  to  settle
on  a  tract  of  land  twenty  miles  square  east  of  the
Mississippi  and  south  of  the  Yazoo.  The  "  Mili
tary  Adventurers  ''  having  been  reorganized,  Gen.
Lyman  began,  in  December.  1773,  with  a  few  com
panions,  to  make  a  preliminary  survey.  The  party
settled  near  Natchez,  but  Lyman  soon  died.

LYMAN,  Theodore,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Bos
ton,  Mass.,  20  Feb.,  1792;  d.  in  Brookline,  Mass.,
18  July,  1849.  His  father  was  also  Theodore  Ly
man,  and  the  son  is  generally  called  Theodore  Ly
man,  Jr.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1810,
after  which  he  spent  two  years  in  literary  pursuits
at  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  and  then  passed
a  few  months  on  the  continent  of  Europe.  In


1817  he  again  visited  Europe  and  spent  two  years
travelling  with  Edward  Everett  through  Greece,
Turkey,  and  Bulgaria.  On  his  return  he  studied
law.  after  which  for  the  three  years  following  he
held  the  office  of  aide-de-camp  to  the  governor  of
Massachusetts,  and  in  1823  had  command  of  the
Boston  brigade  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.
Under  his  strict  dis
cipline  this  organ
ization  became  a
creditable  body  of
troops.  He  also  at
this  time  participat
ed  in  public  affairs,
and  in  1820  became
a  member  of  the
lower  branch  of  the
state  legislature,
where  he  continued
until  1825,  except
in  1824,  when  he
was  in  the  state  sen
ate.  In  1834.  and
again  in  1835,  he
was  elected  mayor
of  Boston.  His  ad
ministration  was
marked  by  the  de
struction  of  the  Ursuline  convent  in  Boston  and
by  the  adoption  of  his  recommendation  that  a
sinking  fund  for  the  payment  of  city  debt  should
be  established.  In  1835 'he  rescued  William  Lloyd
Garrison  from  an  infuriated  mob  at  the  risk  of  his
own  life.  On  the  completion  of  his  second  term  he
retired  entirely  from  public  life.  He  was  president
of  the  Boston  farm-school,  to  which  he  bequeathed
$10.000,  and  an  active  member  of  the  State  horticul
tural  society,  to  which  organization  he  left  a  simi
lar  sum.  The  object  of  his  greatest  benevolence
was  the  State  reform-school  in  Westborough  which
he  founded  and  to  which  he  gave  $22,500  during
his  lifetime  and  $50.000  at  his  death.  His  works
include  "  Three  Weeks  in  Paris  "  (Boston,  1814) ;
"The  Political  State  of  Italy  "  (1820):  "Account
of  the  Hartford  Convention  ""  (1823) ;  "  The  Diplo
macy  of  the  United  States  with  Foreign  Nations  "
(2  vols.,  1828).— His  son.  Theodore,  third  of  the
name,  naturalist,  b.  in  Waltham,  Mass..  23  Aug.,
1833,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1855,  and  at
the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  that  university  in
1858.  after  which  he  continued  his  scientific  studies
in  Europe  until  1863.  Soon  after  his  return  he
entered  the  military  service,  and  was  made  aide-
de-camp  on  Gen.  George  G.  Meade's  staff,  with  the
rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  on  2  Sept.,  1863,  in
which  capacity  he  served  until  20  April,  1865,  be
ing  present  at  the  movements  on  Centerville  and
Mine  Run,  the  battles  of  the  Wilderness,  Spottsyl-
vania  Court-House,  and  Cold  Harbor,  the  invest
ment  of  Petersburg,  the  pursuit  of  the  Army  of
Northern  Virginia,  and  its  capture  at  Appomattox
Court-House.  From  1865  till  1882  he  was  fish
commissioner  of  Massachusetts,  making  the  first
scientific  experiments  that  were  undertaken  for
the  cultivation  and  preservation  of  food  fishes  by
any  state  in  the  Union.  The  annual  "  Reports  of
the  Commissioners  on  Inland  Fisheries  of  Massa
chusetts"  during  his  administration  were  wholly
or  in  part  written  by  him.  In  1883  he  was  elected
to  congress  as  an  Independent  on  the  issue  of  re
form  in  the  civil  service,  and  served  until  3  March,
1885.  He  has  been  active  in  the  interests  of  Har
vard,  being  an  overseer  of  that  university  from
1868  till  1880,  and  from  1881  till  1887,  and  'he  has
also  been  interested  in  the  administration  of  chari-


LYMAN


LYNCH


ties,  is  president  of  the  Boston  farm-school,  and  a
trustee  of  the  National  Peabody  education  fund
and  of  the  Peabody  museum  of  archaeology.  Mr.
Lyman  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies  both  at
home  and  abroad,  and  in  1872  was  elected  to  the
National  academy  of  sciences.  He  has  worked
chiefly  on  radiated  animals  at  the  Museum  of  com
parative  zoology  in  Cambridge,  where  since  1860
he  has  been  assistant  in  zoology.  In  that  connec
tion  he  has  published  "  Illustrated  Catalogue  of
the  Ophiuridae  and  Astrophytidffi  in  the  Muse
um  of  Comparative  Zoology"  (Cambridge,  1865) ;
"  Supplement "  (1871) ;  "  Report  on  Ophiuridffi  and
Astrophytidae  dredged  by  Louis  F.  de  Pourtales  "
(1869) ;  "  Old  and  New  Ophiuridae  and  Astrophy-
tid*"  (1874);  "  Ophiurida?  and  Astrophytidse  of
the  Hassler  Expedition  "  (1875) ;  "  Dredging  Opera
tions  of  the  U.  S.  Steamer  '  Blake ' ;  Ophiurans  "
(1875) ;  "  Prodrome  of  the  Ophiuridae  and  Astro-
phytidae  of  the,  '  Challenger '  Expedition ''  (part  i.,
1878 ;  part  ii.,  1879) ;  and  "  Report  on  the  Ophiu-
ridae  dredged  by  H.  M.  S.  '  Challenger'  during  the
Years  1873-'6  "  (London,  1882 ) ;  also  various  minor
articles  contributed  to  scientific  journals,  and
"Papers  relating  to  the  Garrison  Mob"  (1870).

LYMAN,  Theodore  Benedict,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Brighton,  Mass.,  27  Nov.,  1815.  lie  was
graduated  at  Hamilton  college  in  1837,  and  at  the
General  theological  seminary,  New  York  city,  in

1840,  was  ordained  deacon  in  Christ  church,  Balti
more,  Md.,  20  Sept.,  1840.  by  Bishop  Whittingham,
and  priest  in  St.  John's  church,  Hagerstown,  Md.,
19  Dec.,  1841,  by  the  same  bishop. He  entered
upon  the  charge  of  St.  John's  church,  Hagerstown,
in  October,  1840,  became  rector  of  the  parish  in

1841,  and  occupied  that  post  for  ten  years. In
1850  he  accepted  the  rectorship  of  Trinity  church,
Pittsburg,  Pa. In  1860  he removed  to  Europe,
and  was  instrumental  in  establishing  the  Ameri
can  church  in  Florence  and  the  American  chapel,
now  St.  Paul's  church,  in  Rome. During  his  resi
dence  abroad  he  was  elected  dean  of  the  General
theological  seminary,  but  declined. Ten  years  later
he  returned  to  the  United  States,  became  rector  of
Trinity  church,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  and  held  that
office  for  three  years. He  was  elected  assistant
bishop  of  North  Carolina  in  1873,  and  was  conse
crated  in  Christ  church,  Raleigh,  N.  C.,  11  Dec..
1873. On  the  death  of  Bishop  Atkinson,  in  1881,
he  became  bishop  of  the  diocese. With  his  con
sent  the  eastern  part  of  the  slate  was  set  off  as  a
separate  diocese  in  1883. He  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  St.  James's  college,  Md.,  in  1856,  and
by  appointment  of  the  presiding  bishop,  in  1886,
took  charge  of  the  American  Episcopal  churches
in  Europe. Bishop  Lyman  has  published  a  few
occasional  sermons  and  addresses.

LYMAN,  William,  legislator,  b.  in  North
ampton,  Mass.,  in  1753;  d.  in  London,  England,
in  October,  1811.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1776,  in  1789  was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts
senate,  and  was  then  elected  to  congress,  serving
from  2  Dec.,  1793,  till  3  March,  1797.  He  was  ap"-
pointed  consul  at  London  in  1805,  and  held  the
office  for  six  years  until  his  death.

LYMBURNER,  Adam,  Canadian  merchant,  b.
in  Kilmarnock,  Ayrshire,  Scotland,  in  1746 ;  d.  in
London  in  1836.  He  came  to  Canada,  established
himself  in  Quebec  as  a  merchant,  and  served  for
several  years  in  the  executive  council  of  the  prov
ince.  In  1779  the  English-speaking  population
employed  Mr.  Lymburner  to  visit  London  as  their
agent  and  urge  upon  the  home  government  a  re
vision  of  the  colonial  system  on  a  constitutional
basis.  His  mission  resulted  in  the  transmission  to


the  governor  of  a  draft  bill  that  provided  for  the
establishment  of  representative  government  in
Canada.  The  bill  was  not  satisfactory  to  the  colo
nists  in  all  its  provisions,  and  was  opposed  by  Mr.
Lymburner  at  the  bar  of  the  house  of  commons.

"LYNCH,  Charles,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia;  d.
near  Staunton,  Campbell  co.,  Va.,  about  1785.  He
was  the  colonel  of  a  regiment  of  riflemen  that
behaved  with  gallantry  at  Guilford.  The  term
"  lynch  law  "  is  said  to  have  been  derived  from  his
practice  of  executing  without  trial  the  members  of
a  band  of  Tory  marauders  that  infested  the  newly
settled  country.  Another  account  derives  the  term
from  the  summary  methods  taken  by  a  planter
named  John  Lynch  to  rid  the  region  of  outlaws
and  escaped  slaves  who  took  refuge  in  the  Dismal
Swamp.  This  may  have  been  Col.  Charles's  broth
er  JOHN,  who  founded  the  town  of  Lynchburg.
Va.,  and  who  is  said  by  some  authorities  to  have
been  the  original  "Judge  Lynch":  while  others
trace  the  phrase  back  to  one  Lynch  who  was  sent
to  America  to  punish  pirates  about  1687,  or  to  the
mayor  of  Galway,  Ireland,  who  in  1493  executed
his 'own  son  for  murder.  A  tradition  of  the  Drake
family  of  North  Carolina  ascribes  the  phrase  to
the  precipitate  hanging,  to  prevent  a  rescue,  of  a
Tory  named  Maj.  Beard  on  Lynch  creek  in  Frank
lin  county,  N.  C.  When  it  was  found  that  the
Tories  were  not  in  pursuit,  the  captors  went
through  the  forms  of  a  court-martial,  and  hanged
the  lifeless  body  in  execution  of  its  decree. — His
son,  Charles,  b.  in  Virginia;  d.  near  Natchez,
Miss.,  16  Feb.,  1853,  was  governor  of  Mississippi
from  1835  till  1837.

LYNCH,  Isidore  de,  French  soldier,  b.  in  Lon
don,  7  June,  1755  ;  d.  in  France,  4  Aug.,  1841.  lie
was  sent  for  his  education  to  the  College  of  Louis-
le-Grand,  Paris.  During  the  war  of  1770  in  India
he  was  taken  to  that  country  by  one  of  his  uncles,
who  commanded  a  regiment  of  the  Irish  brigade,
and  after  serving  in  the  campaigns  of  1770  and
1771  he  returned  to  France.  He  then  volunteered
to  aid  the  American  colonists,  and  served  first  un
der  the  orders  of  Count  d'Estaing.  At  the  most
critical  moment  of  the  siege  of  Savannah,  Ga.,
D'Estaing,  who  was  at  the  head  of  the  right  of  one
column,  commanded  Lynch  to  carry  an  urgent
order  to  the  third  column  on  the  left.  These  col
umns  were  within  grape-shot  range  of  the  intrench-
ments  of  the  English,  and  a  tremendous  firing  was
kept  up  on  both  sides.  Instead  of  passing  through
the  centre  or  in  the  rear  of  the  column,  Lynch  rode
through  the  front.  In  vain  D'P^staing  and  those
who  surrounded  him  shouted  to  him  to  take  an
other  direction.  He  went  on,  executed  his  order,
and  returned  by  the  same  way.  Being  asked  by
D'Estaing  why  he  took  a  path  in  which  he  was  al
most  certain  to  be  killed,  he  replied :  "  Because  it
was  the  shortest,"  and  then  joined  the  part  of  the
troops  that  were  most  ardently  engaged  in  mount
ing  to  the  assault.  He  was  afterward  employed  in
the  army  of  Rochambeau,  and  continued  to  do  good
service  up  to  the  surrender  of  Cornwallis.  After
seeing  some  fighting  in  Mexico  he  returned  to
France  in  1783,  was  named  colonel  of  the  2d  regi
ment  in  the  Irish  brigade,  and  received  the  cross
of  St.  Louis.  Although  all  his  relatives  in  France
were  devoted  to  the  Bourbons,  he  took  service  un
der  the  French  republic,  and  commanded  the  in
fantry  at  the  first  battle  of  Valmy  in  1792.

LYNCH,  James  Daniel,  author,  b.  in  Mecklen
burg  county,  Va.,  6  Jan.,  1836.  He  was  educated
at  the  University  of  North  Carolina,  taught  in  Co
lumbus  and  in  West  Point,  Miss.,  in  1859-'62,  and
in  the  latter  year  joined  the  Confederate  army.


LYNCH


LYNCH


63


He  raised  a  company  of  cavalry  under  Gen.  Polk,
was  chosen  captain,  and  was  wounded  at  Lafayette,
Ga.  After  the  war  he  began  the  practice  of  law  in
West  Point.  Miss.,  but  abandoned  it  for  literary
pursuits.  His  best  known  poems  are  " The  Clock
of  Destiny,"  "The  Star  of  Texas,"  and  the  "Siege
of  the  Alamo."  He  has  also  published  "  Kemper
County  Vindicated  "  (New  York,  1878) ;  "  Bench
and  Bar  of  Mississippi"  (1881);  and  "Bench  and
Bar  of  Texas  "  (1885) ;  and  has  in  press  (1887)  "An
Industrial  History  of  Texas."

LYNCH,  John  Joseph,  Canadian  R.  C.  arch
bishop,  b.  near  Clones,  Ireland.  6  Feb.,  1816;  d.  in  To
ronto,  12  May,  1888.  He  began  his  classical  studies
in  Lucan,  County  Kildare.  and  finished  them  in
Castleknock,  Dublin.  In  1837  he  was  sent  to  the
Seminary  of  St.  Lazarus  in  Paris,  and  shortly  af
terward  became  a
member  of  the
Lazarist  order.  In
1843  he  returned
to  Ireland  and  was
ordained  priest  by
Archbishop  Mur
ray,  of  Dublin.  He
was  professor  in
the  College  of  Cas
tleknock  till  1846,
and  then,  meeting
Bishop  Odin,  who
was  in  search  of
priests  for  his  vica-
riate  of  Texas,  he
consented  to  ac
company  him  to
the  United  States.
He  arrived  in  New
Orleans,  29  June,
1847,  sailed  for
Galveston,  and  finally  reached  Houston,  which  be
came  the  centre  of  his  missionary  labors.  There
were  about  10,000  Roman  Catholics  scattered  over
Texas,  and  Father  Lynch's  labors  were  most  ex
hausting.  He  was  treated  with  great  kindness  by
people  of  all  creeds,  and  Gov.  Houston  offered  to
raise  funds  to  build  him  a  church  if  he  would  consent
to  reside  permanently  in  Houston.  In  his  travels
through  Texas  he  frequently  lost  his  way,  at  one
time  stumbling  on  an  Indian  camp,  where  he  was
received  with  kindness  and  allowed  to  baptize  the
children  of  the  tribe.  He  returned  to  Houston  in
the  autumn  of  1847,  after  going  north  as  far  as
Indian  territory  and  exploring  the  country  be
tween  Brazos,  Colorado,  and  Trinity  rivers.  He
was  stricken  down  by  a  malignant  fever  shortly
after  reaching  Houston,  and.  after  visiting  New
Orleans,  was  obliged,  in  March,  1848,  to  go  to  the
north.  He  visited  the  Lazarist  college  of  St.  Mary
the  Barrens,  Mo.,  and  became  president  of  that  in
stitution  in  September  following.  He  remodelled
the  system  of  discipline  on  the  plan  of  the  Bene
dictine  monasteries  of  the  middle  ages,  abolishing
all  espionage,  with  entire  success.  In  1849  he  was
elected  deputy  by  the  Lazarists  of  America  to  the
general  assembly  of  the  order  in  Paris.  On  his  re
turn  to  St.  Mary's,  while  performing  the  duties  of
president,  he  gave  missions  throughout  the  sur
rounding  country.  In  one  of  his  long  journeys
imprudent  exposure  and  over-fatigue  resulted  in
paralysis  of  the  right  side,  but  he  recovered  and  was
elected  deputy  to  the  general  assembly  of  his  order
in  1854.  He  founded  the  Seminary  of  our  Lady  of
Angels  near  Niagara  Falls,  and  devoted  the  next
three  years  of  his  life  to  placing  this  institution  on
a  firm  footing.  He  was  nominated  coadjutor  to


the  bishop  of  Toronto  in  September,  1859,  with
right  of  succession,  and  was  consecrated  on  20
Nov.  following.  In  April,  1800,  he  became  bishop
on  the  resignation  of  Bishop  de  Charbonnel.  He
at  once  set  about  visiting  every  part  of  his  diocese,
and  in  1863  held  his  first  synod,  in  which  he  framed
a  complete  code  of  ecclesiastical  jurisprudence.  In
1862  he  visited  Rome  to  attend  the  canonization
of  the  Japanese  martyrs.  In  1869  he  went  again
to  Rome  to  attend  the  Vatican  council,  and  was
then  made  archbishop  of  Toronto  and  metropoli
tan  of  Ontario.  He  presided  over  his  first  provin
cial  council  in  1873,  and  in  1879  made  his  decen
nial  visit  to  Rome,  also  visiting  Ireland.  In  an
interview  with  the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  then
lord-lieutenant,  and  Sir  Stafford  Northcote,  he  en
deavored  to  persuade  those  statesmen  of  the  ad
vantage  of  conceding  home  rule  to  Ireland.  He
was  received  formally  on  his  return  to  London  by
Sir  Alexander  T.  Gait,  the  Canadian  high  commis
sioner,  who  requested  him  to  be  presented  at  court.
After  some  hesitation  he  consented,  by  the  advice
of  Cardinal  Manning,  and  was  the  first  Roman
Catholic  bishop  since  the  reign  of  James  II.  to  at
tend  a  royal  levee.  On  his  return  to  Toronto  he
delivered  a  series  of  lectures  on  the  Vatican  coun
cil  in  his  cathedral  before  large  audiences,  the  ma
jority  of  whom  were  not  Roman  Catholics.  Dr.
Lynch  was  a  vigorous  and  eloquent  writer,  and  his
pastorals,  which  embrace  all  questions  of  a  social
and  religious  character,  had  much  influence  on
public  life  in  Canada.  His  jubilee  was  celebrated
on  10  Dec.,  1884,  with  great  magnificence,  the  civil
authorities  of  the  province  taking  an  active  part
in  it.  During  Archbishop  Lynch's  episcopate  the
Roman  Catholic  church  in  "Ontario  made  rapid
strides.  When  he  became  bishop  of  Toronto  there
were  about  thirty  priests  and  forty-two  churches.
At  present  (1888)  there  are  seventy-one  churches
and  about  eighty  priests.  Under  his  guidance
charitable  and  educational  institutions  sprung  up
in  every  part  of  Ontario.  He  founded  the  Con
vent  of  the  Precious  Blood  in  1874  and  Magdalen
asylum  in  1875,  and  established  convents  of  St.
Joseph  in  St.  Catharines,  Thorold,  Barrie,  and
Oshawa.  Forty  parish  churches  and  thirty  pres
byteries  were  erected  and  seventy  priests  ordained
for  the  diocese  between  1859  and"  1884.

LYNCH,  John  Roy,  member  of  congress,  b.  in
Concordia  parish,  La.,  10  Sept.,  1847.  He  is  a  mu
latto,  and  was  not  born  a  slave,  but  after  his  fa
ther's  death  the  administrator  of  the  estate  held
his  mother  in  bondage.  When  a  child  he  was  car
ried  with  his  mother  to  Natchez,  Miss.,  where  he
continued  to  reside  after  he  obtained  his  freedom
on  the  occupation  of  the  city  by  the  National
troops.  He  had  received  no  previous  training,  but,
by  attending  a  night-school  for  a  few  months,  and
afterward  studying  privately,  he  obtained  a  good
English  education.  He  engaged  in  the  business  of
photography  until  1869,  when  he  was  appointed  a
justice  of  the  peace.  He  was  elected  to  the  legis
lature  in  the  same  year,  and  re-elected  and  chosen
speaker  in  1871.  In  1872  he  was  sent  to  congress,
and  re-elected  for  the  following  term.  In  1876  he
was  again  a  candidate,  and  his  friends  claimed  that
he  was  elected,  but  James  R.  Chalmers  obtained
the  seat.  In  1878  he  defeated  Gen.  Chalmers,  and
in  1880  was  defeated  by  the  Democratic  candidate.
He  was  temporary  chairman  of  the  Republican
national  convention  of  1884.

LYNCH,  Patricio,  Chilian  naval  officer,  b.  in
Valparaiso,  18  Oct.,  1825;  d.  at  sea  in  May,  1886.
His  father  was  of  Irish  extraction.  The  son  studied
at  the  naval  academy,  and  served  as  a  cadet  in  the


64


LYNCH


LYNCH


naval  campaign  of  1838  against  the  Peru-Bolivian
confederation.  In  1840  he  entered  the  British  navy
by  the  orders  of  his  government,  and  took  part  in
the  war  against  China  in  1841-'2.  lie  became  a
lieutenant  and  was  decorated  with  two  medals.  In
1847  he  returned  to  his  native  country,  re-entered
the  navy  as  a  lieutenant,  and  in  1854  was  retired
with  the  rank  of  frigate-captain.  In  1865  he  re
turned  to  the  service,  and  during  the  campaign
against  Spain  was  governor  of  Valparaiso,  organ
ized  the  National  guard,  and  commanded  a  Chilian
vessel.  After  the  war  he  was  promoted  to  post-
captain,  and  till  the  year  1878  was  several  times
maritime  prefect  of  Valparaiso.  In  1879  he  was
the  first  Chilian  governor  of  the  Peruvian  territory
of  Tarapaca,  having  been  before  general  commander
of  transportation.  In  this  same  year  he  was  chief
of  the  expedition  that  was  sent  to  the  north  of  Peru,
destroying  property  to  the  amount  of  $15.000,000.
On  19  Nov.,  1880,  "he  landed  at  Pisco  with  his  di
vision  of  8,500  men,  and  made  a  bold  march  of
more  than  one  hundred  and  seven  miles  to  Cura-
yaco,  overcoming  great  difficulties.  He  was  obliged
to  carry  potable  water  for  his  troops,  but  was  so
fortunate  as  to  lose  but  four  soldiers.  On  13  Jan.,
1881,  in  the  battle  of  Chorrillos,  he  encountered
such  stubborn  resistance  that  he  lost  192  officers
and  1,879  soldiers,  the  greater  number  in  the  at
tack  of  "  Morro  Solar."  He  also  was  present  at
the  final  battle  of  Miraflores  on  15  Jan.  Some
months  afterward  congress  promoted  him  to  the
rank  of  rear-admiral,  and  appointed  him  com
mander  of  the  Chilian  army,  which  post  he  held
till  October,  1883.  Although  it  is  said  that  he  had
not  been  over-scrupulous  in  the  previous  campaign
regarding  plunder,  he  sternly  repressed  the  sack
ing  of  Lima  by  his  own  soldiers  and  the  marauders
that  infested  the  city,  ordering  the  immediate  exe
cution  of  every  man  caught  in  the  act  of  robbing,
and  he  court-martialed  several  Chilian  officers  for
extortion.  He  suppressed  the  Calderon  govern
ment,  and  sent  the  provisional  president  a  prisoner
to  Chili,  notwithstanding  the  protest  of  the  Ameri
can  minister.  In  1883  he  planned  the  campaign
in  which  Caceres  was  defeated  at  Huamachuco
in  July,  invested  Iglesias  with  the  presidency  in
October,  withdrew  the  Chilian  garrison  to  Chor
rillos,  and  conducted  the  evacuation  of  the  country
after  the  ratification  of  peace.  In  recompense  for
his  services  he  was  promoted  by  congress  to  the
highest  rank  of  the  Chilian  navy,  that  of  vice-
admiral,  and  in  1885  was  sent  as  minister  to  Spain.
In  the  following  year  he  was  recalled  by  his  gov
ernment  to  take  charge  of  the  Chilian  legation  at
Lima,  and  died  on  his  passage  homeward  when  near
the  Canary  islands.  His  remains  were  landed  in
Teneriffe,  and  afterward  transported  by  the  iron
clad  "  Blanco  Encalada"  to  Chili,  arriving  in  San
tiago  on  14  May,  1887,  where  they  received  mag
nificent  funeral  honors.

LYNCH,  Patrick  Niesen,  R,  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Clones,  Ireland,  10  March,  1817;  d.  in  Charleston,
S.  C.,  26  Feb.,  1882.  In  1819  his  parents  emigrated
to  the  United  States,  and  were  among  the  first
settlers  of  Cheraw,  S.  C.  After  studying  at
Bishop  England's  seminary  of  St.  John  the  Bap
tist  in  Charleston,  the  son  was  sent  to  the  College
of  the  Propaganda,  Home,  and  became  one  of  its
most  brilliant  students.  He  was  ordained  priest,
and,  after  winning  the  degree  of  doctor  of  divinity
by  a  public  thesis  in  1840,  returned  to  Charleston,
and  was  appointed  assistant  pastor  at  the  cathe
dral.  Here  he  remained  until  the  death  of  Bishop
England  in  1844.  During  the  eleven  following
years  he  was  pastor  of  St.  Mary's  church,  being


also  part  of  the  time  principal  of  the  Collegiate
institute  and  vicar-general  of  the  diocese.  In
1855.  on  the  death  of  Bishop  Reynolds,  he  was  ap
pointed  administrator,  and  governed  the  see  until
he  was  nominated  bishop.  He  was  consecrated,  14
March,  1858.  When  South  Carolina  seceded,  Bishop
Lynch  became  an  ardent  supporter  of  the  Con
federacy.  In  the  first  year  of  the  civil  war  a  fire
broke  out  in  Charleston,  destroying  the  new  cathe
dral,  the  bishop's  house,  and  other  church  prop
erty,  and  his  flock  was  entirely  scattered  by  the
subsequent  siege  and  bombardment.  Then  came
Sherman's  march  to  the  sea,  with  the  burning  of
Columbia  and  its  church,  college,  and  convent.
For  the  purpose  of  counteracting  the  effect  of
Archbishop  liughes's  mission  to  Europe,  the  Con
federate  authorities  sent  Bishop  Lynch  on  a  special
mission  to  France,  and  with  a  letter  from  Jefferson
Davis  to  the  pope.  On  his  return  he  found  his
diocese  nearly  ruined.  In  addition  to  losses  in
church  property,  he  owed  over  $100,000  to  poor
people  who  had  intrusted  him  with  their  savings,
and  the  rebuilding  of  such  churches  and  institu
tions  as  were  absolutely  necessary  would  cost  at
least  $  150,000  more.  He  had  no  resources  in  his
diocese,  and  the  rest  of  his  life  was  a  struggle  with
these  obligations.  He  spent  a  great  part  of  the
time  in  other  states  collecting  money,  and  at  his
death  all  the  debt  was  paid  except  $17,000.  The
exertion  affected  his  naturally  vigorous  constitu
tion,  and  led  to  a  premature  end.  The  life  of
Bishop  Lynch  was  marked  by  acts  of  heroic  charity
and  great  literary  activity.  In  1848  he  took  charge
of  a  hospital  during  an  epidemic  of  yellow  fever,
nursing  the  sick  even  after  he  had  contracted  the
disease  ;  and  on  the  outbreak  of  the  disease  in
1871  he  returned  in  great  haste  to  his  diocese,  so  as
not  to  be  away  from  his  flock  in  time  of  peril.  He
was  a  classical  scholar  and  a  theologian,  as  well  as
a  devoted  student  of  applied  science.  He  wrote
several  articles  for  reviews  and  periodicals,  and
edited  Deharbe's  "  Series  of  Catechisms."  His
articles  on  the  "  Vatican  Council  "  in  the  "  Catholic
World,"  and  those  on  "The  Blood  of  St.  Janua-
rius,"  were  afterward  published  in  book-form.

LYNCH,  Thomas,  patriot,  b.  in  South  Carolina
about  1720;  d.  there  in  1776.  His  father,  Thomas,
was  the  first  to  cultivate  rice  on  the  alluvial  lands
that  are  periodically  overflowed  by  the  tides.  The
son  inherited  a  large  estate  on  North  and  South
Santee  rivers,  became  a  man  of  great  influence,  who
took  a  prominent  part  in  the  proceedings  of  the
provincial  assembly,  and  was  an  early  and  zealous
advocate  of  colonial  resistance  to  the  encroach
ments  of  the  crown  and  parliament.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  Colonial  congress  of  1765,  and.  with
his  colleagues,  Christopher  Gadsden  and  John  Rut-
ledge,  arrived  first  at  the  place  of  meeting.  In  the
debates  he  denied  the  power  of  parliament  over  the
colonies,  and  opposed  sending  a  petition.  With  the
same  colleagues  he  was  sent  to  the  1st  Continental
congress,  and  continued  a  member  of  that  body
until  he  was  compelled  by  failing  health  to  resign,
and  was  succeeded  by  his  son. — His  son,  Thomas,
signer  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  b.  in
Prince  George  parish,  S.  C.,  5  Aug.,  1749:  d.  at  sea
in  1779,  was  sent  at  the  age  of  twelve  to  England,
where  he  was  educated  at  Eton  college  and  Cam
bridge  university,  and  studied  law  in  the  Temple,
London,  but  returned  home  in  1772  before  com
pleting  his  course,  having  a  distaste  for  the  legal
profession.  He  devoted  himself  to  cultivating  a
plantation  on  North  Santee  river,  which  his  father
conveyed  to  him,  and  took  part  in  the  public  dis
cussions  of  colonial  grievances.  On  the  organiza-


LYNCH


LYNDE


65


tion  of  the  first  regiment  of  South  Carolina  pro
vincials  in  1775  he  was  commissioned  as  captain,
and  while  raising  his  company  in  North  Carolina
contracted  swamp  fever.  When  his  father  was
stricken  with  paralysis  he  was  unable  to  obtain
from  Col.  Christopher  Gadsden  leave  of  absence,

but  his  connec
tion  with  the  reg
iment  was  sev
ered  soon  after
ward  by  his  unan
imous  election  by
the  provincial  as
sembly  to  be  his
father's  successor
in  the  Continen
tal  congress.  On
his  arrival  in
Philadelphia  he
took  his  seat  in
the  congress  of
1776,  and,  not
withstanding  the
weak  state  of  his
own  health,  im-
pressed  that  body
with  his  earnestness  and  eloquence.  One  of  hi's
last  public  acts  was  to  affix  his  signature  to  the
Declaration  of  Independence.  In  the  autumn  of
1776  the  ailments  that  he  had  incurred  during  his
military  service  compelled  him  to  return  to  South
Carolina.  His  health  continued  to  decline,  and,  as
a  last  hope,  he  embarked  about  the  close  of  1779
for  St.  Eustatius,  where  he  expected  to  take  pass
age  in  some  neutral  ship  for  the  south  of  France.
The  vessel  in  which  he  sailed  was  seen  for  the  last
time  when  a  few  days  out  at  sea,  and  was  probably
lost  in  a  tempest.

LYNCH,  William  Francis,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Norfolk,  Va.,  in  April,  1801 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,
17  Oct.,  1865.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  mid
shipman  in  1819,  and  was  promoted  lieutenant  in
1828.  The  expedition  to  explore  the  course  of  the
Jordan  and  the  Dead  sea  was  planned  by  him  in
1847,  and,  after  receiving  the  sanction  of  the  gov
ernment,  was  carried  out  by  him  with  success.  He
sailed  for  Smyrna  in  the  storeship  "  Supply,"  and
thence  made  an  overland  journey  on  camels  to
Constantinople,  where  he  obtaine'd  the  requisite
authority  and  protection  from  the  Turkish  govern
ment  to  pass  through  Palestine.  In  March,  1848,
he  landed  in  the  Bay  of  Acre,  and  in  April  began
the  work  of  navigating  the  Jordan  from  Lake
Tiberias  to  the  Dead  sea,  performing  the  journey
in  two  metallic  life-boats.  By  the  establishment
of  a  series  of  levels,  the  Dead  sea  was  shown  to  be
1,312  feet  below  the  Mediterranean,  corroborating
an  earlier  survey  made  under  the  direction  of  the
British  navy.  Subsequently  he  planned  an  ex
ploration  of  western  Africa,  but  it  failed  of  ap
proval.  He  was  advanced  to  the  rank  of  com
mander  in  1849,  and  in  1856  was  made  captain,
which  rank  he  held  until  1861.  when  he  resigned  to
join  the  Confederate  navy.  In  June,  1861,  he  re
ceived  the  commisson  of"  flag-officer,  and  was  as
signed  to  the  command  of  the  defences  of  North
Carolina.  He  had  charge  of  the  naval  force  that
unsuccessfully  resisted  Flag-Officer  Louis  M.  Golds-
borough's  attack  on  Roanoke  island  in  February,
1862,  and  he  subsequently  commanded  the  remain
der  of  the  fleet  which  was  surprised  by  part  of
Com.  Stephen  C.  Rowan's  forces  and  driven  up  Al-
bemarle  sound  to  Elizabeth  City.  Later  he  com
manded  Smithville  during  Admiral  David  D.  Por
ter's  attack  on  Fort  Fisher,  and  after  its  surrender


lie  dismantled  the  Smithville  defences  and  retired
with  his  marines  to  Wilmington.  He  published
'*  Narrative  of  the  United  States  Expedition  to  the
River  Jordan  and  the  Dead  Sea "  (Philadelphia,
1849),  and  "  Naval  Life,  or  Observations  Afloat  and
on  Shore  "  (Nfew  York.  1851).

LYNCH,  William  Warren,  Canadian  journal
ist,  b.  in  Bedford,  Quebec,  30  Sept.,  1845.  He  was
educated  at  Stanbridge  academy,  and  at  Vermont
and  McGill  universities,  and  was  graduated  at  the
latter  in  1868.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
Lower  Canada  in  June,  1868,  and  was  appointed
queen's  counsel,  11  Oct.,  1880.  He  has  been  mayor
of  the  township  of  Brome,  warden  of  the  county
of  that  name,  and  editor  of  the  Cowansville  "  Ob
server,"  and  has  twice  been  president  of  the  pro
vincial  association  of  Protestant  teachers  of  Que
bec.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislative  assembly
by  acclamation  in  1871,  re-elected  by  acclamation
five  times  between  that  year  and  1886.  He  became
solicitor-general,  30  Oct.,  1879,  and  on  the  abolition
of  that  office,  31  July,  1882,  was  appointed  com
missioner  of  crown  lands,  which  post  he  resigned,
20  Jan.,  1887.  He  held  the  same  portfolio  in  the
Taillon  administration  from  25  Jan.,  1887,  until
it  resigned,  27  Jan.,  1887.  In  June,  1883,  he  re
ceived  the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.  from  the  University
of  Bishop's  college,  Lennoxville.  He  has  been  a
delegate  to  the  provincial  synod  of  the  Church  of
England,  and  also  a  member  of  the  executive  com
mittee  of  the  diocese  of  Montreal.

LYNDE,  Benjamin,  jurist,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,
22  Sept.,  1666:  d.  there,  28  Jan.,  1745.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1686,  studied  law  in  the
Temple,  London,  practised  in  Massachusetts,  and
was  appointed  a  judge  in  1712,  and  chief  justice  of
the  colony  in  1729.  He  was  a  member  of  the  coun
cil  from  1723  till  1737. — His  son,  Benjamin,  jurist,
b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  4  Oct.,  1700 ;  d.  there,  9  Oct.,
1781,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1718,  studied
law,  and  practised  in  Massachusetts.  He  was
chosen  a  member  of  the  council  in  1737,  and  con
tinued  in  that  body  for  many  years,  serving  also  as
a  representative,  and  for  some  time  as  naval  officer
of  the  port.  He  became  judge  of  sessions  and  com
mon  pleas,  and  in  1745  succeeded  his  father  as
judge  of  the  supreme  court.  He  presided  at  the
trial  of  Capt.  Preston  in  1770  for  ordering  the  Bos
ton  massacre,  and  was  accused  of  packing  the  jury
with  the  corrupt  object  of  disposing  of  unsalable
products  of  his  manufacturing  business  to  the
government.  In  1772  he  resigned  the  chief  jus
ticeship,  and  in  1774
he  was  one  of  the
signers  of  the  Sa
lem  address  to  Gen.
Thomas  Gage.  To
ward  the  close  of  his
life  he  was  judge  of
probate.

LYNDE,  William
Pitt,  mem ber  of  con
gress,  b.  in  Sherburne,
N.  Y.,  16  Dec.,  1817 ;
d.in  Milwaukee, Wis.,
18  Dec.,  1885.  He
was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1838,  studied
law  in  the  law-school
at  Harvard,  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in
New  York  city  in
1841,  and  established  himself  in  practice  in  Mil
waukee,  Wis.,  and  gained  a  high  professional  repu
tation,  especially  in  the  departments  of  commercial


^


66


LYNDON


LYON


and  admiralty  law.  He  was  appointed  attorney-
general  of  Wisconsin  territory  in  1844,  and  in  the
following  year  U.  S.  district  attorney,  which  office
he  held  till  the  admission  of  the  state  into  the
Union,  when  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo
crat,  and  took  his  seat  on  5  June,  1848.  He  was
a  candidate  for  re-election,  but  was  defeated  by
Charles  Durkee  on  the  Free-soil  issue,  which  they
debated  in  a  joint  canvass.  His  term  ended  on  3
March,  1849,  and  in  that  year  he  was  a  Democratic
candidate  for  the  supreme  court  bench,  but  was
not  elected.  He  was  mayor  of  Milwaukee  in  1860,
a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1866,  and  of  the
state  senate  in  1868-'9.  In  1874  he  was  again  sent
to  congress,  and  in  1876  was  re-elected.

LYNDON,  Josiah,  governor  of  Rhode  Island,
b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  10  March,  1704 :  d.  in  War
ren,  R.  I.,  30  March,  1778.  He  received  a  good
education,  and  in  1730  became  clerk  of  the  lower
house  of  the  legislature  and  of  the  superior  court
of  Newport  county,  which  offices  he  held  for  many
years.  In  1768-'9  he  was  governor  of  the  colony,
declining  to  serve  longer  than  one  term.  He  then
returned  to  his  clerkship,  which  he  held  until  his
death.  His  administration  was  marked  by  signs
of  growing  hostility  to  the  British  government,
and  especially  by  a  correspondence  between  the
governor  and  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough,  in  which
the  former  protested  against  the  arbitrary  acts  of
the  home  government.  This,  with  a  similar  letter
to  the  king,  expressing  the  sentiments  of  the  gen
eral  assembly  and  signed  by  Gov.  Lyndon,  is  in
John  R.  Bartlett's  "  Records  of  the  Colony  of
Rhode  Island  "  (10  vols.,  Providence,  1856-'65).

LYNN,  Benjamin,  pioneer,  lived  in  the  latter
half  of  the  18th  century.  He  was  a  wandering
hunter  in  Green  river  valley,  Ky.,  before  its  settle
ment,  and  as  soon  as  stockades  began  to  be  built
along  Nolin  (No-Lynn)  river,  to  which  he  had
given  his  name,  he  formed  in  1782  a  Separate  Bap
tist  congregation  there  and  became  its  pastor.  He
afterward  held  other  charges,  and  his  name  is  con
nected  with  the  traditions  and  early  records  of  the
oldest  churches  in  southern  Kentucky.  He  is
called  the  "  hunter-preacher "  and  the  "  Daniel
Boone  of  southern  Kentucky."

LYON,  Asa,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pomfret,  Conn.,  31
Dec.,  1763 ;  d.  in  South  Hero,  Grand  Isle  co.,  Vt.,
4  April,  1841.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1790,  studied  divinity  with  Rev.  Charles  Backus,
and  was  ordained  pastor  at  Sutherland,  Mass.,  24
Oct.,  1792.  He  remained  there  till  the  following
year,  and  from  1802  till  1840  was  pastor  at  South
Hero.  He  was  chief  judge  of  Grand  Isle  county  in
1805-'14,  and  was  a  representative  in  the  legisla
ture  in  1800,  1802,  1805-'6,  1808,  and  1810-'14,  and
a  member  of  the  executive  council  in  1808.  He
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Federalist,  and  served
from  4  Dec.,  1815,  till  3  March,  1817.  Mr.  Lyon  is
said  to  have  been  a  cousin  of  Robert  Burns.  He
was  an  impressive  preacher,  distinguished  for  his
knowledge  of  literature.  He  published  sermons
and  patriotic  addresses.

LYON,  Caleb,  congressman,  b.  in  Lyonsdale,
N.  Y.,  7  Dec.,  1822;  d.  near  Rossville,  Staten  island.
N.  Y.,  8  Sept.,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Nor
wich  university,  Vt.,  in  1841,  travelled  in  Europe
for  several  years,  and  in  1847  was  appointed  consul
to  Shanghai,  China.  On  his  return  he  travelled
through  Central  and  South  America,  arrived  in
California  in  1849.  and  was  secretary  of  the  con
vention  that  was  called  to  frame  a  state  constitu
tion.  While  there  he  designed  the  state  coat  of
arms.  After  another  journey  in  Europe  and  the
East  he  returned  to  his  native  state,  and  was  elected


to  the  assembly  in  1850,  but  resigned  on  the  ques
tion  of  enlarging  the  Erie  canal,  of  which  he  was
an  advocate,  and  was  in  the  same  year  elected  to
the  state  senate.  At  the  close  of  his  term  he  again
went  abrdad,  and  as  a  friend  of  Capt.  Duncan  N.
Ingraham  (q.  v.)  was  concerned  in  the  rescue  of
Martin  Koszta  from  an  Austrian  brig  in  the  port
of  Smyrna.  When  he  returned  he  was  elected  as
an  Independent  to  congress,  and  served  from  5
Dec.,  1853,  till  3  March,  1855.  After  the  burning
of  the  family  mansion  at  Lyonsdale  be  removed  to
Staten  island,  and  occupied  and  restored  the  coun
try-seat  known  as  Ross  castle.  In  1864  he  was  ap
pointed  by  President  Lincoln  governor  of  Idaho,
which  post  he  held  till  December,  1866.  He  was  a
ready  orator,  whose  memory  and  knowledge  of
statistics  rendered  him  formidable  in  debate.  As
a  connoisseur  of  the  fine  arts  his  opinion  was  es
teemed.  He  published  poems,  which  have  never
been  collected,  and  lectured  on  his  travels.  Norwich
university  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1851.

LYON,  George  Francis",  English  traveller,  b.  in
Chichester,  England,  in  1795  ;  d.  at  sea  in  October,
1832.  He  entered  the  British  naval  service  in
1809,  was  present  at  the  attack  on  Algiers  by  Lord
Exmouth  in  1816,  and  in  1818  was  commissioned
to  accompany  Joseph  Ritchie  on  his  tour  of  explo
ration  into  central  Africa.  Ritchie  died  in  Fezzan,
and  Lyon  returned  to  England,  after  encountering
many  dangers  and  privations,  which  he  described
in  his  "  Narrative  of  Travels  in  Northern  Africa  "
(London,  1821).  In  1821,  in  command  of  the
"  Hecla,"  he  accompanied  Capt.  William  E.  Parry
on  his  arctic  expedition,  publishing  on  his  return
"  The  Private  Journal  of  Capt.  G.  F.  Lyon  "  (1824).
In  1824  he  sailed  in  command  of  the  "  Griper "
with  the  mission  of  exploring  Melville  peninsula,
and  following  its  western  shore  as  far  as  Turn-
again,  he  found,  after  three  months'  searching,  a
passage  through  the  group  of  islets  called  South
ampton  island,  but  was  unable  to  enter  Repulse
bay  through  Sir  Thomas  Rowe's  Welcome.  On  13
Sept.,  a  violent  tempest  compelled  him  to  return
to  England.  The  story  of  the  voyage  was  told  in
"  A  Brief  Narrative  of  an  Unsuccessful  Attempt "
(1825).  He  subsequently  passed  several  years  in
Mexico,  and  died  on  his  return  from  a  second  visit
to  America.  His  remaining  works  are  "  The  Sketch-
Book  of  Capt.  G.  F.  Lyon  during  Eighteen  Months'
Residence  in  Mexico,  No.  1  "  (London,  1827),  and
"  Journal  of  a  Residence  and  Tour  in  Mexico  in
1828  "  (2  vols.,  1828).

LYON,  John  Christian,  clergyman,  b.  in  Le-
onsberg,  Wiirtemberg,  Germany,  11  Feb.,  1802;  d.
in  Catonville,  Md.,  21  May,  1868.  His  parents
were  Lutherans.  The  son  came  to  this  country
in  1817,  united  with  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  in  1826,  and  soon  afterward  entered  its
ministry,  in  which  he  served  until  he  was  super
annuated  in  1862.  He  preached  generally  in  Ger
man  and  did  much  to  bring  his  countrymen  into
his  denomination.  He  has  been  called  the  founder
of  the  German  Methodist  church  in  the  United
States.  He  was  the  author  and  translator  of  sev
eral  theological  works.

LYON,  Lucius,  senator,  b.  in  Shelburn.  Vt,,  26
Feb.,  1800;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  24  Sept.,  1851.
He  received  a  public-school  education,  and,  settling
in  Detroit  in  1822,  was  elected  a  territorial  dele
gate  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  2
Dec.,  1833,  till  3  March,  1835.  In  the  latter  year
he  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitutional  con
vention,  and  he  also  served  in  that  of  1850.  He
was  a  U.  S.  senator  from  26  Jan.,  1837,  till  3  March,
1839,  and  a  representative  from  4  Dec..  1843,  till  3


LYON


LYOX


67


March.  1845.  From  1837  till  1839  he  was  a  regent
of  the  University  of  Michigan.  His  last  public
office  was  that  of  surveyor-general  of  the  states
of  Michigan,  Ohio,  and  Indiana.

LYON.  Mary,  educator,  b.  in  Buckland,  Mass.,
28  Feb.,  1797;  a.  in  South  Hadley,  Mass.,  5  March,
1849.  Her  early  education  was  received  at  district-
schools,  and  in"  1814  she  began  to  teach  at  Shel-
burne  Falls.  At  the  age  of  twenty  she  became  a
pupil  at  the  Sanderson  academy  in  Ashtield,  where
she  studied  twenty  hours  each  day,  and  in  three
days  committed  to  memory  Adams's  Latin  gram
mar.  In  1821  she  entered  the  school  of  the  Rev.
Joseph  Emerson  at  Byfield,  near  Xewburyport,  and
in  1824  studied  at  Amherst,  under  Prof.  Eaton,  to
become  qualified  for  giving  experimental  instruc
tion  in  chemistry.  From  1824  till  1828  she  assisted
Mrs.  Grant  in  the  Adams's  female  seminary  in
Londonderry,  X.  H.  During  the  winter,  when
this  school  was  closed,  owing  to  the  severity  of  the
climate,  she  taught  in  Ashfield  and  Buckland,  and
subsequently  at  Ipswich.  Her  great  work  was  the
founding  of  Mount  Holyoke  seminary,  at  South
Hadley,  Mass.,  on  8  Nov.,'l837,  and  from  that  date
until  lier  death  she  served  as  its  principal.  One
feature  of  her  system,  to  which  there  was  much
opposition,  was  that  the  entire  domestic  labor  of
the  institution  was  performed  by  the  pupils  and
teachers,  in  order  to  promote  interest  in  these
tasks.  In  the  course  of  her  life  Miss  Lyon  in
structed  more  than  3,000  pupils,  many  of  whom
became  missionaries.  She  published  a  pamphlet
entitled  "  Tendencies  of  the  Principles  embraced
and  the  System  adopted  in  the  Mount  Holyoke
Seminary  "  (1840),  and  also  the  "  Missionary  Offer
ing  "  (Boston,  1843).  See  "  Power  of  Christian
Benevolence,  illustrated  in  the  Life  and  Labors  of
Mary  Lyon,"  by  Edward  Hitchcock  (Northamp
ton,  Mass.,  1851),  and  "  Recollections  of  Mary
Lyon,"  by  Fidelia  Fiske  (Boston,  1866).

LYON,  Matthew,  politician,  b.  in  County  Wick-
low,  Ireland,  in  1746;  d.  in  Spadra  Bluff,  Ark.,  1
Aug.,  1822.  He  emigrated  at  the  age  of  thirteen
to  New  York,  and,  as  he  was  unable  to  pay  for  his
passage,  the  captain  of  the  ship,  in  accordance
with  the  custom  of  the  time,  assigned  him  for  a
sum  of  money  to  a  farmer  in  Litchfield  county,
Conn.,  in  whose  service  he  remained  for  several
years.  He  then  became  a  citizen  of  Vermont,  and
in  July,  1776,  was  commissioned  as  lieutenant  in
a  company  of  "  Green  Mountain  Boys."  In  the
latter  part  of  the  same  year  he  was  cashiered  for
deserting  a  post  on  Onion  river,  but  subsequently
served  as  commissary-general,  and  eventually  be
came  colonel  of  militia.  He  was  made  deputy
secretary  in  1778,  and  subsequently  clerk  of  the
court  of  confiscation.  After  the  war  he  settled  in
Vermont  and  was  elected  to  the  state  legislature,
where  he  served  for  four  successive  years.  He
founded  the  town  of  Fair  Haven,  Vt.,  in  1783,
built  saw-mills  and  grist-mills,  established  an  iron-
foundry,  manufactured  paper  from  bass-wood,  and
issued  a  Democratic  newspaper  entitled  '•  The
Scourge  of  Aristocracy,  and  Repository  of  Impor
tant  Political  Truth."  of  which  the  types  and  pa
per  were  manufactured  by  himself.  He  represented
Fair  Haven  in  the  legislature  for  ten  years,  and  in
1786  was  assistant  judge  of  Rutland  county  court.
He  married  a  daughter  of  Gov.  Thomas  Chitten-
den,  became  an  active  political  leader,  and  was
elected  to  congress  by  the  anti-Federal  party,  serv
ing  from  15  May,  1797,  till  3  March,  1801.  In  Oc
tober,  1798,  he  was  indicted  in  Vermont  for  writing
for  publication  a  letter  calculated  "  to  stir  up  sedi
tion  and  to  bring  the  president  and  the  government


of  the  United  States  into  contempt."  He  was  con
victed,  confined  for  four  months  in  the  Vergennes
jail,  and  fined  $1,000,  which  was  paid  by  his  friends.
Mr.  Lyon  is  said  to  have  revenged  his  wrongs  by
giving  the  decisive  vote  for  Jefferson.  While  in
prison  he  was  re-elected  to  congress,  and  after  the
expiration  of  his  term  removed  to  Kentucky,  where
he  established  the  first  printing-office,  transporting
the  type  on  horseback  across  the  mountains.  He
served  two  years  in  the  Kentucky  legislature,  and
was  elected  to  congress  from  that  state,  serving
from  17  Oct.,  1803,  till  3  March,  1811.  After  his
final  retirement  from  congress  the  speaker  of  the
house  presented  his  petition  to  have  the  fine  re
funded  to  him  that  he  had  paid  in  Vermont,  and
on  4  July,  1840,  an  act  was  passed  paying  the  sum
to  his  heirs  with  interest.  He  was  employed  to
build  a  fleet  of  gun-boats  for  service  in  the  war  of
1812,  but  was  made  bankrupt  by  his  attempt.  In
1820  he  was  appointed  a  United  States  factor  among
the  Cherokee  Indians  in  Arkansas,  removed  to  that
territory,  and  was  elected  its  first  delegate  to  con
gress,  but  did  not  live  to  take  his  seat.  A  sketch
of  his  life  was  published  by  Pliny  H.  White,  of
Vermont,  in  1858.  —  His  son,  Chittenden,  con
gressman,  b.  in  Vermont  in  1786  ;  d.  in  Caldwell
county,  Ky.,  8  Nov.,  1842,  received  a  public-school
education,  and  removed  with  his  father  to  Ken
tucky  in  1801.  He  was  a  member  of  both  houses  of
the  Kentucky  legislature,  and  afterward  elected
a  representative  from  Kentucky  to  congress  as  a
Jackson  Democrat,  serving  from  3  Dec.,  1827,  till
3  March,  1835.  He  was  defeated  as  a  candidate
for  presidential  elector  on  the  Van  Buren  ticket  in
1836.  Lyon  county,  Ky.,  was  named  in  his  honor.
He  inherited  the  impetuous  Irish  temper  of  the
father,  and  was  a  man  of  gigantic  stature,  strength,
and  prowess,  being  fully  six  and  a  half  feet  in
height,  and  weighing  350  pounds.  He  was  more
than  a  match  for  any  antagonist,  and  bore  the  repu
tation  of  "  champion  "  among  the  border  people.

LYON,  Nathaniel,  soldier,  b.  in  Ashford,  Conn.,
14  July,  1818  ;  d.  near  Wilson's  Creek,  Mo.,  10  Aug.,
1861.  He  was  graduated  at  the  IT.  S.  military
academy  in  1841,  assigned  to  the  2d  infantry,  and
served  in  Florida  during  the  latter  part  of  the
Seminole  war.  He  was  engaged  at.  the  siege  of
Vera  Cruz,  promoted  1st  lieutenant  while  on  the
inarch  to  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  commanded  his
company  through
out  the  subsequent
campaign,  receiv
ing  the  brevet  of
captain  for  gal
lantry  at  Contreras
and  Churubusco.
In  the  assault  on
the  city  of  Mexico
he  was  wounded  at
the  Belen  Gate.
At  the  close  of  the
war  he  was  ordered
to  California,  and
in  1850  he  con
ducted  a  success
ful  expedition
against  the  Indians
of  Clear  lake  and
Russian  river  in
northern  Califor
nia,  receiving  the  praise  of  Gen.  Persifer  F.  Smith
for  the  rapidity  and  secrecy  of  his  marches,  and
his  skilful  dispositions  on  the  ground.  He  was
promoted  captain  on  11  June,  1851,  and  in  1853
returned  with  his  regiment  to  the  east.  While


68


LYON


LYON


listening  to  the  debates  in  congress  over  the  Kan
sas-Nebraska  bill,  his  sympathies  were  engaged
in  behalf  of  the  negro,  although  he  had  been
hitherto  an  earnest  Democrat.  In  1854  he  was
sent  to  Fort  Riley,  and  during  the  height  of  the
contest  for  the  possession  of  Kansas  manifested
his  sympathy  with  the  Free  -  state  party,  and
gave  it  his  aid  and  support.  In  1856,  when  the
troops  were  ordered  to  enforce  the  laws  against  the
Abolitionists,  Lyon  seriously  contemplated  resign
ing  his  commission,  that  he  might  not  be  employed
"  as  a  tool  in  the  hands  of  evil  rulers  for  the  ac
complishment  of  evil  ends";  but  he  was  saved
from  the  necessity  of  doing  so  by  being  ordered  to
the  Dakota  frontier.  He  was  on  duty  again  in
Kansas  in  1859,  and  was  with  Gen.  William  S.  Har-
ney  in  December,  1860,  when  the  governor  of  Mis
souri  sent  a  brigade  of  militia  to  co-operate  with
the  National  troops  in  arresting  James  Montgomery.
He  was  left  by  Harney  at  Fort  Scott,  but  wished  to
be  nearer  the  scene  of  the  impending  conflict,  in
which,  he  wrote  on  27  Jan.,  1861,  "  I  certainly  ex
pect  to  expose,  and  very  likely  shall  lose,  my  life."
In  the  beginning  of  February  he  was  ordered  to
St.  Louis.  There  he  contested  with  Maj.  Peter  V.
Hagner,  whom  he  suspected  of  southern  sympa
thies,  the  command  of  the  arsenal ;  but  his  appeal
to  Gen.  Harney,  and  then  to  President  Buchanan,
was  unavailing.  He  was  soon  in  close  accord  with
Francis  P.  Blair,  Jr.,  and  the  other  Unionist  lead
ers,  and  at  once  began  to  drill  and  organize  the
Home-guards.  A  few  days  before  President  Lin
coln's  inauguration  Blair  went  to  Washington  to
persuade  Gen.  Scott  and  the  president  of  the  neces
sity  of  giving  the  command  of  the  arsenal  to  Lyon,
but  without  success.  An  attempt  of  the  secession
ist  minute-men  to  provoke  a  conflict  on  inaugura
tion-day  decided  the  new  administration  to  place
Lyon  in  command  of  the  troops  on  13  March,  1861 ;
yet  the  order  was  qualified  by  instructions  from
Gen.  Harney  still  leaving  in  charge  of  Maj.  Hagner
the  arms  and  materials  of  war  which  Lyon  intended
in  the  event  of  a  collision  to  distribute  among  the
Home-guards.  While  Gov.  Claiborne  F.  Jackson
was  promoting  the  organization  of*  secessionist
militia,  and  after  he  had  placed  the  police  of  St.
Louis  under  the  control  of  Basil  W.  Duke,  the
leader  of  the  minute-men,  and  after  the  municipal
election  of  1  April,  1861,  had  transferred  the  city
government  into  the  hands  of  secessionists,  Gen.
Harney  revoked  his  recent  order  and  gave  Lyon
entire  charge  of  the  arsenal,  arms,  and  stores.  Be
fore  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Surnter,  Lyon  had
strengthened  the  fortifications  and  mounted  heavy
siege-guns  and  mortars  that  commanded  the  city,
and  its  river  approaches.  On  the  president's  call
for  troops  Gov.  Jackson  prepared  to  plant  batteries
on  the  hills  overlooking  the  arsenal.  Lyon  at  once
communicated  with  Gov.  Richard  Yates,  who,  by
the  president's  orders,  sent  three  regiments  of  the
Illinois  quota  to  support  the  garrison  in  St.  Louis.
Lyon  was  at  the  same  time  commanded,  according
to  his  own  suggestion,  to  turn  over  10,000  stand  of  I
arms  to  the  Illinois  state  authorities.  Blair  had
procured  in  Washington  another  order  authorizing  [
Capt.  Lyon  to  issue  5,000  stand  of  arms  for  arming  !
loyal  citizens.  Harney  interfered  to  prevent  the  j
arming  of  volunteers,  and  ordered  Lyon,  who  had  •
placed  guards  in  the  streets  in  violation  of  the  city  i
ordinances,  to  withdraw  his  men  within  the  arsenal,  !
but  for  this  was  removed  from  the  command  of  the
department  on  21  April.  On  the  same  day  Capt.
Lyon  was  ordered  to  muster  into  the  service  the
four  regiments,  constituting  Missouri's  quota,  which
the  governor  had  refused  to  furnish.  Without  re-


!  gard  to  seniority  he  assumed  command  on  the  de
parture  of  Harney,  and  from  that  time  was  rec
ognized  by  the  government  as  commanding  the
department.  On  the  night  of  26  April  he  secretly
sent  away  to  Illinois  all  the  munitions  of  war  that
were  not  needed  for  the  four  regiments,  which  were
speedily  organized  and  equipped.  Although  the
removal  of  the  arms  from  the  arsenal  frustrated
the  governor's  object  in  ordering  the  militia  into
camp  at  St.  Louis,  it  was  decided  to  hold  the  en
campment  nevertheless.  Daniel  M.  Frost's  brigade,
numbering  now,  after  all  the  Union  men  had  with
drawn,  about  700  men,  went  into  camp  on  6  May
in  a  grove  in  the  western  part  of  the  city,  which
they  called  Camp  Jackson.  Having  been  author
ized  by  a  despatch  from  the  secretary  of  war,  Lyon
in  May  mustered  in  five  regiments,  called  the  Home-
guards  or  U.  S.  reserve  corps,  in  addition  to  five
regiments  of  Missouri  volunteers  that  had  been  or
ganized  in  April.  The  volunteers  were  recruited
almost  entirely  from  the  German  population,  as  the
native-born  and  the  Irish  were  secessionists.  On
10  May  he  surrounded  Camp  Jackson,  and  made
prisoners  of  war  of  the  entire  corps  of  militia.  In
the  camp  were  siege-guns  that  Jefferson  Davis  had
sent  from  New  Orleans  at  the  request  of  Gov.  Jack
son.  When  Gen.  Harney  resumed  command  he
approved  the  capture  of  Camp  Jackson,  but  refused
to  carry  out  Lyon's  plan  for  immediate  operations
against  the  hostile  forces  that  the  governor  was
organizing  in  pursuance  of  an  act  of  the  legisla
ture.  On  31  May,  in  accordance  with  an  order  that
Blair  had  obtained  from  the  president,  Lyon,  who
had  been  commissioned  as  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  on  17  May,  and  appointed  to  the  com
mand  of  the  brigade  of  German  recruits,  relieved
Gen.  Harney  of  the  command  of  the  Department
of  the  West.  The  governor  and  Gen.  Sterling  Price,
in  an  interview  with  Gen.  Lyon,  sought  to  obtain
from  him  a  renewal  of  the  agreement  Gen.  Harney
had  made  to  respect  the  neutrality  of  the  state ;  but
Lyon  insisted  on  the  right  of  the  U.  S.  government
to  enlist  men  in  Missouri,  and  to  move  its  troops
within  or  across  the  state.  Open  hostilities  fol
lowed.  Lyon  sent  troops  to  the  southwestern  part
of  the  state  in  order  to  meet  an  apprehended  ad
vance  of  Confederate  troops  from  Arkansas,  and
cut  off  the  retreat  of  the  governor  and  the  state
troops,  while  with  another  force  he  advanced  on
Jefferson  City,  of  which  he  took  possession  on  15
June,  the  state  forces  having  evacuated  it  two  days
before,  and  then  on  the  enemy's  new  headquar
ters  at  Booneville,  where  he  routed  Col.  John  S.
Marmaduke's  force  on  17  June.  His  sudden  move
ment  placed  him  in  command  of  the  entire  state
except  the  southwestern  corner.  On  3  July  he  left
Booneville  to  continue  the  pursuit  of  Price,  but
when  he  learned  that  the  Missourians  had  defeated
Sigel  at  Carthage,  and  effected  a  junction  with  the
Confederate  troops  under  Gen.  Ben  McCulloch,  he
halted  at  Springfield  to  await  re-enforcements.  On
learning  that  the  Confederates  were  marching  on
his  position,  he  advanced  to  meet  them,  although
he  supposed  that  they  outnumbered  his  force  four
to  one,  but,  after  a  skirmish  at  Dug  Spring,  re
treated  to  Springfield  again  when  he  found  that
their  three  columns  had  joined.  On  9  Aug.,  con
sidering  a  retreat  more  hazardous  than  a  battle,  he
decided  to  surprise  the  Confederates  in  their  camp
on  Wilson's  Creek  at  daybreak  the  next  morning.
He  turned  their  position  and  attacked  their  rear,
while  Gen.  Franz  Sigel,  at  the  head  of  another  col
umn,  assailed  their  right  flank.  Sigel,  after  driving
back  the  enemy,  was  defeated  through  mistaking
one  of  their  regiments  for  Iowa  troops.  Lyon,  per-


LYON


LYTTLETON


69


ceiving  new  troops  coming  to  the  support  of  Price,  \
brought  all  his  men  to  the  front  for  a  final  effort.  ,
His  horse  was  killed,  and  he  was  wounded  in  the
head  and  leg,  but,  mounting  another  horse,  he
dashed  to  the  front  to  rally  his  wavering  line,  and
was  shot  through  the  breast.  Maj.  Samuel  D.
Sturgis,  who  was  left  in  command,  after  continuing
the  battle'  three  hours,  ordered  a  retreat.  Of  the
5.000  National  troops  1.317  were  killed,  wounded,  or
taken  prisoners,  while  of  the  Confederates,  who  were
10,000  strong,  1,230  were  killed  or  wounded.  The
National  forces  fell  back  on  Springfield  in  good
order,  and  retreated  thence  to  Rolla,  while  Gen.
McCulloch,  the  Confederate  commander,  refused  to
pursue.  Lyon's  movement,  though  resulting  in
defeat,  had  enabled  the  Union  men  in  Missouri  to
organize  a  government  and  array  the  power  of  the
state  on  the  National  side.  Gen.  Lyon  bequeathed
$30.000.  constituting  nearly  his  entire  property,  to
the  government,  to  aid  in  the  preservation  of  the
Union.  A  series  of  articles,  written  while  he  was
on  duty  in  Kansas  in  advocacy  of  the  election  of
Abraham  Lincoln,  and  printed  in  a  local  news
paper,  were  collected  into  a  volume  with  a  memoir,
and  published  under  the  title  of  "  The  Last  Politi
cal  Writings  of  Gen.  Nathaniel  Lyon  "  (New  York,
1862).  See  also  a  memoir  by  Dr.  Ashbel  Wood
ward  (Hartford,  1862) ;  James  Peckham's  •'  Life  of
Lyon  "  (New  York,  1866) ;  R.  I.  Holcombe's  '"  Ac
count  of  the  Battle  of  Wilson's  Creek " ;  and
•'The  Fight  for  Missouri,''  by  Thomas  L.  Snead
(New  York,  1886).

LYON,  Richard,  poet,  lived  in  the  17th  cen
tury.  He  entered  the  ministry,  came  to  this  coun
try  from  England  early  in  life,  and  in  1644—'7  was
private  tutor  to  a  young  English  student  in  Cam
bridge,  Mass.  He  lived  in  the  family  of  President
Henry  Dunster,  and  with  him  was  appointed  to  re
vise  John  Eliot's  '•  Bay  Psalms."  In  the  revision,
many  hymns  taken  from  other  parts  of  the  Bible
are  inserted  under  the  name  of  "  Spiritual  Songs
of  the  Old  and  New  Testament"  (20th  ed..  1722).

LYONS,  Albert  Brown,  chemist,  b.  in  Wai-
mea,  Hawaiian  islands,  1  April,  1841.  He  was
graduated  at  Williams  in  1865,  and  at  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  Michigan  three
vears  later.  He  filled  the  chair  of  chemistry  in
Detroit  medical  college  from  1868  till  1881,  when
he  was  called  to  be  consulting  chemist  to  the  drug
house  of  Parke.  Davis  and  Co.  In  this  capacity  he
became  well  known  throughout  the  United  States
by  his  frequent  contributions  to  medical  and  phar
maceutical  journals  on  adulterations  and  frauds
in  drugs.  Besides  his  editorial  connection  with
various  medical  journals  in  Detroit,  he  became  in
1887  editor  of  "  The  Pharmaceutical  Era."  Dr.
Lyons  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  sec
retary  of  the  Detroit  academy  of  medicine.  In  ad
dition  to  his  many  papers,  he  has  published  a
"  Manual  of  Practical  Assaying  "  (Detroit.  1886).

LYONS.  James  fcrilhorne,  poet,  b.  in  England:
d.  in  Haverford,  Pa.,  2  Jan.,  1868. He  entered  the
ministry  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  in  1844
came  to  this  country,  and  was  rector  of  St.  Mary's
church,  Burlington,  N.  J. In  1846  he  removed  to  I
Philadelphia,  where  he  taught,  and  later  he  became  |
principal  of  a  classical  school  in  Haverford,  near  '
that city,  remaining there until  his  death. He  I
published "  Christian Songs, Translations, and  \
other  Poems"  (Philadelphia,  1861).

LYONS, Richard Bickertou  Pemell, Vis-  I
count,  b.  in  Lymington,  England.  26  April,  1817 ;  '
d.  in  London,  5  Dec.,  1887. He  was  the  only  son  of
the  first  Lord  Lyons,  and  succeeded  to  the  barony  i
in  1858. He  was  educated  at  Oxford,  and  after


filling  various  diplomatic  appointments  was  Brit
ish  minister  to  the  United  States  from  December,
1858,  till  February,  1865,  when  he  returned  on  ac
count  of  impaired  health.  He  was  appointed  am
bassador  to  Turkey  in  August  of  that  year,  and
from  1867  until  November,  1887,  was  ambassador
to  France.  He  became  a  member  of  the  privy
council  in  1805,  was  given  the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.
by  Oxford  in  the  same  year,  in  1881  was  made  a
viscount,  and  in  1887  was  advanced  to  an  earldom.

LYTLE,  William  Haiiies,  soldier,  b.  in  Cincin
nati,  Ohio,  2  Nov.,  1826;  killed  in  the  battle  of
Chickamauga,  20  Sept.,  1863.  His  great-grand
father,  William,  fought  in  the  old  French  war,  and
his  grandfather,  of
the  same  name,  was
an  early  pioneer  in
Ohio,  and  active  in
border  warfare.  His
father,  Robert  T.
Lytle,  was  a  mem
ber  of  congress  in
1833-'5.  and  survey
or  of  public  lands
in  Ohio  in  1835-'8.
William  Haines  was
graduated  at  Cin
cinnati  college,  stud-
ie"d  law,  and  began
practice,  but  at  the
beginning  of  the
Mexican  war  vol-
unteered,  and  was
chosen  captain  of  a
company  in  the  2d  Ohio  regiment.  He  served
through  the  war.  resumed  practice  at  its  close,  was
elected  to  the  Ohio  legislature,  and  in  1857  was
the  unsuccessful  candidate  of  the  Democratic  party
for  lieutenant-governor.  Soon  afterward  he  be
came  major-general  of  Ohio  militia,  and  at  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  commissioned
colonel  of  the  10th  Ohio  regiment,  which  he  led  in
Wrest  Virginia  in  1861.  At  Carnifex  Ferry,  10
Sept.,  1861,  he  commanded  a  brigade  and  was  se
verely  wounded.  When  he  had  recovered  he  had
charge  of  the  Bardstown  camp  of  instruction,  and
then  of  a  brigade  in  Gen.  Ormsby  M.  Mitchell's
operations  along  the  Memphis  and  Chattanooga
railroad.  He  was  again  wounded  and  taken  pris
oner  at  Perryville,  Ky..  8  Oct..  1862,  but  was  soon
exchanged,  and  on  29  Nov.  promoted  to  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers.  Thereafter  he  served  ac
tively  in  the  west  under  Rosecrans  till  he  was
killed  while  leading  a  charge  of  his  brigade  at  the
battle  of  Chickamauga.  Gen.  Lytle  was  a  poet  of
much  merit,  but  no  collection  of  his  verses  has
appeared  in  book-form.  His  best-known  poem  is
that  written  in  1857,  beginning

'•I  am  dying,  Egypt,  dying;
Ebbs  the  crimson  life-tide  fast."

LYTTLETON,  William  Henry  (Baron  West-
cote),  governor  of  South  Carolina,  b.  in  England
about  1720 :  d.  14  Sept.,  1808.  He  was  a  younger
son  of  Sir  Thomas  Lyttleton,  bart.  In  1755  he
was  appointed  governor  of  South  Carolina,  and  held
the  post  till  1760,  when  he  was  transferred  to  Ja
maica.  He  was  British  minister  to  Portugal  in
1766.  On  31  July,  1776,  he  was  raised  to  the  Irish
peerage,  as  Baron  Westcote  of  Bally  more,  and  in
1779,  on  the  death  of  his  nephew,  Thomas,  the
baronetage  reverted  to  him.  In  1794  he  was
created  a  peer  of  Great  Britain,  with  the  title  of
Lord  Lyttleton.  Baron  of  Frankley,  which  had
been  bestowed  already  on  his  brother,  Sir  George,
the  poet,  but  had  expired  with  his  nephew.


70


MABERY


MACA LESTER


M


MABERY,  Charles  Frederic,  chemist,  b.  in
North  Gorliam,  Me.,  13  Jan.,  1850.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard
in  1876,  and  received  his  doctorate  in  course  in
1881.  Meanwhile  he  held  the  place  of  assistant  in
chemistry  from  1875  until  1883,  when  he  was  called
to  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  the  Case  school  of
applied  science'  in  Cleveland.  He  has  published
in  the  "  American  Chemical  Journal  "  numerous
papers  giving  the  results  of  original  researches,
with  Charles  L.  Jackson,  Henry  B.  Hill,  Rachel
Lloyd,  and  others,  in  the  laboratory  at  Cambridge.
After  he  removed  to  Cleveland  he  became  asso
ciated  in  the  recent  development  of  the  electric
production  of  aluminium,  having  been  engaged  in
the  early  experimental  work  and  in  the  perform
ance  of  other  chemical  investigations  for  the  com
pany  controlling  the  patents.  In  this  connection
he  has  invented  a  new  method  for  the  preparation
of  anhydrous  aluminium  chloride.  Prof.  Mabery
is  a  member  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and
sciences  and  of  the  German  chemical  society,  and
was  elected  secretary  of  the  chemical  section  of
the  American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science  in  1887,  but  did  not  serve.

MABLY,  Gabriel  Bonnot  <le,  French  author,
b.  in  Grenoble,  14  March,  170!);  d.  in  Paris,  23
April,  1785.  He  was  educated  in  the  Jesuit  college
at  Lyons,  and  lived  chiefly  in  retirement,  devot
ing  himself  to  literature.  He  published  numerous
works  on  history  and  law,  and  ''Observations  sur
le  gouvernement  et  les  lois  des  Etats-Unis  d'Ame-
rique,"  embodying  his  views  on  the  preparation  of
the  constitution,  by  request  of  congress  (1784).
This  work  contains  many  sentiments  adverse  to
civil  liberty  and  religious  toleration.

MACADAM,  John  Loudoiin,  Scottish  engineer,
b.  in  Ayr,  Scotland,  21  Sept.,  1756;  d.  in  Moffat,
Dumfriesshire,  26  Nov.,  1836.  On  the  death  of  his
father  he  was  sent  to  his  uncle,  William  Macadam,
who  had  settled  as  a  merchant  in  New  York  city.
The  nephew  was  placed  in  a  counting-house,  be
came  a  successful  merchant,  and,  espousing  the
royal  cause  in  1775,  was  agent  for  the  sale  of  prizes
at  the  port  of  New  York.  In  1783  he  was  com
pelled  to  return  to  Scotland,  and  purchased  an
estate  in  Ayrshire.  He  began  in  1810  to  experi
ment  on  the  construction  of  roads,  and,  in  spite  of
great  opposition,  succeeded  in  carrying  into  effect
the  system  that  is  known  by  his  name.  This  sys
tem  depends  on  Mr.  Macadam's  discovery  that
small  angular  fragments  of  stone  will  coalesce  or
bind  into  a  compact  mass  under  pressure,  and  his
principle  that  the  efficiency  of  a  road  is  in  propor
tion  to  the  thoroughness  with  which  water  is  ex
cluded  from  the  soil  on  which  it  rests.  Mr.  Mac
adam  gave  his  services  and  advice  without  charge
on  all  occasions,  and  declined  many  offers  of  re
munerative  offices  abroad.  In  1825  he  was  voted
£6,000  by  parliament  toward  repaying  the  expenses
that  he  had  incurred  in  introducing  his  system,
and  he  declined  the  honor  of  knighthood,  which
was  subsequently  bestowed  on  his  son  James.  Mr.
Macadam  married  Margaret  Nicoll,  of  Islip,  L.  I.,
during  his  stay  in  New  York,  and  after  hei  death
in  1827  took  for  his  second  wife  Charlotte,  sister
of  Bishop  de  Lancey.  He  published  "  Practical
Essay  on  the  Scientific  Repair  and  Preservation  of
Public  Roads  "  (London,  1819) :  "  Remarks  on  the
Present  State  of  Roadmaking  "  (1820) ;  and  "  Ob
servations  on  Roads  "  (1822).


McADOO,  William  (iibbs,  jurist,  b.  near
Knoxville,  Tenn.,  4  April,  1820.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  East  Tennessee  university,  Knoxville,  in
1845,  and  in  1845-'6  sat  in  the  legislature.  After
serving  in  the  Mexican  war  in  1847  he  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar,  and  was  attorney-general  of
Knoxville  judicial  district  in  1851-'60.  He  re
moved  to  Georgia  in  1862,  served  as  a  captain  in
the  Confederate  army,  and  in  1871  became  judge
of  the  20th  judicial  district  of  the  state.  He  has
published  various  addresses,  and,  with  Prof.  II.  C.
White,  "  Elementary  Geology  of  Tennessee." — His
wife.  Mary  Faith  Floyd,  b.'in  Tennessee,  8  Sept.,
1832,  is  a  granddaughter  of  Gen.  John  Floyd,  who
commanded  against  the  Creek  Indians  in  1813-'14.
She  was  early  left  an  orphan,  and  married  Ran
dolph  McDonald,  of  Georgia,  who  died  in  1854,  and
in  1858  she  married  Mr.  McAdoo.  She  has  been  a
frequent  contributor  to  periodicals,  both  in  prose
and  in  verse,  and  has  published  "  The  Nereid,"  a
romance,  and  "  Antethusia."

McAFEE,  Robert  Breckinridsre,  lawyer,  b.  in
Mercer  county,  Ky.,  in  February.  1784;  d.  there,
12  March,  1849.  His  ancestors  left  Sinking  Creek,
Botetourt  co.,  Va.,  1  June,  1773,  and  settled  in
Kentucky,  where  they  were  conspicuous  in  the  In
dian  warfare  of  the  time.  Robert  was  educated  at
various  schools  and  at  Transylvania  seminary,
studied  law,  and  began  practise  in  Mercer  county.
He  was  one  of  the  first  Kcntuckians  to  join  the
northwestern  army  at  the  opening  of  the  war  of
1812,  and  became  successively  sergeant,  ensign,
and  2d  lieutenant.  He  was  quartermaster  in  Col.
Richard  M.  Johnson's  regiment  when  it  relieved
Fort  Wayne  from  a  threatened  Indian  attack.  In
1813  he  became  captain  in  this  regiment,  and  was
actively  employed  on  the  frontier.  At  the  close  of
the  war  he  retired  to  his  farm  in  Mercer  county,
and  in  1819  was  elected  to  the  legislature.  From
1820  till  1824  lie  was  lieutenant-governor  of  Ken
tucky.  He  presided  over  the  senate  during  the  bit
ter  and  exciting  contest  known  as  the  new  and  old
court  controversy,  which  virtually  involved  the
question  of  the  repudiation  of  a  debt  of  doubtful
legality  by  the  state,  and  which  was  decided  by  the
maintenance  of  all  its  obligations,  though  they  had
been  obtained  by  fraud.  He  declined  an  election
to  congress  in  1829,  and  served  again  in  the  legis
lature  in  1831-'2.  Mr.  McAfee  was  a  member  of
the  Baltimore  convention  of  1832  which  nominated
Gen.  Jackson  for  president.  From  1833  till  1837  he
resided  at  Bogota,  Columbia,  as  U.  S.  charge  d'af
faires.  In  1841  he  again  served  in  the  state  senate,
and  in  1845  he  retired  from  public  life.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Royal  antiquarian  society  of  Den
mark,  and  an  honorary  member  of  the  Kentucky
historical  society.  He  wrote  a  "  History  of  the
War  of  1812  "  (Lexington,  1816).  and  was  the  au
thor  of  a  private  journal  containing  much  infor
mation  relative  to  the  early  history  of  Kentucky.

MACALESTER,  Charles,  merchant,  b.'  in
Campbelltown,  Argyleshire,  Scotland,  5  April,
1765;  d.  near  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  29  Aug.,  1832.
He  came  to  this  country  in  1786,  was  naturalized
as  an  American  citizen,  and  settled  in  Philadel
phia.  From  1786  till  1804  he  commanded  vessels,
generally  acting  as  supercargo,  and  soon  became
an  owner  of  the  ships  in  which  he  sailed.  One  of
these,  the  "  George  Barclay,"  he  navigated  with
great  success  against  the  pirates.  At  the  begin
ning  of  the  19th  century  he  built  a  ship  called  the


McALESTER


McALPINE


71


"  Fanny."  which  was  the  fastest  sailing  merchant
man  of  her  time,  accomplishing  her  first  voyage
from  Philadelphia  to  the  Isle  of  Wight  in  seven
teen  days,  the  most  rapid  passage  then  on  record.
In  London  he  was  engaged  to  make  a  voyage  in
this  ship  to  Batavia.  In  1804  he  relinquished  his
sea-voyages  and  devoted  himself  to  mercantile
pursuits  in  Philadelphia,  building  many  fine  ves
sels,  which  sailed  to  London,  Amsterdam,  China,
and  the  East  Indies.  In  1825  he  retired  with  a
competency,  and.  becoming  president  of  the  Insur
ance  company  of  Philadelphia,  redeemed  its  for
tunes,  and  served  efficiently  until  his  death.  He
was  also  a  director  of  the  Bank  of  North  America.
Mr.  Macalester  was  an  ardent  Presbyterian,  a
founder  of  the  Mariner's  church,  treasurer  of  the
Marine  Bible  society  of  Philadelphia,  and  vice-
president  of  St.  Andrew's  society.  —  His  son,
Charles,  merchant,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17
Feb..  1798 ;  d.  there,  9  Dec.,  1873,  was  educated  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  which  he  left  in
1812  to  command  a  company  of  forty  boys,  who
worked  for  two  days  to  assist,  in  making  the  forti
fications  on  the  west  side  of  the  Schuylkill.  Early
in  life  he  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits,  and  re
sided  in  Cincinnati  in  1821-'7.  after  which  he  re
turned  to  Philadelphia,  and  retired  in  1849.  He
was  president  of  the  Orthopedic  hospital,  and  of
the  St.  Andrew's  society.  In  1873  he  gave  a  valu
able  property,  consisting  of  a  large  building  with
extensive  grounds,  for  the  establishment  of  a  col
lege  in  Minneapolis,  which  has  been  called  by  the
trustees  "  Macalester  college."  He  has  frequently
presided  at  large  mass  meetings  in  Philadelphia.

McALESTER,  Miles  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York,  21  March,  1833 ;  d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  23  April,
1869.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  acad
emy  in  1856,  and  assigned  to  the  engineer  corps,
becoming  1st  lieutenant,  2  May,  1861,  and  captain,
3  March,  1863.  He  served  in  the  construction  and
repair  of  fortifications  on  the  Atlantic  coast  from
Florida  to  New  York,  superintending  the  defences
of  the  Narrows  in  1859-'61  and  Fort  Mifflin,  Pa.,
in  1861.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  engaged  in
constructing  the  defences  in  Washington,  and  also
served  as  chief  engineer  of  the  3d  corps  in  the
Army  of  the  Potomac  till  October.  1862,  being  in
all  the  important  battles  of  that  army,  and  win
ning  the  brevets  of  major  and  lieutenant-colonel.
From  October,  1862,  till  April,  1863,  he  served  as
chief  engineer  of  the  Department  of  the  Ohio,  for
tified  Cincinnati  and  its  vicinity,  and  constructed
bridge-trains  for  the  western  armies.  During  the
siege  of  Vicksburg  he  was  detached  under  the  or
ders  of  Gen.  Grant,  and  subsequently  became  as
sistant  professor  of  engineering  at  West  Point.  On
15  July,  1864,  he  was  appointed  chief  engineer  of
the  military  division  of  west  Mississippi,  and  en
gaged  in  the  reduction  of  the  Confederate  defences
in  Mobile  bay  and  in  the  Mobile  campaign,  receiv
ing  the  brevets  of  colonel,  23  April,  1864,  for  his
services  as  chief  engineer  of  the  military  division
of  west  Mississippi,  and  especially  as  supervising
engineer  of  the  siege  of  Forts  Gaines  and  Morgan,
and  brigadier-general,  9  April,  1865,  for  services  at
the  siege  of  Mobile.  He  was  then  engaged  in  con
structing  defences  at  Mobile  and  New  Orleans,
and  in  the  improvements  of  the  Mississippi  river.
He  was  commissioned  major  of  the  engineer  corps
on  7  March,  1867,  and  appointed  engineer  of  the
8th  light-house  district,  22  May,  1867.

MacALISTER,  James,  educator,  b.  in  Glas
gow,  Scotland,  26  April,  1840.  After  studying  at
Glasgow  university,  he  came  to  this  country  and
entered  Brown,  but  was  not  graduated.  He  then


studied law  at  Albany  law-school,  where  he  re
ceived  his  degree  in  1864. In  1873  he  was  super
intendent  of public  schools  in  Milwaukee,  Wis..
and  in  1878  he  became  regent  of  normal  schools  in
|  Wisconsin,  holding these  offices  until  1883. He
i  was  then  appointed  first  superintendent  of  public
1  schools  in  Philadelphia,  which  post  he  now  (1887)
holds. In  1885  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the
board  of  trustees  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.
and  in  1886  a  member  of  the  American  philosophi
cal society. He  advocates educational reforms,
especially  the  kindergarten  and  the  introduction
j  of  industrial  or  manual  training  into  the  public
;  schools. He  has  published  educational  and  literary
addresses, reports,  and "  Manual  of  Primary  In
struction "  (Philadelphia,  1884);  ''Manual  of  In
struction  in  United  States  History  and  Civil  Gov
ernment"  (1887);  and  "Catalogue  of  Pedagogical
Library,  with  Bibliographical  Notes  "  (1887).

MCALLISTER.  Matthew  Hall,  jurist,  b.  in
Savannah,  Ga..  26  Nov..  1800 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,
Cal.,  19  Dec.,  1865.  After  receiving  his  education
at  Princeton  he  studied  law.  was  admitted  to  the
bar  about  1820,  and  practised  in  his  native  city.
In  1827  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  district  attorney,
which  post  had  been  held  by  his  father  under  Gen.
Washington's  administration.  In  1832  he  was  ac
tive  in  opposition  to  nullification,  and  became  a  po
litical  leader  during  the  discussions  of  that  period.
He  was  several  times  elected  to  both  branches  of
the  legislature,  in  which  he  obtained  the  establish
ment  of  the  court  for  the  correction  of  errors,  and
in  1845  was  defeated  by  a  small  vote  as  Democratic
candidate  for  governor  of  Georgia.  For  several
years  he  was  mayor  of  Savannah,  and  was  noted  as
a  protector  of  the  colored  people.  In  1848  he  was
a  delegate  to  the  National  Democratic  convention
that  nominated  Gen.  Lewis  Cass  for  the  presidency.
He  removed  to  California  in  1850  with  his  family,
entered  upon  the  practice  of  law  in  San  Francisco,
!  and  in  1855  was  appointed  the  first  U.  S.  circuit
judge  of  California,  rendering  eminent  service  by
his  wise  decisions  upon  land-titles,  which  were  then
|  in  the  utmost  confusion.  He  was  also  well  known
I  for  his  energetic  action  in  suppressing  the  vigilance
committee  by  an  appeal  to  the  naval  authority.
Judge  McAllister  resigned  his  office  in  1862,  owing
to  impaired  health.  In  1860  Columbia  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  He  was  the  author  of  a  "  Eu
logy  on  President  Jackson  "  and  also  of  a  volume
of  legal  opinions,  which  was  published  by  his  son.
— His  son,  Julian,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York  city,  28
Oct.,  1823 ;  d.  on  Governor's  island.  N.  Y..  3  Jan.,
1887,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1847,  assigned  to  the  2d  artillery,  and"  served  in
the  war  with  Mexico  in  1847-'8.  He  was  trans-
j  ferred  to  the  ordnance  corps  on  13  April,  1848,  and
was  at  various  arsenals  till  the  civil  war,  during
which  he  was  chief  of  ordnance  of  the  Department
of  the  Pacific.  He  received  all  the  brevets  up  to
colonel  at  the  close  of  the  war,  and  in  1866  became
major  and  a  member  of  the  board  to  determine  the
armament  of  the  Pacific  coast  fortifications.  He
was  made  lieutenant-colonel  on  23  June.  1874,  and
in  1886  was  transferred  to  the  command  of  the
New  York  arsenal  on  Governor's  island,  where  he
also  served  as  president  of  the  board  for  testing
rifled  cannon. — Matthew  Hall's  grandson.  Ward,
jurist,  b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  27  July,  1855,  was  edu
cated  at  Princeton  and  graduated  at  Harvard  law-
school  in  1880.  He  was  assistant  district  attorney
for  California  in  1882-'o,  resigned,  and  then  became
judge  of  the  U.  S.  court  for  the  territory  of  Alaska.
McALPINE.  William  Jarvis,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  New  York  city  in  1812.  He  received  his  educa-


Me  AN ALLY


Me  ARTHUR


tion  in  his  native  city,  and  in  1827  became  a  civil
engineer,  engaging  chiefly  on  the  construction  of
canals  and  other  hydraulic  works.  Subsequently
he  was  engineer  of  the  eastern  division  of  the  Erie
canal  enlargement  until  June,  1846,  when  he  be
came  chief  engineer  of  the  construction  of  the  dry
dock  of  the  U.  S.  navy-yard  in  Brooklyn.  He  was
elected  state  engineer  of  New  York  in  1852,  and
in  1854-'6  was  state  railroad  commissioner.  Later
he  was  for  two  years  acting  president  and  engi
neer  of  the  Erie  railroad,  after  which  he  was  chief
engineer  of  roads  in  the  west.  The  original  water
works  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  and  in  Chicago,  111.,  were
designed  and  constructed  under  his  supervision,
and  he  was  associated  in  the  building  of  other
similar  works.  In  1870,  at  the  request  of  the  Aus
trian  government,  he  presented  plans  for  the  im
provement  of  the  cataracts  of  the  Danube  river.
Since  that  time  his  advice  has  been  largely  sought
on  important  engineering  projects  thi'oughout  the
United  States.  He  has  published  valuable  reports
and  was  president  of  the  American  society  of  civil
engineers  in  1868-'9.

Me  AN  ALLY,  David  Rice,  clergyman,  b.  in
Granger  county,  Tenn.,  17  Feb.,  1810.  He  was
educated  by  private  teachers,  and  at  the  age  of
nineteen  entered  the  conference  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church  at  Abingdon,  Va.,  as  an  itinerant
preacher.  He  travelled  for  twelve  years  in  the
circuits  and  districts  of  Virginia,  North  Carolina,
and  Tennessee,  was  for  three  years  the  editor  of  a
secular  paper  in  North  Carolina,  and  in  1843  be
came  president  of  the  East  Tennessee  female  insti
tute,  Knoxville.  He  conducted  this  school  for
eight  years,  during  four  of  which  he  edited  a  re
ligious  journal.  In  1851  he  became  editor  of  the
'•  Christian  Advocate "  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and  su
perintendent  of  the  Methodist  book  concern  there.
Besides  sermons  and  addresses,  he  has  published
tracts  on  educational  and  controversial  subjects,
and  was  long  associated  with  Horace  Mann  in
efforts  to  improve  the  common-school  system.  He
is  also  the  author  of  "Life  of  Martha  Laurens
Ramsay "  (St.  Louis,  1852) ;  "  Life  and  Times  of
Rev.  William  Patton  "  (185G) ;  "  Life  and  Times  of
Rev.  Dr.  Samuel  Patton  "  (1857) ;  "  Life  and  La
bors  of  Bishop  Marvine  "  (1878) ;  and  "  History  of
Methodism  in  Missouri  "  (1881).

MacARTHUR,  Arthur,  jurist,  b.  in  Glasgow,
Scotland,  20  Jan.,  1815.  He  came  to  this  country
when  a  child  with  his  parents,  spent  a  year  in  Wes-
leyan  university.  Conn.,  studied  law  in  New  York,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1841.  He  began
practice  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  and  in  1843  was  ap
pointed  public  administrator  for  the  county  of
Hampden,  and  judge-advocate  for  the  western  di
vision  of  the  militia.  In  1849  he  removed  to  Mil
waukee,  Wis.,  and  in  1851  was  elected  city  attorney
of  that  city,  in  which  office  he  served  one  term.  In
1855  he  was  elected  lieutenant-governor  of  the
state  and  served  a  part  of  his  time  as  governor
during  a  vacancy  that  was  created  by  the  resigna
tion  of  Gov.  Barstow.  In  1857  he  was  elected
judge  of  the  2d  judicial  circuit,  and  he  was  re-
elected  in  1863.  He  was  appointed  a  U.  S.  com
missioner  to  the  Paris  exposition  of  1867,  In  1870
he  was  appointed  associate  justice  of  the  supreme
court  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  which  place
he  resigned  on  1  April,  1887,  under  the  act  of
congress  permitting  Federal  judges  to  retire  on
full  pay  after  reaching  the  age  of  seventy.  He  has
been  for  many  years  president  of  the  Washington
humane  society,  and  occupies  a  similar  post  in  the
associated  chanties  for  the  district.  He  is  also
president  of  the  board  of  regents  of  the  National


university  at  Washington.  Judge  MacArthur  has
published  four  volumes  of  reports  containing  the
more  important  decisions  of  his  court  (Washington,
1875  et  seq.),  and  is  the  author  of  "  Education  in
its  Relation  to  Manual  Industry  "  (New  York,  1884).
He  has  now  (1888)  nearly  ready  for  publication  a
work  called  the  "  Biography  of  the  English  Lan
guage."  He  has  for  many  years  delivered  lectures
on  historical  and  literary  subjects  which  will  prob
ably  be  gathered  into  a  volume  soon.

MacARTHUR,  Charles  Lafayette,  journal
ist,  b.  in  Claremont.  N.  H.,  7  Jan.,"  1824.  He  was
educated  in  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  learned  there  the
printer's  trade,  became  editor  and  proprietor  of  the
"  Carthaginian,"  printed  in  Carthage,  N.  Y.,  and
was  afterward  a  reporter  for  the  Detroit  "  Free
Press."  About  1842  he  removed  to  Milwaukee,  and
became  the  first  editor  of  the  "Sentinel."  In
1846-'7  he  was  city  editor  of  the  New  York  "  Sun."
He  next  joined  John  M.  Francis  in  the  purchase
of  the  Troy  "  Budget,"  for  which  he  wrote  letters
from  Europe  in  1851.  and  from  the  southern  states
in  1856,  that  attracted  much  attention.  In  1859
he  established  the  Troy  "  Daily  Arena,"  which  he
sold  in  the  spring  of  1861  in  order  to  go  to  the
war,  in  which  he  served  first  as  lieutenant  and
quartermaster  of  the  2C  New  York  volunteers,  and
afterward  as  captain  and  assistant  quartermaster  in
the  regular  army.  In  the  autumn  of  1864  he  estab
lished  the  Troy  "News,"  one  of  the  earliest  Sun
day  newspapers  except  those  published  in  New
York  city.  In  1866  he  sold  the  "  News,"  having  be
come  one  of  the  editors  and  proprietors  of  the  Troy
"  Daily  Whig,"  and  in  March.  1869,  he  revived,  as
a  Sunday  newspaper,  the  Troy  '•  Northern  Budget."
For  some  years  prior  to  1886  he  was  the  proprietor
of  the  Troy  "  Daily  Telegram."  In  1881-'3  he  was
a  member  of  the  New  York  state  senate.

McARTHUR,  Duncan,  soldier,  b.  in  Dutchess
county,  N.  Y..  14  June.  1772;  d.  near  Chillicothe,
Ohio,  28  April,  1839.  His  family  removed  to  the
western  frontier  of  Pennsylvania  when  he  was
eight  years  old,
and  at  the  age  of
eighteen  he  volun
teered  in  Gen.  Jo-
siah  Harmar's  ex
pedition  against
the  Miami  In
dians.  He  parti
cipated  as  a  ran
ger  or  scout  in  the
warfare  with  the
Indians  of  Ken
tucky  and  Ohio
until  Gen.  Antho
ny  Wayne's  vic
tory  over  them  in  "^\  A.


1794.
ward


Soon  after
he settled


as  a  surveyor  near
Chillicothe,  and
acquired  large
wealth  in  land.  He  wa»  a  member  of  the  Ohio
legislature  in  1805,and  in  1808  became  major-gen
eral  of  the  territorial  militia.  In  the  beginning  of
the  war  with  Great  Britain  he  was  commissioned
colonel  of  the  1st  Ohio  volunteers.  7  May,  1812,
and  was  second  in  command  at  Detroit  when  Gen.
William  Hull  surrendered.  After  the  Americans
had  established  themselves  on  the  Canadian  side
of  Detroit  river  he  led  a  foraging-party  that  cap
tured  provisions  from  the  settlements  on  the
Thames,  and  in  a  reconnoissance  toward  Fort  Mai
den  narrowly  escaped  being  cut  oft'  by  Tecumseh's


MACARTHUR


McAULEY


73


Indians.  When  Hull  was  temporarily  absent  from
the  army  for  a  time  McArthur  determined  to  at
tach  the  fort  at  Amherstburg.  which  would  have
fallen  without  a  blow  a  few  days  earlier,  but  was
now  protected  by  a  gun-boat  and  a  strong  battery.
Col.  McArthur  and  Col.  Lewis  Cass  were  absent  at
the  time  of  the  capitulation,  having  been  sent  to
the  river  Raisin  to  escort  Capt.  Brush  and  his  re
lieving  force  to  Detroit.  They  were  included  in
the  surrender,  and  when  a  British  officer  came  from
the  fort  with  the  articles  of  capitulation  McArthur
tore  off  his  epaulettes  and  broke  his  sword  in  an
outburst  of  indignation.  He  was  commissioned  as
brigadier-general  on  12  March,  1813.  and  when
Gen.  Harrison  resigned,  31  May,  1814,  succeeded
to  the  chief  command  of  the  western  army.  He
projected  a  plan  for  the  conquest  of  Canada,  and
on  26  Oct.,  1814,  crossed  St.  Clair  river  with  750
men  and  five  field-pieces,  passed  through  the
Scotch  and  Moravian  settlements,  reached  Oxford
on  4  Nov.,  and  drove  the  militia  before  him,  until
he  reached  Brantford.  where  he  found  a  large  force
of  Indians  and  militia  posted  on  the  opposite  bank
of  Grand  river,  and  heard  that  the  road  to  Burling
ton  was  defended  by  British  regulars  and  cannon.
He  accordingly  turned  southward,  destroying  pub
lic  property  and  defeating  a  force  of  militia.  On
reaching  Dover  he  learned  that  Gen.  George  Izard
had  withdrawn  his  troops  from  Canadian  soil,  and
that  a  strong  force  of  regulars  was  coming  against
him.  Turning  westward,  he  hastened  back  to  De
troit  by  way  of  St.  Thomas,  discharging  his  force  at
Sandwich  on  17  Nov.  He  had  been  elected  by  the
Democrats  a  member  of  congress  from  Ohio  in  1813.
but  declined  to  leave  the  army.  After  he  was  mus-  |
tered  out,  15  June,  1815,  he  was  returned  to  the
legislature.  In  1816-'17  he  served  as  a  commis-  I
sioner  to  negotiate  treaties  with  the  Indians,  which  '
were  ratified  in  1818,  and  by  which  the  Indians  con
veyed  to  the  government  their  lands  in  Ohio.  In  i
1817-'19  he  was  again  a  member  of  the  state  house  |
of  representatives,  and  was  chosen  speaker.  In
1822  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Clay  Demo
crat,  and  served  from  1  Dec.,  1823,  till  3  March.
1825.  In  1830-'2  he  was  governor  of  Ohio,  and  in
1832  he  was  again  a  candidate  for  congress,  but
lost  the  election  by  a  .single  ballot.  While  gov
ernor  he  suffered  severe  physical  injuries  through
an  accident,  from  which  he  never  recovered.

MacARTHUR,  John, architect, b.  in  Blade-
nock,  Wigtonshire,  Scotland.  13  May,  1823. He  j
came  to  the  United  States  at  the  age  "of  ten,  stud-  I
ied  architectural  drawing,  and  served  as  a  foreman  j
under  his  uncle  in  the  construction  of  the  Penn-  j
sylvania  hospital. In 1848  he  was  appointed  by  ',
the  city  of  Philadelphia  architect  and  superintend-  j
ent  of  the  new  house  of  refuge. During  the  civil  |
war  he  was  architect  in  charge  of  the  hospitals  and  i
other  government buildings  in  the Philadelphia  ,
district. In  1869  he  was  selected  by  competition  to  |
design  and  construct  the  new  city  hall  in  Phila-  j
delphia,  on  which  he  is  still  (1887)  engaged,  having  '
given  up  his  private  business  in  order  to  devote  '
his  entire  time  to  this  structure. In  1871  he  was  !
appointed  by  the  United  States  architect  of  the  j
new  post-office  in  Philadelphia,  which  was  built
and  furnished  entirely  under  his  direction. In  the  \
same  year  he  was  appointed  superintendent  of  re
pairs,  having  charge  of  all  government  buildings  ;
in  Philadelphia. In  1874  he  was  twice  offered  the
post  of  supervising  architect  of  the  U.  S.  treasury,
but  declined. In  1875  he  was  commissioned  by
the  government  to  examine  and  report  on  the  con
struction  of  the  custom-house  building  in  Chicago.
In  1885  he  was  appointed  by  the  city  of  Boston  to  \


select  plans  for  the  new  court-house.  Among  the
buildings  designed  and  built  by  him  are  the  naval
hospitals  at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  Annapolis,  Aid.,  and
Mare  island,  Cal. ;  the  state  hospitals  for  the  in
sane  at  Danville  and  Warren.  Pa. ;  Lafayette  col
lege,  Easton,  Pa. :  the  Continental,  Girard.  and
Lafayette  hotels,  Philadelphia ;  and  the  "  Public
Ledger"  building,  Philadelphia,  and  the  town  and
country  residences  of  George  W.  Childs.

McARTHUR,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Erskine,
Scotland,  17  Nov.,  1826.  He  is  the  son  of  a  black
smith,  and  worked  at  that  trade  till  he  was  twenty-
three  years  of  age.  when  he  came  to  the  United
States  and  settled  in  Chicago,  111.,  where  he  was
employed  as  foreman  of  boiler-making  in  a  foun
dry,  and  was  subsequently  at  the  head  of  an  es
tablishment  of  his  own.  When  the  civil  war  began
he  joined  the  12th  Illinois  volunteers,  with  a  com
pany  of  which  he  was  captain,  and  was  chosen
lieutenant-colonel.  He  soon  afterward  became
colonel  of  the  regiment,  commanded  a  brigade  at
the  assault  on  Fort  Donelson,  and  for  his  gallantry
was  promoted  brigadier-general,  21  March,  1862.
At  Shiloh  he  received  a  wound  in  the  foot  in  the
beginning  of  the  first  day's  battle,  but  returned
after  it  was  dressed  to  his  brigade,  and  succeeded
to  the  command  of  the  2d  division,  when  Gen.
William  H.  L.  Wai  lace  was  mortally  wounded.  In
the  operations  against  Yicksburg  he  commanded  a
division  in  Gen.  McPherson's  corps.  He  took  a
conspicuous  part  in  the  battle  of  Nashville,  where
he  was  at  the  head  of  a  division  under  Gen.  An
drew  J.  Smith,  which  carried  the  salient  point  of
the  enemy's  line,  and  for  gallantry  in  this  action
he  was  bre vetted  major-general.  He  was  postmas
ter  at  Chicago  in  1873-'7.

MACAU  LAY,  Sir  James  Buchanan,  Canadian
jurist,  b.  in  Niagara,  3  Dec.,  1793;  d.  in  Toronto,
26  Nov.,  1859.  His  father,  Dr.  James  Macaulay,  a
native  of  Glasgow,  Scotland,  came  with  his  regi
ment,  the  Queen's  rangers,  to  Canada  in  1792,  and
was  afterward  deputy  inspector-general  of  hospi
tals.  James  was  educated  in  Cornwall,  and  after
ward  entered  the  98th  regiment  as  ensign.  In  1812
he  joined  the  Glengarry  fencibles  as  a  lieutenant,
and  fought  at  Ogdensburg,  Oswego,  Lundy's  Lane,
and  at  the  siege  of  Fort  Erie.  At  the  close  of  the
war  his  corps  was  disbanded,  and  after  engaging
in  the  study  of  law  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1822.  He  rose  rapidly  in  his  profession,  was  an
executive  councillor  during  the  administration  of
Sir  Peregrine  Maitland.  and  in  1829  became  a  judge
of  the  court  of  Queen's  bench.  When  the  court  of
common  pleas  was  constituted  in  December.  1849,
he  was  transferred  to  it  as  chief  justice,  and  con
tinued  on  the  bench  until  his  resignation  in  1856.
A  short  time  before  his  death  he  accepted  the
appointment  of  judge  of  the  court  of  error  and  ap
peal.  In  1859  the  honor  of  knighthood  was  con
ferred  upon  him  by  the  Queen.  He  was  chairman
of  the  commission  that  was  intrusted  with  the
consolidation  of  the  statutes  of  Upper  Canada,  and
this  work  was  completed  in  1858  largely  by  the  aid
of  Sir  James. — His  brother,  JOHN  SIMCOE,  served
as  colonel  of  engineers,  and  afterward  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  legislative  council  of  Upper  Canada.

McAULEY,  Jeremiah,  missionary,  b.  in  Ire
land  in  1839  :  d.  in  New  York  city,  18  Sept.,  1884.
At  the  age  of  thirteen  he  was  sent  to  a  married
sister  in  New  York  city,  and  assisted  her  husband
in  his  business,  but.  forming  vicious  associations,
left  them  soon,  and  lived  in  Water  street,  where
he  became  a  thief  and  a  prize-fighter.  At  the  age
of  nineteen  he  was  arrested  for  highway  robbery,
and,  although  innocent  of  the  charge,  was  convict-


74


MACBEIDE


MCCAFFREY


ed  and  sentenced  to  fifteen  years'  imprisonment.
When  he  had  been  about  five  years  in  prison  he
became  religious,  but  after  he  was  pardoned,  in
March,  1864,  he  returned  to  his  evil  practices.
When  reduced  to  poverty,  he  found  a  friend  in  a
missionary,  who  aided  him  to  find  work,  and  re
awakened  his  religious  convictions.  After  repeated
relapses,  he  entered  the  Methodist  church,  and  in
October,  1872,  opened  a  mission  called  the  "  Help
ing  Hand  "  in  Water  street.  He  was  very  success
ful  in  arousing  religious  feelings  in  the  degraded,
assisted  by  his  wife,  MARIA,  who  had  been  his  com
panion  in  vice.  In  1882  they  opened  the  "  Cre-
morne  Mission,"  and  in  June,  1883,  he  began  the
publication  of  a  weekly  called  "  Jerry  McAuley's
Newspaper."  See  "  Jerry  McAuley,  his  Life  and
Work,"  an  autobiography,  edited  by  the  Rev.  Rob
ert  M.  Offord  (New  York,  1885).

MACBRIDE,  James,  botanist,  b.  in  Williams-
burg  county,  S.  C.,  in  1784;  d.  in  Charleston,
S.  C.,  in  1817.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1805,
and  then  studied  medicine.  Settling  in  Pineville,
S.  C.,  he  practised  his  profession  for  many  years,
but  later  removed  to  Charleston,  where  he  died  of
yellow  fever.  Dr.  Macbride  was  an  ardent  devotee
of  botany,  and  contributed  papers  on  that  science
to  the  "  Transactions  of  the  Linnaean  Society  "  and
elsewhere.  His  name  was  given  by  Dr.  Stephen
Elliott  to  the  Macbridea  pulcra,  a  genus  found
in  St.  John's,  Berkeley,  S.  C.,  of  which  but  two
species  are  known  to  exist.  This  same  authority
dedicated  the  second  volume  of  his  "  Sketch  of  the
Botany  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  "  (Charles
ton,  1824)  to  Dr.  Macbride.

McBRIDE,  James  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Ken
tucky  about  1815 ;  d.  in  Pocahontas,  Ark.,  in  the
autumn  of  1862.  He  studied  law,  and  practised  in
the  courts  of  Missouri,  whither  he  removed  in  1845.
When  the  civil  war  began  he  joined  Gen.  Sterling
Price  in  raising  the  state  guard  of  Missouri,  re
cruited  a  brigade,  and  was  afterward  commissioned
as  brigadier-general  in  the  Confederate  service.  In
the  counter-attack  on  Gen.  Lyon's  force  at  Wilson's
Creek  he  led  the  infantry  on"  the  Confederate  left.

McCABE,  James  Dabney,  clergyman,  b.  in
Richmond,  Va.,  15  April,  1808;  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  1  Aug.,  1875.  He  entered  the  Methodist  min
istry  at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  but  afterward  con
nected  himself  with  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church,  and  in  1856  became  associate  rector  of
St.  Paul's  church  in  Baltimore.  He  afterward  was
rector  of  other  parishes  in  Maryland,  and  twice  de
clined  a  bishopric.  He  edited  the  "  Olive  Branch,"
and  also  the  "  Odd-Fellows'  Magazine,"  and  pub
lished  a  "  Masonic  Text-Book." — His  brother,  John
Collins,  clergyman,  b.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  12  Nov.,
1810 ;  d.  in  Chambersburg,  Pa.,  26  Feb.,  1875,  left
school  early,  and  became  a  clerk  in  a  bank.  He
contributed  a  poem  to  the  first  number  of  the
"  Southern  Literary  Messenger,"  formed  a  friend
ship  with  its  editor,  Edgar  A.  Poe,  and  wrote  con
stantly  for  it  and  other  magazines  poems,  essays,
and  papers  on  colonial  history.  In  1845  he  entered
the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,
and  after  being  rector  at  Smithfield.  Va.,  for  five
years,  took  charge  of  a  parish  in  Hampton,  and
while  there  prosecuted  researches  among  parish
registers  and  family  archives  into  the  early  history
of  his  church  in  Virginia,  and  published  papers  on
the  subject,  but,  on  the  announcement  of  Bishop
William  Meade's  work,  handed  over  his  materials
to  Dr.  Meade.  At  this  time  he  received  from  the
college  of  William  and  Mary  the  degree  of  D.  D.
In  1855  he  was  chairman  of  the  state  yellow  fever
committee.  He  was  rector  of  a  church  in  Balti


more,  Md.,  in  1856-'9,  and  then  in  Anne  Arundel
county,  Md.,  till  1861,  when  he  became  chaplain  of
a  Virginia  regiment  of  Confederate  troops.  From
1862  till  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  chaplain  of
Libby  prison  in  Richmond.  In  1865-'7  he  had
charge  of  a  church  in  Bladensburg,  Md.,  then  went
to  Middleburg,  Del.,  and  left  that  parish  in  1872
to  become  rector  of  a  church  in  Chambersburg.
Dr.  McCabe  lectured  frequently  on  literary  topics,
and  delivered  memorial  addresses  and  poems,  many
of  which  were  published.  A  volume  of  his  early
poems  was  printed  under  the  title  of  "Scraps"
(Richmond,  1835). — James  Dabney's  son,  James
Dabuey,  author,  b.  in  Richmond.  Va.,  30  July,
1842;  d.  in  Germantown,  Pa.,  27  Jan.,  1883,  was
educated  at  the  Virginia  military  institute.  Dur
ing  the  secession  crisis  he  published  a  pamphlet  en
titled  "  Fanaticism  and  its  Results,"  by  "  A  South
erner"  (Richmond,  1860).  A  war-story  entitled
"  The  Aide-de-Camp,"  was  issued  in  book-form  in
1863,  and  three  plays  of  martial  tenor  were  per
formed  at  the  Richmond  theatre  in  1862-'3.  In
the  winter  of  1863  he  published  "  The  Bohemian,"
a  Christmas  book,  to  which  his  wife  and  Charles  P.
Dimitry  also  contributed,  and  in  1863-'4  he  edited
the  "Magnolia  Weekly."  His  "Sword  of  Harry
Lee  "  and  other  war-poems  were  very  popular.  He
published  a  "  Life  of  Gen.  Thomas  J.  Jackson,"  by
"An  Ex-Cadet"  (Richmond.  1863;  enlarged  ed.,
1864) ;  "  Memoir  of  Gen.  Albert  S.  Johnston  "  (1866) :
and  •'  Life  and  Campaigns  of  Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee  "
(New  York,  1867),  in  which  he  disparages  Jefferson
Davis,  and  ascribes  the  loss  of  the  southern  cause
to  his  blunders.  lie  also  made  a  compilation  of  the
romance  and  humor  of  the  war  entitled  "  The  Gray-
Jackets  "  (1867).  He  was  the  author  of  several
hundred  short  stories,  essays,  poems,  and  transla
tions.  His  works  include  "  Planting  the  Wilder
ness"  (Boston,  1869);  "History  of  the  Late  War
between  Germany  and  France"  (1871);  "Lights
and  Shadows  of  New  York  Life "  (New  York,
1872) ;  "  The  Great  Republic  "  (1872) ;  and  a  "  His
tory  of  the  Grange  Movement,"  which,  with  some
of  his  subsequent  works,  was  published  under  the
pen-name  of  "  Edward  Winslow  Martin  "  (Chicago,
1874).  His  later  publications  are  "  Paris  by  Sun
light  and  Gaslight"  (Philadelphia,  1875);  '"Cen
tennial  History  of  the  United  States"  (Philadel
phia,  1875) ;  "  Pathways  of  the  Holy  Land  "  (1877) ;
"History  of  the  Turko-Russian  War"  (1879);
"Our  Young  Folks  Abroad"  (Philadelphia,  1881);
and  "Our  Young  Folks  in  Africa"  (1882). — A  son
of  John  C.,  William  Gordon,  educator,  b.  near
Richmond,  Va,,  4  Aug.,  1841.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1861,  and  immedi
ately  enlisted  in  the  Confederate  army,  and  served
throughout  the  civil  war,  for  the  first  year  as  a
private,  and  afterward  as  a  captain  of  artillery.
After  the  war  was  ended  he  established  the  univer
sity  school  at  Petersburg,  Va.,  of  which  he  is  still
(18"88)  head-master.  While  in  the  army  he  con
tributed  many  poems  to  southern  magazines,  and
after  returning  to  civil  life  published  essays,  re
views,  sketches,  and  translations  from  mediaeval
Latin  poetry.  He  translated  and  revised  "  Aids  to
Latin  Orthography,"  from  the  German  of  Wilhelm
Brambach  (New  York,  1872),  edited  "  Ballads  of
Battle  and  Bravery "  (1873),  and  is  the  author  of
"  The  Defence  of  Petersburg,  Campaign  of  1864-'5  "
(Richmond,  1876).  He  has  also  published  a  "  Latin
Grammar"  (Philadelphia,  1883),  edited  "Caesar"
(Philadelphia,  1886),  and  is  engaged  (1888)  in  pre
paring  an  edition  of  "  Horace's  Works."

McCAFFREY,  John, clergyman, b. in Em-
mettsburg,  Md.,  6  Sept.,  1806 ;  d.  there,  25  Sept.,


McGAGG


McCALL


75


1882.  He  studied  theology  in  Emmettsburg  and
Baltimore,  was  ordained  priest  in  1838,  and  imme
diately  afterward  appointed  president  of  Mount  St.
Mary's  college,  where  he  made  many  improvements.
Among  others,  he  began  the  erection  of  a  fine
church.  He  twice  declined  a  bishopric.  Dr.  Mc
Caffrey  was  a  man  of  wide  erudition  and  much
literary  ability.  His  principal  publications  were  a
course  of  lectures  on  literary  and  philosophical
subjects  delivered  before  the  Philomathean  society
of  Mount  St.  Mary's,  a  series  of  lectures  before  the
Catholic  association  of  Baltimore,  several  addresses,
among  which  one  on  the  "Landing  of  the  Pil
grims  "  attracted  great  attention,  and  funeral  ora
tions  on  Bishop  Dubois  and  Bishop  Brute,  which
have  been  considered  models  of  their  kind.  He  was
also  the  author  of  a  series  of  catechisms  (New  York).

McCAdJG,  Ezra  Butler,  lawyer,  b.  in  Kinder-
hook,  N.  Y.,  22  Nov.,  1825.  He  studied  law  in
Hudson  and  settled  in  1847  in  Chicago,  where  he
has  taken  a  high  rank  in  his  profession,  having
refused  a  nomination  by  both  parties  for  judge  of
the  Illinois  supreme  court.  Mr.  McCagg  was  a
member  of  the  U.  S.  sanitary  commission,  and  presi
dent  of  the  Northwestern  sanitary  commission  and
of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the  Illinois  eastern  hos
pital  for  the  insane,  and  first  president  of  the  Lin
coln  park  trustees.  His  library  and  art  collection,
one  of  the  best  in  the  west,  was  destroyed  by  the
fire  of  1871.  lie  has  since  then  collected  another
large  library  and  many  choice  works  of  art.  Among
them  is  the  historical  picture  by  G.  P.  A.  Ilealy  rep
resenting  the  conference  between  Lincoln,  Grant,
Sherman,  and  Porter,  on  board  "The  Queen,"  28
March,  1865,  at  City  Point,  which  is  represented  in
the  article  SHERMAN,  WILLIAM  TECUMSEH.  Mr.
McCagg  has  delivered  many  lectures,  and  pub
lished  numerous  pamphlets.

McCAINE,  Alexander,  clergyman,  b.  in  Tip-
perary,  Ireland,  about  1775;  d.  in  Montgomery,
Ala.,  1  June,  1856.  He  was  educated  in  England,
and  was  intended  for  the  Anglican  ministry  ;  but,
after  emigrating  to  the  United  States  in  1791,  he
accepted  the  Methodist  doctrines,  was  admitted  in
to  the  conference  in  1797,  and  ordained  an  elder  in
1801.  He  was  for  many  years  a  travelling  com
panion  of  Bishop  Francis  Asbury,  filled  important
pulpits,  and  located  in  1821.  He  became  interested
in  the  question  of  lay  representation  in  the  councils
of  his  church,  and  after  the  adverse  decision  of  the
general  conference  of  1824  published  a  treatise  in
support  of  his  views,  called  "  History  and  Mystery
of  Methodist  Episcopacy"  (Baltimore,  1829),  which
called  forth  a  reply  from  Bishop  John  Emory,  en
titled  "  Defence  of  our  Fathers."  He  was  a  leader
in  the  organization  of  the  Methodist  Protestant
church  in  1830,  and  one  of  the  most  eloquent  and
influential  ministers  in  that  denomination.

McCALL,  Edward  R.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C.,  5  Aug.,  1790;  d.  in  Bordentown,
N.  J..  31  July,  1853.  He  entered  the  navy  as  mid
shipman,  1  Jan.,  1808,  and  was  promoted  to  a  lieu
tenancy.  11  March,  1813,  at  which  time  he  was  on
duty  on  board  the  brig  "  Enterprise,"  fourteen
guns,  then  under  the  command  of  Lieut.  Johnston
Blakeley,  who  was  shortly  afterward  succeeded  by
Lieut.  William  Burrows  (q.  v.).  The  "  Enterprise  "
left  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  for  a  cruise,  1  Sept.,  1813,
and  on  the  4th,  at  20  minutes  past  3  P.  M.,  she
brought  to  action  the  British  brig  "  Boxer,"  fourteen
guns.  Lieut.  Burrows  being  mortally  wounded
early  in  the  engagement,  though  he  refused  to
leave  his  post,  the  command  devolved  on  Lieut.
McCall,  who  carried  the  ship  gallantly  through  the
action,  the  enemy  surrendering  at  4  p.  M.  By  reso


lution,  approved  6  Jan..  1814,  congress  caused  to  be

8 resented  to  the  nearest  male  relative  of  Lieut,
•urrows,  and  to  Lieut.  McCall,  gold  medals  "  in
testimony  of  the  high  sense  entertained  of  their
gallantry  and  good  conduct  in  the  conflict  with
the  British  sloop  '  Boxer.' "  Lieut.  McCall  was
promoted  to  the  rank  of  master-commandant,  3
March,  1825,  and  to  that  of  captain,  3  March,  1835.
McCALL,  George  Archibald,  soldier,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  16  March,  1802;  d.  in  West
Chester,  Pa.,  26  Feb.,  1868.  He  was  the  son  of
Archibald  McCall,  merchant  of  Philadelphia.  He
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1822,
and,  after  serving  as  aide  to  Gen.  Edmund  P.
Gaines  in  1831-'6,  was  commissioned  captain  in  1836
and  major  in  1847,  and  served  in  the  Florida  and
Mexican  wars,  receiving  the  brevets  of  major  and
lieutenant-colonel  "  for  gallant  and  distinguished
services  in  the  battles  of  Palo  Alto  and  Resaca  de
la  Palma."  On  his  return  from  the  Mexican  war
he  was  given  a  sword  by  the  citizens  of  Phila
delphia.  In  1850  he  was  appointed  inspector-
general  of  the  army,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,
which  place  he  resigned,  22  Aug.,  1853,  and  settled
in  Chester  county,  Pa.  At  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  he  tendered  his  services  to  Gov.  Andrew
D.  Curtin,  who  made  him  major-general  of  militia,
with  the  task  of  organizing  the  Pennsylvania  re
serves.  He  was  commissioned  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  on  17  May,  1861.  He  commanded  the
reserves,  which  formed  a  division  of  three  brigades,
until  J  une,  1862,  planning  the  successful  movement
against  Dranesville,  20  Dec.,  1861,  and  command
ing  all  the  National  troops  at  the  battle  of  Me-
chanicsville,  26  June,  1862,  where  he  repelled  a
greatly  superior  force.  He  was  at  Gaines's  Hill
and  Charles  City  Cross-roads,  but  was  taken  pris
oner  at  New  Market  Cross-roads,  on  30  June,  and
confined  in  Libby  prison  for  several  weeks,  after
which  he  was  on  sick-leave,  and  resigned  from  the
army,  31  March,  1863.  In  August,  1862,  he  re
ceived  a  sword  from  the  citizens  of  Chester  county,
Pa.,  and  in  the  autumn  of  that  year  he  was  Demo
cratic  candidate  for  congress  from  Pennsylvania-
He  was  the  author  of  "  Letters  from  the  Frontier,"
a  posthumous  work  (Philadelphia,  1868). — His
cousin,  Peter,  lawyer,  b.  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  31
Aug.,  1809 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  30  Oct.,  1880,
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1826,  studied  law
with  Joseph  R.  Ingersoll  in  1830,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  Philadelphia,  and  until  within  a  few
months  of  his  death  continued  in  the  practice  of
his  profession,  in  which  he  became  eminent  in  all
its  departments.  He  served  in  the  councils  of  the
city,  and  in  1844—'5  was  its  mayor.  He  was  for
thirty  years  one  of  the  vice-provosts  of  the  Law
academy  of  Philadelphia,  and  for  many  years  pro
fessor  of  pleading  and  practice  in  the  law  depart
ment  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  of  which
institution  he  was  a  trustee  from  1861  till  his  death.
Among  his  published  addresses  are  "  Progress  and
Influence  of  the  Society  of  Friends  in  Philadel
phia,"  delivered  before  the  Historical  society  of
Pennsylvania  (Philadelphia,  1832);  "Rise  and
Progress  of  Civil  Society  "  (1836) ;  and  "  History
of  Pennsylvania  Law  and  Equity "  (1838). — An
other  cousin,  John  Cadwalader,  poet,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  24  Dec.,  1793:  d.  there,  3  Oct.,  1846,  stud
ied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  his  native
city  in  1815.  He  published  "  The  Troubadour,  and
other  Poems  "  (Philadelphia,  1822),  and  "  Fleurette,
and  other  Rhymes  "  (1828).

McCALL,  Hugh,  soldier,  b.  in  South  Carolina
in  1767 ;  d.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  9  July,  1824.  He  be
came  ensign  of  the  3d  sub-legion,  12  May,  1794,


76


McCALLA


McCANN


1st  lieutenant  in  May.  1798,  deputy  paymaster-
general,  31  Jan.,  1800,  and  captain  in  August  of
that  year.  On  the  reorganization  of  the  army  in
1802  he  was  retained  in  the  2d  infantry,  brevetted
major,  10  July,  1812,  and  mustered  out,  15^  July,
1815.  He  was  made  military  storekeeper  at  Savan
nah,  Ga.,  31  March,  1818,  and  at  Charleston,  S.  C.,
in  May,  1821.  Major  McCall  published  a  "  History
of  Georgia  "  (2  vols.,  Savannah,  1811-'16),  a  work
that,  as  Jared  Sparks  said,  had  "its  merits,  but
the  author  labored  under  disadvantages,  and  his
materials  were  scanty."

McCALLA,  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Nesham-
iny,  Pa.,  in  1748;  d.  in  Wappetaw,  S.  C.,  6  April.
1809.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1766,  and
then  taught  in  Philadelphia,  at  the  same  time
studying  theology.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  as  a
Presbyterian  in  1772,  and  two  years  later  ordained
pastor  of  the  churches  at  New  Providence  and
Charleston,  Pa.,  where  he  preached  till  the  Revo
lution.  He  was  then  appointed  a  chaplain  in  the
Continental  army,  and  served  in  Canada  till  the
battle  of  Trois  Rivieres  in  1776,  where  he  was  cap
tured.  After  confinement  in  a  prison-ship  he  was
released  on  parole  in  the  latter  part  of  the  year,
and  returned  to  his  congregation,  but  was  accused
of  violating  his  parole  by  his  patriotic  prayers,  and
forced  to  flee  to  Virginia,  where  he  was  soon  after
ward  exchanged.  He  there  established  a  school  in
Hanover  county,  Va.,  but  in  1788  went  to  Wappe
taw,  S.  C.,  where  he  was  pastor  of  the  Congrega
tional  church  till  his  death.  South  Carolina  col
lege  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  Dr.  McCalla
possessed  much  learning  and  eloquence.  His  "  Ser
mons  and  Essays"  were  edited  with  a  memoir  by
William  Hollingshead  (2  vols.,  1810).

McCALLA,  William  Latta,  clergyman,  b.  near
Lexington,  Ky.,  25  Nov.,  1788 ;  d.  in  Louisiana,  12
Oct.,  1859.  He  was  graduated  at  Transylvania
university,  studied  theology  privately,  was  licensed
to  preach  in  1816,  and  was  a  chaplain  in  the  U.  S.
army  in  1816-'18.  He  was  settled  over  Presbyte
rian  churches  in  Augusta,  Ky.,  in  1819,  and  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  much  of  the  time  from  1823  to
1854.  During  part  of  this  period  he  was  in  Texas
on  account  of  failing  health,  serving  as  an  itinerant
missionary,  and  also  as  an  army  chaplain.  He  af
terward  preached  in  St.  Louis,  was  connected  with
a  seminary  at  St.  Charles,  Mo.,  and  in  the  year  of
his  death  removed  to  Louisiana.  He  also  engaged
in  missionary  work  among  the  boatmen  of  St.
Louis  and  the  slaves  of  the  south.  Mr.  McCalla
was  a  fine  linguist  and  a  notable  pulpit  orator.
He  was  an  active  and  forcible  controversialist,  and
held  many  public  debates  including  discussions
with  Alexander  Campbell  on  Baptism,  with  Abner
Kneeland  on  Universalism,  and  with  Joseph  Barker
on  Infidelity.  His  self-control  and  polite  manner
of  saying  cutting  things  led  to  the  remark  that
"  he  was  smooth  as  oil,  but  it  was  the  oil  of  vit
riol.'5  He  published  many  sermons  and  essays,
"  The  Doctorate  of  Divinity "  ;  "  Adventures  in
Texas,  chiefly  in  1840"  (Philadelphia);  and  a  col
lection  of  psalms  and  hymns  in  French.

McCALLUM,  Daniel  Craig,  engineer,  b.  in
Johnston,  Renfrewshire,  Scotland,  21  Jan.,  1815 ;
d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  27  Dec.,  1878.  He  came  to
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  with  his  parents  in  his  youth,
became  an  architect  and  builder,  and  in  1855-'0
was  general  superintendent  of  the  Erie  railway.
On  11  Feb.,  1862,  he  was  appointed  director  of  all
the  military  railroads  in  the  United  States,  with
the  staff  rank  of  colonel,  and  to  him  was  due  much
of  the  efficiency  of  the  railroad  service  during  the
civil  war.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of


volunteers  "  for  faithful  and  meritorious  services,"
24  Sept..  1864,  and  major-general,  13  March,  1865,
and  on  31  July,  1866,  was  mustered  out  of  the  ser
vice.  In  the  same  year  he  published  a  valuable
report  on  the  military  railroads  during  the  war.

McCALLUM,  Lachlan,  Canadian  member  of
parliament,  b.  in  Tiree,  Argyleshire,  Scotland,  15
March,  1823.  He  came  to  Canada  in  1842  and  set
tled  in  Haldimand  county,  where  he  engaged  ex
tensively  in  contracting  and  ship-building.  During
the  Fenian  raid  in  June,  1866,  he  commanded  the
Dunnville  naval  company  at  Fort  Erie.  He  was
an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  Haldimand  in  the
Canada  assembly  in  1863,  first  elected  to  the  Do
minion  parliament  in  1867,  and  was  a  member  till
his  defeat  in  1872.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legis
lative  assembly  of  Ontario  from  1871  till  1872,
when  he  resigned  in  consequence  of  the  act  abol
ishing  dual  representation.  He  was  re-elected  to
the  Dominion  parliament  in  1874,  unseated  on  pe
tition  in  May.  1875,  re-elected  in  June,  1875,  in
1878,  and  in  1882,  and  sat  until  the  dissolution  of
parliament  in  1887.  On  5  Feb.  of  that  year  he  be
came  a  Dominion  senator.

McCALMONT,  Alfred  Brunsen,  soldier,  b.  in
Franklin.  Venango  co.,  Pa.,  28  April,  1825 :  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa..  7  May,  1874.  He  was  admitted  to
the  bar  and  practised  in  Franklin,  and  afterward
in  Pittsburg.  where  he  became  city  solicitor  in
1853.  He  was  assistant  attorney-general  of  the
United  States  during  Buchanan's  administration,
and  afterward  returned  to  his  native  town.  He  was
commissioned  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  142d  Penn
sylvania  regiment  in  September,  1862,  and  in  1864
became  colonel  of  the  208th  Pennsylvania,  taking
part  in  the  battles  of  Fredericksburg,  Chancellors-
ville,  Gettysburg,  and  others.  He  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  13  March.  1865,
and  after  the  war  resumed  his  profession.

McCANDLESS,  Wilson,  jurist,  b.  in  Pitts-
burg,  Pa.,  19  June,  1810;  d.  there,  30  June,  1882.
lie  was  graduated  at  the  Western  university  of
Pennsylvania,  studied  law,  and  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1831.  After  practising  successfully  for  more
than  twenty-five  years,  he  was  appointed  by  Presi
dent  Buchanan  tl.  S.  judge  for  the  western  dis
trict  of  Pennsylvania.

McCANN,  William  Penn,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Paris,  Ky.,  4  May,  1830.  He  was  appointed  mid
shipman  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  1  Nov.,  1848,  and,  hav
ing  been  promoted  througli  the  various  grades,
became  lieutenant-commander,  16  July.  1862.  He
was  stationed  at  Vera  Cruz  on  the  first  hostile
demonstrations  at  Pensacola,  Fla.,  and  re-en
forced  Fort  Pickens  with  sailors  and  marines  on
14  and  15  April,  1861.  He  remained  off  the  fort
127  days,  and  in  June  assisted  in  landing  addi
tional  re-enforcements  under  Col.  Harvey  Brown.
In  1862  he  operated  on  York,  Pamunkey,  and  James
rivers  in  co-operation  with  the  Army  of  the  Poto
mac,  and  captured,  on  4  July  of  that  year,  the
Confederate  gun-boat  "  Teazer,"  with  plans  of  bat
teries,  torpedoes,  and  defences  of  Richmond.
Having  been  ordered  to  the  command  of  the
'•  Hunchback  "  in  the  following  October,  he  was
present  at  New  Berne,  14  March,  1863,  when  the
Confederate  forces,  with  eighteen  guns  and  several
thousand  infantry,  attacked  that  vessel  and  Camp
Anderson.  After  an  action  of  an  hour  and  a  half
he  silenced  the  enemy's  guns  and  compelled  him  to
withdraw.  After  further  service  on  the  North
Carolina  coast,  McCann  was  ordered  to  the  "  Ken-
nebec,"  and  had  thirteen  months'  active  blockade
service  before  Mobile,  participating  in  several  en
gagements  with  the  batteries  and  Fort  Morgan


McCARROLL


MCCARTHY


77


while  attacking  stranded  blockade-runners.  He
captured  at  sea  three  of  the  latter  loaded  with  cot
ton,  together  with  forty-five  of  the  officers  and
crew.  The  vessels  and  cargoes  were  subsequently
sold  for  half  a  million  dollars.  During  the  battle
of  Mobile  Bay,  5  Aug.,  1864,  the  "  Kennebee  "  was
lashed  to  the  "  Monongahela,"  fifth  in  line  of  bat
tle.  McCann  was  relieved  from  the  "  Kennebee  "
in  December,  1864,  and  was  engaged  in  various
routine  duties  until  8  Dec.,  1867,  when  he  was
commissioned  commander.  He  was  promoted
captain,  21  Sept.,  1876,  and  commodore,  26  Jan.,
1887,  and  is  now  (1888)  commandant  of  the  Bos
ton  navy-yard.

McCARROLL,  James,  journalist,  b.  in  Lanes-
boro,  County  Longford,  Ireland,  3  Aug.,  1814.  He
came  with  his  father's  family  to  Canada  in  1831,
and  soon  afterward  contributed  prose  and  verse  to
the  newspapers.  In  1845  he  became  proprietor  and
editor  of  "  Peterborough  Chronicle,"  and  in  1847
removed  to  Cobourg,  where  he  taught  music  in
addition  to  his  journalistic  work.  He  became  con
nected  with  the  customs  department  in  1849.  in
1851  was  appointed  collector  at  Xiagara  Falls,  and
about  1854  out-door  surveyor  of  Toronto,  which
place  he  retained  until  the  office  was  abolished.
While  in  Toronto  he  edited  several  newspapers.
In  1866  he  removed  to  Buffalo,  X.  Y.,  and  after  a
few  years  to  Xew  York,  where  he  has  been  since
engaged  as  a  musical  and  dramatic  critic,  and  as  a
writer  of  general  literature.  He  is  the  author  of
various  inventions,  the  last  of  which  increases  the
light  and  flame  in  the  chimney  of  an  Argand  gas-
burner,  or  of  any  other  burner,  to  double  their  vol
ume  by  retarding  the  escape  of  unconsumed  car
bon  through  the  chimney.  He  is  well  known  as  a
poet,  and  has  published  in  book-form  his  humorous
letters,  under  the  pen-name  of  Terry  Finnegan.  to
Thomas  D'Arcy  McGee  (Toronto,  1864) :  "  The  Xew
Ganger"  (1864);  "The  Adventures  of  a  Xight "
(1865) ;  and  "  The  Xew  Life-Boat  "  (1866).

MeCARTEE,  Robert,  clergyman,  b.  in  Xew
York  city.  30  Sept..  1791;  d.  in  Yonkers,  X.  Y.,  12
March.  1865.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1808,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  Xew
York  bar,  but  after  a  few  years  of  practice  en
tered  the  theological  seminary  of  the  Associate
Reformed  church  in  the  city  of  Xew  York.  He
was  licensed  to  preach  in  April,  1816,  and  ac
cepted  a  call  from  the  Old  Scots  church  in  Phila
delphia.  He  resigned  this  charge  on  21  April,
1821.  and  became  in  1822  pastor  of  the  Irish
Presbyterian  church  in  Xew  York.  The  church
was  at  that  time  composed  of  only  about  thirty
members,  mostly  emigrants  from  Ireland.  Dr.  Mc-
Cartee  built  a  new  edifice  and  increased  the  at
tendance  to  one  thousand  communicants.  He  was
not  only  pastor,  but  also  the  adviser,  the  legal
counsellor,  and  informally  the  magistrate  of  his
congregation.  In  1836  failing  health  compelled
him  to  abandon  this  post,  and  he  was  successively
pastor  of  churches  in  Port  Carbon,  Pa.,  and  Gosheh
and  Xewburg,  X.  Y.,  till  1856,  when  he  became
pastor  of  an  Associate  Reformed  church  in  Xew
York  city.  He  retired  from  pastoral  duties  in
1862,  and  removed  to  Yonkers.  He  received  the
degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Columbia  in  1831. — His
wife,  Jessie  Graham,  poet,  b.  in  Xew  York  city
in  October,  1796:  d.  in  Xewburg.  X".  Y.,  17  Feb!.
1855,  was  a  sister  of  Rev.  George  W.  Bethune.
She  was  the  author  of  various  poems,  chiefly  of  a
religious  character,  some  of  which  were  print
ed  in  various  periodicals  during  her  lifetime.
—Their  son.  Divie  Bethune,  missionary,  b.  in
Xew  York  city,  13  Jan.,  1820,  was  educated  at


Columbia  and  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
and  sailed  for  China  in  1843.  Besides  mastering
the  Chinese  language  and  practising  as  a  physi
cian,  he  acted  frequently  as  U.  S.  consul  at  Xing-
po,  and  sat  as  judge  in  the  mixed  court  at  Shang
hai.  In  May,  1861,  at  the  request  of  U.  S.  Flag-
Officer  Stribling.  he  entered  Xanking,  through  the
lines  of  the  Tai-Ping  rebels,  and  obtained  from  the
"Heavenly  King"  a  sealed  document  granting
non-molestation,  not  only  to  Americans  in  China,
but  to  all  Chinese  in  their  employ.  By  this  meas
ure  large  numbers  of  native  Christians  and  their
friends  were  rescued  when  the  rebels  entered
Xingpo.  In  1872,  when  the  coolies  of  the  Peru
vian  ship  "  Maria  Luz  "  were  freed  by  the  Japanese
government  upon  his  suggestion,  a  commission  was
appointed  from  Peking  to  proceed  to  Tokio  to
bring  home  the  freedmen,  and  Dr.  McCartee  was
nominated  secretary  and  interpreter,  receiving  for
his  services  a  gold  "medal  and  complimentary  let
ters.  Remaining  in  Japan,  he  was  from  October.
1872,  until  April,  1877,  a  professor  in  the  Imperial
university  of  Tokio,  and  he  also  acted  as  secretary
of  the  Chinese  legation  in  that  city,  but  returned
to  the  United  States  in  1880,  and  'in  1882  visited
Hawaii  on  business  connected  with  Chinese  immi
gration.  In  1885  he  acted  as  American  secretary
of  the  legation  of  Japan  in  Washington.  In  1887
he  returned  to  China  and  Japan.  Dr.  McCartee's
writings  on  Asiatic  history,  linguistics,  natural
science,  medicine,  and  politics,  in  the  publications
of  the  American  geographical  society,  the  Ameri
can  oriental  society,  and  other  associations,  have
been  numerous  and  valuable.  His  religious  writ
ings  in  Chinese  are  still  widely  circulated  and
read.  "  Audi  Alteram  Partem  "  (Yokohama,  1879)

j  treats  of  the  conflicting  claims  of  China  and  Japan

:  concerning  the  Loochoo  islands.

MCCARTHY,  Justin.  Irish  author,  b.  in  Cork.
Ireland,  22  Xov.,  1830.  He  was  liberally  educated
in  his  native  city,  and  from  1846  till  1853  he  was
connected  with  the  Cork  "  Examiner."  He  then
joined  the  staff  of  the  "  Xorthern  Times  "  at
Liverpool.  In  1860  he  was  a  reporter  in  the  house
of  commons  for  the  London  "  Morning  Star,"  of
which  he  was  subsequently  foreign  editor,  and  in
1864  chief  editor.  In  1868'he  resigned,  in  order  to
visit  the  United  States,  where  he  remained  for
nearly  three  years,  lecturing  and  travelling.  Be
fore  his  return  to  England  he  was  employed  for
a  time  on  the  editorial  staff  of  the  Xew  York
"Tribune,"  and  also  on  that  of  the  Xew  York  "  In
dependent."  In  1879  he  was  elected  to  parliament
for  Longford,  Ireland,  and  re-elected  in  1880,  in
both  instances  without  a  contest.  At  the  general
election  in  1885  lie  contested  Derry,  and  was  de
feated  by  a  majority  of  twenty-nine,  but  was  im
mediately  chosen  for  Longford  by  an  overwhelm
ing  majo'rity.  In  1886  he  was  returned  from  the
latter  town  unopposed.  He  afterward  again  vis
ited  this  country  on  a  lecturing  tour.  Mr.  McCar
thy  has  contributed  to  English  and  American  peri
odicals  and  served  as  political-leader  writer  for  the
London  press.  Besides  many  novels,  he  has  pub
lished  "  Con  Amore,"  a  collection  of  critical  essays
(London,  1868);  "Prohibitory  Legislation  in  the
United  States,"  an  account  of  a  study  of  such  leg
islation  and  its  workings  in  Maine,  Massachusetts,
Michigan,  Iowa,  etc. ;  "  Modern  Leaders,"  a  series
of  articles  on  living  celebrities  (1872):  "  A  History
of  Our  Own  Times"  (1878-'80);  and  "The  Epoch
of  Reform"  (1882).  Mr.  McCarthy's  most  impor
tant  work  is  his  "  History  of  Our  Own  Times."  He
has  also  published  the  first  volume  of  a  "  History
of  the  Four  Georges  "  (1884).


78


MACCARTNEY


McCAWLEY


MacCARTNEY,  Washington,  educator,  b.  in
Westmoreland  county,  Pa.,  24  Aug.,  1812;  d.  in
Philadelphia  in  Julyj  1856.  He  was  graduated  at
Jefferson  college.  Pa.,  in  1834,  and  was  professor
of  mathematics  and  moral  philosophy  in  Lafayette,
Pa.,  in  1835.  and  again  in  1837,  1843-4,  and 'l 846.
In  1830  he  filled  the  chair  of  modern  languages  in
Jefferson  college.  Jn  the  latter  institution  he  was
also  professor  of  mental  and  moral  philosophy  for
several  years  subsequent  to  1849.  He  had  previ
ously  studied  law  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
Northampton  county.  Pa.,  in  1838.  In  1846-'8  he
served  the  county  as  deputy  attorney-general,  and
was  elected  president  judge  of  the  3d  judicial  dis
trict,  of  Pennsylvania  in  1851,  which  office  he  filled
until  his  death.  In  1846  he  established  a  law-school
at  Easton,  Pa.,  which  in  1854  was  incorporated  as
the  "  Union  Law-School."  It  was  in  successful  op
eration  at  the  time  of  his  decease.  Prof.  McCart
ney  had  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.

McCARTY,  William  Monroe,  jurist,  b.  in
Brookville,  Franklin  co.,  Ind.,  18  May,  1816.  He
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1834,  and
began  to  practise  in  his  native  town  at  the  age  of
twenty.  He  removed  in  1840  to  Cincinnati,  where
he  became  widely  known  by  prosecuting  persons
who  had  usurped  the  corporate  name  and  privi
leges  of  a  defunct  bank  for  the  purpose  of  defraud
ing  the  public.  Finding  that  the  climate  of  Cin
cinnati  did  not  agree  with  his  health,  he  returned
to  Franklin  county,  Ind.,  and  a  call  for  troops  being
made  soon  afterward  to  re-enforce  the  army  in
Mexico,  Mr.  McCarty  raised  a  regiment,  of  which  he
was  elected  lieutenant-colonel,  lie  served  through
the  war,  and  his  regiment  was  highly  complimented
for  its  conduct  at  the  battle  of  Buena  Vista.  On
his  return,  he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate.  In
1848  he  was  placed  on  the  Cass  electoral  ticket,  and
took  part  in  the  canvass.  He  was  president-judge
of  the  13th  circuit  in  1850-'5,  and  in  1861  was
chosen  U.  S.  senator,  but  failed  to  obtain  his  seat.

McCAUL,  John,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in  Dub
lin,  Ireland,  in  1807.  He  was  educated  at  Trinity
college,  Dublin,  where  he  became  classical  tutor
and  examiner.  In  November,  1838,  he  was  ap
pointed  principal  of  Upper  Canada  college,  in  1842
vice-president  of  King's  college,  and  professor  of
logic,  rhetoric,  and  classics.  He  was  elected  presi
dent  of  the  University  of  Toronto  in  1849  and  in
1853.  He  has  been  editor  of  a  Canadian  month
ly,  the  "  Maple  Leaf,"  published  several  volumes
of  essays  and  treatises  on  classical  subjects,  edited
portions  of  Horace,  Longinus,  Lucian,  and  Thucy-
dides,  as  college  text-books,  and  gave  special  atten
tion  to  Latin  inscriptions.  His  works  include
"  Britanno-Roman  Inscriptions"  (1863)  and  "  Chris
tian  Epitaphs  of  the  First  Six  Centuries."

McCAtlLEY,  Charles  Adam  Hoke,  soldier,  b.
in  Middletown,  Md.,  13  July,  1847.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1870  and  en
tered  the  3d  artillery  as  2d  lieutenant.  After  serv
ing  variously  until  1878,  he  was  transferred  to  the
3d  cavalry,  and  on  5  May,  1879.  was  promoted  1st
lieutenant.  Meanwhile  he  had  devoted  his  atten
tion  to  natural  science,  and  in  1876  accompanied
the  Red  river  exploring  expedition  into  the  Indian
territory  and  Texas  as  ornithologist.  Subsequent
ly  he  served  in  connection  with  Indian  affairs  un
til  5  Feb.,  1881,  when  he  was  made  assistant  quar
termaster  with  the  rank  of  captain.  Since  that
time  he  has  been  stationed  at  various  posts  in  the
western  states,  becoming  in  October  disbursing
quartermaster  at  Chicago,  111.  Capt.  McCauley
invented  in  1871  the  military  system  of  signalling
by  means  of  mirrors.  He  "is  a  corresponding  or


active  member  of  various  scientific  societies.  His
publications,  issued  by  the  National  government,
include  "  Ornithology  of  the  Red  River  Region
of  Texas"  (Washing'ton,  1877);  "The  San  Juan
Reconnoissance  in  Colorado  and  New  Mexico'"
(1877) ;  "  Reports  on  the  White  River  Indian
Agency,  Colorado,  and  the  Uinta  Indian  Agency  "
(1879) ;  and  "  Pagasa  Springs,  Colorado ;  its  Ge
ology  and  Botany  "  (1879).

McCAULEY,  'Charles  Stewart,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  3  Feb..  1793  ;  d.  in  Wash
ington,  D.  C.,  21  May,  1869.  He  was  a  nephew  of
Admiral  Charles  Stewart,  and  became  a  midship
man  in  the  navy,  16  Jan.,  1809,  rising  to  the  rank
of  lieutenant,  9  Dec.,  1814,  commander,  3  March,
1831,  and  captain,  9  Dec.,  1839.  He  served  on  the
"  Constellation  "  in  1813,  and  took  part  in  the  gun
boat  attack  on  the  British  frigate  "  Narcissus  "  in
Hampton  Roads,  and  in  the  defence  of  Craney
island.  He  served  as  acting  lieutenant  of  the
"Jefferson"  in  1814  on  Lake  Ontario.  In  1823  he
obtained  leave  of  absence,  and  for  two  years  com
manded  a  vessel  in  the  merchant  marine.  Refus
ing  an  offer  of  $10,000  a  year  from  a  shipping
firm,  he  then  returned  to  duty,  and  served  four
years  in  the  "  Boston."  in  the  South  Atlantic
squadron.  In  April,  1855,  McCauley  was  placed
in  command  of  the  home  squadron,  and  directed
by  the  secretary  of  the  navy  to  go  to  the  island  of
Cuba  and  protect  American  interests.  For  his  suc
cess  in  this  he  was  publicly  complimented  on  his
return  in  June  by  President  Pierce  at  a  dinner  at
the  White  House.  In  1860  he  was  ordered  to  the
command  of  the  Gosport  navy-yard,  and  in  1861
he  destroyed  a  large  amount  of  property  there,  to
prevent  its  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  Confed
erates.  He  was  placed  on  the  retired  list,  21  Dec.,
1861,  and  promoted  commodore.  4  April,  1867. —
His  nephew,  Edward  Yorke,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  2  Nov.,  1826,  was  appointed  mid
shipman  in  the  navy,  9  Sept.,  1841.  and  promoted
lieutenant.  14  Sept.,  1855.  He  resigned,  19  Aug.,
1859,  but  entered  the  service  again  as  acting  lieu
tenant,  11  May,  1861.  He  was  made  lieutenant-
commander,  16  July,  1862 ;  commander,  27  Sept.,
1866 ;  captain,  3  Sept.,  1872 ;  commodore,  7  Aug.,
1881 ;  and  rear-admiral,  2  March.  1885.  He  was
present  in  the  "  Powhatan  "  at  the  attack  on  pirates
in  the  China  seas  in  1855,  took  part  in  the  "  Ni
agara"  in  laying  the  Atlantic  cable  in  1857-'8,  and
served  in  the  "  Flag"  in  the  South  Atlantic  block
ading  squadron  in  1861-'2.  He  commanded  the
steamer  "  Fort  Henry,"  of  the  Eastern  Gulf  block
ading  squadron  in  1862-'3,  and  in  1863-'4,  when  in
command  of  the  "  Tioga,"  took  part  in  the  boat
attack  on  Bayport,  Fla.  In  1864-'5  he  had  charge
of  the  gun-boat  "  Benton,"  of  the  Mississippi  squad
ron.  In  1886  Admiral  McCauley  commanded  the
Pacific  station,  and  in  February,  1887,  he  was  re
tired.  He  has  published  "The  Egyptian  Manual
and  Dictionary"  (Philadelphia,  1883-'4).

McCAW,  James  Brown,  surgeon,  b.  in  Vir
ginia  in  1772;  d.  in  Richmond.  Va.,  in  1846.  He
was  graduated  in  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  in  1792,
and  engaged  in  medical,  practice  with  his  uncle,
Dr.  McClurg,  taking  rank  as  the  leading  surgeon
of  eastern  Virginia  for  over  thirty  years.  He  was
one  of  the  first  to  tie  the  external  carotid  artery,
an  operation  he  performed  in  1807.  He  was  pos
sessed  of  great  physical  strength,  and  at  the  burn
ing  of  the  Richmo'nd  theatre  in  1811  he  saved  the
lives  of  twenty-one  women.

McCAWLEY,  Charles  Grymes,  officer  of  ma
rines,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..' 29  Jan..  1827.  He
was  appointed  from  Louisiana  2d  lieutenant  in  the.


McCLEERY


McCLELLAN


79


marine  corps  on  3  March,  1847 ;  became  1st  lieu
tenant,  2  Jan.,  1855 ;  captain,  26  July,  1861 ;  major,
10  June.  1864;  and  lieutenant-colonel,  5  Dec..  1867.
He  served  with  the  army  in  Mexico,  being  present
at  the  storming  of  Chapultepec  and  the  capture  of
the  city  of  Mexico,  for  gallantry  in  which  actions
he  was  brevetted  1st  lieutenant,  13  Sept.,  1847.  In
May,  1862,  he  was  sent  to  reoccupy  the  Norfolk
navy-yard  with  a  force  of  200  men,  and  hoisted  the
National  flagon  behalf  of  the  navy.  In  July,  1863,
he  was  ordered  to  join  a  battalion  of  marines  for
service  in  the  South  Atlantic  squadron,  and  was
present  on  Morris  island  during  the  bombardment
and  destruction  of  Fort  Sumter  and  the  capture  of
Forts  Wagner  and  Gregg.  In  the  boat  attack  on
Fort  Sumter,  8  Sept.,  1863,  he  led  a  detachment  of
100  men  and  officers,  and  received  a  brevet  as  major
for  his  bravery  on  that  occasion.  Since  1876  he
has  been  in  command  of  the  marine  corps  with
rank  of  colonel,  and  headquarters  at  Washington.

McCLEERYr,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Ohio  about
1840:  d.  in  New  York  city,  5  Nov.,  1871.  He  was
commissioned  2d  lieutenant  in  the  41st  Ohio  in
fantry  on  21  Aug.,  1861,  and  made  1st  lieutenant.
9  Jan..  1862;  captain,  9  Oct.,  1862;  and  major,  23
Nov.,  1865.  He  lost  his  right  arm  at  Shiloh,  and
was  wounded  at  Stone  River,  31  Dec.,  1862.  On  28
July,  1866,  he  entered  the  regular  army  as  captain
of  the  45th  infantry,  and  was  retired.  15  Dec.,  1870.
He  had  received  the  brevets  of  major,  2  March,
1867,  for  gallantry  at  Mission  Ridge,  and  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  13  March,  1865.  After  his  re
tirement  he  settled  in  St.  Mary's  parish.  La.,  where
he  purchased  a  plantation,  practised  law,  and  was
connected  with  the  Freedmen's  bureau.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican  in  1870,  but
was  unable  to  serve,  owing  to  impaired  health.

McCLELAN,  Aimer  Reid,  Canadian  senator,
b.  in  Hopewell,  New  Brunswick,  4  Jan.,  1831.  He
was  educated  at  Mount  Allison  academy,  afterward
engaged  in  business,  and  became  a  merchant.  He
has  been  one  of  the  governors  of  Mount  Allison
Wesleyan  college,  Sackville,  N.  B.,  commissioner
of  the  civil  court  and  auditor  of  the  municipality
of  Albert,  and  represented  that  town  in  the  New
Brunswick  assembly  from  1854  till  the  union.  He
was  chief  commissioner  of  public  works  from  April,
1866,  till  1867,  and  became  a  member  of  the  Do
minion  senate  in  May,  1867.

McCLELLAN,  George  Brinton,  soldier,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  3  Dec.,  1826 :  d.  in  Orange,  N.  J.,
29  Oct..  1885.  His  father  was  Dr.  George  McClel
lan  (q.  i:),  who  married  Miss  Elizabeth  Brinton.
and  George  was  their  second  son.  The  three  noble
elms  to  be  seen  at  Woodstock,  Conn.,  were  planted
by  Mrs.  McClellan,  the  general's  great-grandmoth
er,  in  honor  and  remembrance  of  her  husband,
Capt.  McClellan.  on  hearing  he  had  passed  safely
through  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill.  The  general
saw  them  for  the  first  time  in  the  summer  of  1884.
He  was  educated  by  private  tutors,  and  spent  two
years,  1840-'2,  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
where  he  acquired  a  love  of  polite  literature,  which
was  never  lost  in  his  later  life.  He  was  always  an
industrious  student,  and  shared  the  first  honors  of
his  class  in  the  university.  At  the  age  of  fifteen
years  and  six  months  (the  minimum  age  being  six
teen,  and  the  exceptions  rare)  he  entered  the  U.  S.
military  academy  1  July,  1842.  In  his  class  were
"  Stonewall  "  Jackson,  J'esse  L.  Reno,  and  others
who  subsequently  became  distinguished.  He  led
his  class  in  mathematics.  He  was  graduated  1
July,  1846.  appointed  brevet  2d  lieutenant  in  the
corps  of  engineers,  and  assigned  to  a  company  of
engineer  troops  (the  only  one  then  in  service)


raised  for  the  Mexican  war.  With  it  he  was  at
Malan.  Camargo,  Tampico,  and  Vera  Cruz.  After
the  fall  of  Vera  Cruz  they  took  an  active  part  in
the  battle  of  Cerro  Gordo,  17  and  18  April,  1847,
and  McClellan  led  the  unsuccessful  attack  on  the
left  against  the  triple  batteries  that  swept  the
road.  A  second  attack  was  rendered  unnecessary
by  the  fall  of  the  Cerro  de  Telegrafe.  He  was
promoted  to  a  2d  lieutenancy  on  24  April,  and
afterward  took  part  in  the  battles  of  Contreras
and  Churubusco,  18  and  19  Aug.,  in  the  former  of
which  his  horse  was  shot.  After  the  rupture  of
the  armistice  by  the  Mexicans  in  September,  he
was  engaged  with  his  company  in  constructing  bat
teries  against  Chapultepec,  and  shared  in  the  as
sault  and  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico,  13  and  14
Sept.,  1847.  He  received  the  brevet  of  1st  lieuten
ant  "  for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  at  Con
treras  and  Churubusco,"  and  that  of  captain  for
his  part  in  the  assault  of  Chapultepec.  In  1848,
after  the  war  was  ended,  he  served  at  West  Point
as  assistant  instructor  of  practical  engineering.
In  1852  he  was  with  Capt.  Marcy  (later  his  father-
in-law)  on  an  exploration  of  the  upper  Red  river,
between  Texas  and  the  Indian  territory ;  and
afterward  he  was  engineer-in-charge  of  explora
tions  and  surveys  in  Texas.  In  1853  he  was  on
engineer  duty  in  Oregon  and  Washington  terri
tories,  and  later  was  employed  as  engineer  on  the
western  division  of  the  Northern  Pacific  railroad.
On  3  March,  1855,  he  was  appointed  a  captain  in
the  1st  cavalry,  and  in  the  same  year  was  sent  to
Europe,  as  a  member  of  a  military  commission,  to
report  on  the  condition  of  the  armies  of  Europe,
and  to  observe  the  operations  of  both  sides  in  the
Crimean  war.  His  colleagues  were  Col.  Richard
Delafield,  of  the  engineers,  and  Major  Alfred  Mor-
decai,  of  the  ordnance.  The  commission  received
facilities  from  the  British  government,  but  not
from  the  French  and  Russian.  The  separate  re
ports  of  these  officers  were  published  by  congress.
Capt.  McClellan's  was  a  model  of  fullness,  accu
racy,  and  system,  and  was  republished  in  1861,  with
the  title  "The  Armies  of  Europe."  The  details  of
the  organization  and  equipment  of  European  armies
he  put  to  good  use  in  organizing  the  Army  of  the
Potomac,  soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.
On  16  Jan.,  1857,  Capt.  McClellan  resigned  his
commission  to  accept  the  place  of  chief  engineer
of  the  Illinois  Central  railroad.  He  became  its
vice-president  in  1858,  and  in  1859  was  elected
president  of  the  eastern  division  of  the  Ohio  and
Mississippi  railroad,  residing  in  Cincinnati.  In
1860  he  was  made  president  of  the  St.  Louis,  Mis
souri,  and  Cincinnati  railroad,  which  office  he  held
until  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  in  1861.  While
engaged  in  railroad  work,  he  was  able  to  help
his  classmate,  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  who,  having
resigned  from  the  service,  was  in  need  of  assist
ance.  On  23  April,  1861,  McClellan  was  appointed
major-general  of  Ohio  volunteers,  and  placed  in
command  of  the  Department  of  the  Ohio,  includ
ing  the  states  of  Ohio,  Indiana,  and  Illinois,  with
portions  of  Virginia  and  Pennsylvania.  In  a
month  he  was  in  the  field,  and  on  26  May  he
crossed  the  Ohio  into  Virginia,  and  occupied  Par-
kersburg.  This  advance  into  West  Virginia,  he
says,  was  made  "  without  orders,  and  entirely  of
his  own  volition.''  The  plain  bordering  the  Ohio
was  occupied  by  McClellan's  forces ;  the  moun
tains  by  the  Confederates  under  Gen.  Garnett,  who
looked  down  upon  the  plain  and  the  Great  Kana-
wha  river  from  two  spurs  separating  the  Monon-
gahela  from  Tygart  Valley  river  and  Cheat  river.
The  southern  portion  was  called  Rich  mountain.


80


McCLELLAN


McCLELLAN


and  the  northern  Laurel  hill :  and  behind  them
both  runs  the  great  Virginia  turnpike  through
Beverly  and  Leedsville.  To  cover  this  turnpike,
Garnett  had  posted  Pegram  at  Rich  mountain  with
2.000  men,  while  he  held  Laurel  hill  with  8.000.
McClellan,  who  had  five  brigades,  posted  Gen.
Jacob  D.  Cox's  command  on  the  Lower  Kanawha,
Gen.  Hill's  to  guard  the  communications  between
western  Virginia  and  the  upper  Potomac,  and
went  in  person  with  the  remainder,  divided  into
two  columns.  The  first  was  to  make  a  demonstra
tion  against  Garnett  at  Philippi ;  the  second  to
capture  Pegram  at  Rich  mountain,  and  cut  off  the
enemy's  retreat.  Advancing  with  Gens.  Schleich
and  Rosecrans,  who  commanded  these  columns,  to
Buckhannon,  on  10  July  he  was  in  front  of  Pe
gram,  and  sent  Rosecrans  to  the  right  to  gain  his
rear.  By  some  miscalculation  there  was  a  delay,
and  Pegram  evacuated  Rich  mountain,  but  many
of  his  scattered  force  were  captured  by  McClel
lan  near  Beverly.  Garnett  abandoned  Laurel  hill

to  join  Pegram,  but
found  himself  inter
cepted.  He  then  tried
by  devious  paths  to
escape  to  the  Cheat
river.  Ho  was  over
taken  at  Carrick's
ford,  but  succeeded
in  crossing  with  the
loss  of  all  his  mate
rial,  and  was  killed
on  the  farther  bank,
and  his  force  was
scattered.  In  this
eight  days' campaign
McClellan  had  driv
en  the  enemy  from
the  great  Kanawha,
and  captured  1,000
prisoners,  and  he
wrote  to  Washing
ton  that  "  he  had
completely  annihi
lated  the  enemy  in  western  Virginia."  Lee  fared
no  better  when  he  succeeded  Garnett  and  at
tempted  to  dislodge  the  force  of  Rosecrans,  under
Reynolds,  at  Cheat  mountain.  In  a  convention
held  at  Wheeling,  11  June,  18(51,  at  which  40  coun
ties  were  represented,  this  portion  of  the  state  had
disapproved  secession  and  adhered  to  the  Union,
which  it  was  now  free  to  enter  as  a  separate  state,
as  it  did.  by  act  of  congress.  31  Dec.,  1862.

On  14  May  McClellan  had  been  appointed  a  major-
general  in  the  U.  S.  army.  Meantime  preparations
had  been  pushed  forward  at  Washington  for  a  di
rect  movement  toward  Richmond,  the  command
of  the  force  being  given  to  Gen.  Irwin  McDowell
(q.  v.).  Immediately  after  the  battle  of  Bull  Run,
McClellan  was  called  to  Washington,  and  on  27
July  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  De
partment  of  Washington  and  Northeastern  Vir
ginia.  While  reorganizing  the  Army  of  the  Po
tomac  he  was,  on  20  Aug.,  invested  with  its  com
mand,  and,  on  the  retirement  of  Gen.  Scott,  1  Xov..
he  was  made  commander  of  all  the  armies  of  the
United  States,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  the
whole  country,  who  hoped  more  from  him  than  it
was  in  the  power  of  man  to  accomplish.  What  he
had  done  so  sagaciously,  intelligently,  and  prompt
ly  in  West  Virginia  placed  him  before  his  country
men  as  the  incarnation  of  perfect  military  genius.
In  his  report  he  declared  that,  on  his  arrival  at
Washington,  he  had  "  found  no  army  to  command
— a  mere  collection  of  regiments  cowering  on  the


V_x


banks  of  the  Potomac,  some  perfectly  raw,  others
dispirited  by  recent  defeat,  some  going  home.
There  were  no  defensive  works  on  the  southern  ap
proaches  to  the  capital.  Washington  was  crowded
with  straggling  officers  and  men  absent  from  their
stations  without  authority."  He  had  to  bring  or
der  out  of  this  chaos,  to  create  an  army,  and  to  de
fend  the  city.  If  he  was  slow  in  doing  this,  he  did
it  well.  He  declared  that  the  true  place  to  defend
Washington  was  on  the  James  river.  After  the
discussion  of  his  plan,  a  compromise  was  made  in
favor  of  a  movement  by  the  York  and  Pamunkey
rivers.  Growing  out  of  his  reputed  tardiness  and
the  conflicting  opinions  as  to  the  best  plan  of  cam
paign,  McClellan  was  now  looked  upon  by  the  gov
ernment  with  suspicion.  Mr.  Stanton,  who  had
succeeded  Simon  Cameron  as  secretary  of  war,  and
who  was  at  first  McClellan 's  friend,  soon  took  issue
with  him  on  vital  points,  and  embarrassed  the  gen
eral  and  the  army  greatly.  In  spite  of  McClellan's
remonstrances  the  secretary  was  constantly  urging
a  forward  movement,  and  prevailed  on  Mr.  Lin
coln  to  issue  an  order — impossible  to  be  carried
out — that  a  combined  movement  by  land  and  water
should  be  made  on  22  Feb.,  1802.  The  serious  ill
ness  of  McClellan  in  December  retarded  the  organ
ization,  and  it  was  not  until  10  Mai'ch,  1802,  that
he  put  the  army  in  motion  for  a  demonstration
upon  Manassas ;  an  unnecessary  and  unfortunate
movement,  because,  in  expectation  of  it,  the  Con
federates  had  evacuated  the  position  the  day  be
fore.  One  good  was  accomplished,  however,  the
gigantic  machine  had  been  put  in  successful  mo
tion,  and  active  operations  were  fairly  begun.
Various  plans  of  campaign  were  considered.  The
general  purpose  was  to  embark  at  Annapolis,  pro
ceed  to  either  the  Rappahannock,  the  York,  or  the
James,  and  thence  move  upon  Richmond.  One
proposition  was  to  land  at  Fort  Monroe,  which
would  be  a  base  of  operations,  and  proceed  b}'
James  river  to  Richmond.  Another  was  to  pro
ceed  by  York  river  with  the  co-operation  of  the
navy.  This  last  plan  of  campaign  having  been
reluctantly  accepted  by  the  president,  McClellan
moved  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  via  Alexandria
from  17  March  to  0  April  by  water  to  Hampton
Roads,  and,  landing  at  Old  Point  Comfort,  en
tered  upon  the  peninsular  campaign.  As  soon  as
he  was  gone  from  Washington  his  opponents  de
clared  he  had  left  the  capital  undefended.  The
course  of  the  government  was  shaped  in  a  great
degree  by  the  views  of  the  opposition,  and  his  plan
of  campaign  was  altered.  He  had  been  assured
of  the  co-operation  of  McDowell's  corps.  40,000
men,  marching  southward  to  join  him  and  to  form
his  right  before  Richmond ;  but  such  were  the
fears  as  to  the  security  of  Washington  that  Blenk-
er's  division  of  Sumner's  corps,  twelve  regiments
and  eighteen  guns,  was  detached  on  31  March,  and
McDowell's  corps  was  diverted  from  him  on  4
April.  On  3  April  an  order  was  issued  to  discon
tinue  all  recruiting  for  volunteers,  upon  which
McClellan  depended  to  supply  his  losses,  and  the
recruiting-offices  were  closed.  As  soon  as  he  left
Washington  he  was  relieved  from  the  command-
in-chief  by  a  published  order  that  had  not  been
communicated  to  him  before,  and  became  simply
commander  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.

Thus  thwarted,  whether  right  or  wrong,  he  made
it  clear  on  what  conditions  he  was  fighting,  and
then  went  on.  His  first  objective  point  was  York-
town,  which  he  besieged  from  5  April  until  4  May.
Without  venturing  an  opinion  whether  Yorktown
could  have  been  taken  earlier  by  a  vigorous  as
sault,  it  is  known  that  the  enemy  held  it  until  the


McCLELLAN


McCLELLAN


81


National  batteries  were  ready  to  open,  and  their
general,  Magruder.  expressed  his  surprise  that
they  were  not  stormed  without  all  this  engineering
work.  He  said  that  with  5,000  men  he  held  100,-
000  in  check,  refusing  to  obey  orders  to  leave  the
place  until  the  batteries  were  ready  to  open.  On
10  April  Norfolk  was  occupied  by  Gen.  Wool.  On
the  other  hand,  it  may  be  said  that  McC'lellan's
caution  was  not  without  its  peculiar  logic.  It  was
the  first  engagement  since  the  battle  of  Bull  Run.
McClellan  could  afford  to  wait  rather  than  to  risk
much  ;  but  criticism,  in  the  light  of  later  events,
warrants  the  opinion  that  his  habits  as  an  engi
neer  and  his  lack  of  experience,  combined  with  a
systematic  character  of  mind,  in  which  delibera
tion  was  a  strong  factor,  caused  him  to  be  un
necessarily  slow  in  this  early  portion  of  the  cam
paign,  lie  was  deceived  by  the  enemy  as  to  the
numbers  in  his  front,  and  was  misled  by  false  maps
of  the  terrain,  in  which  the  directions  of  streams
and  the  localities  of  roads  were  wrong.  Accord
ing  to  the  returns  on  1  April.  1862,  the  army
was  divided  into  four  corps,  those  of  McDowell,
Simmer,  Ileintzelman,  and  Keyes,  with  a  division
of  regular  infantry  and  cavalry  and  a  reserve  ar
tillery,  numbering  in  grand  aggregate  on  the  rolls
of  1  April,  1862,  119.965  men.  This  does  not
include  McDowell's  corps,  which  was  soon  de
tached  and  did  not  participate  in  the  peninsular
campaign.  Richmond  was  the  objective  point.
The  southern  portion  of  the  peninsula  is  flat  and
marshy,  witli  a  salt  tide  on  York  river  as  far  as
West  Point  and  on  the  James  beyond  City  Point.
Northeast  of  Richmond  flows  the  Pamunkey.  join
ing  the  Mattapony  to  form  York  river.  Between
the  Pamunkey  and  the  upper  James,  flowing  north
of  Richmond,  is  the  Chickahominy,  which,  passing
through  wooded  swamps  and  flowing  south  into
the  James,  proved  during  the  rainy  periods  a
much  more  difficult  obstacle  than  had  been  antici
pated.  There  are  thickets  of  white  oak  inter
spersed  with  pool-like  extensions.  Thus,  while  in
dry  seasons  it  was  a  brook,  in  wet  ones  it  was  a
broad  river  with  swampy  banks.  After  the  evacu
ation  of  Yorktown,  the  occupation  of  Williams-
burg  was  contested  on  5  and  6  May.  The  appor
tionment  of  troops  to  the  attack  was  not  wisely
calculated.  Hooker  complained  that  for  nine
hours  his  division  of  thirteen  regiments  bore  the
brunt  of  the  enemy's  attacks  without  support,  al
though  there  were  30.000  men  in  sight  unengaged.
Williamsburg  was  abandoned  by  the  enemy  and
the  forward  movement  was  resumed.  The  dis
tance  to  Richmond  is  about  fifty  miles.  As  the
Confederates  fell  back  to  cover  their  capital,  fight
ing  in  retreat,  the  National  army  advanced,  meet
ing  with  no  strong  resistance  until  it  was  estab
lished  on  the  Chickahominy.  Had  McC'lellan  then
made  his  change  of  base,  the  James  river  be
ing  opened,  he  would  doubtless  have  been  success
ful.  The  Confederate  iron-clads  ran  up  as  far  as
Drewry's  Bluff  on  15  May,  and  on  the  18th  Mc
Clellan  had  reached  the  Chickahominy.  The  near
est  part  of  this  river  is  only  five  miles  from  Rich
mond  ;  but  there  are  large  swamps  intervening,
which  in  rainy  seasons  form  a  decided  military  ob
stacle.  MeClellan's  advance  was  well  in  position
by  23  May.  Franklin's  division  had  now  ascended
York  river,  and  the  base  of  operations  for  the  army
was  the  White  House  on  the  York  River  railroad
where  it  crosses  the  Pamunkey,  twenty-four  miles
east  of  Richmond.  In  expectation  of  the  junction
with  McDowell.  Gen.  Fitz-John  Port-er  had  ad
vanced  to  Hanover  Court-House,  north  of  Rich
mond,  where  on  24  May  he  defeated  a  Confederate
VOL.  iv. — 6


force.  As  McDowell  did  not  come,  and  it  became
known  that  he  would  not,  Porter  was  returned  to
his  original  camp.  The  river  now  divided  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  the  communications
were  precarious.  The  army  advanced  upon  Rich
mond  along  the  Chickahominy.  now  greatly  swol
len — the  left  wing  in  four  divisions  along  the  York
River  railroad,  south  of  the  Chickahominy.  and  the
right  wing,  consisting  of  five  divisions,  by  the  op
posite  bank,  the  swollen  stream  rushing*  between,
and  no  bridge  being  a  sure  communication  except
Bottom's  bridge,  below  the  railroad  crossing.  On
the  night  of  30  May  the  Confederates,  taking  ad
vantage  of  a  deluge  of  rain,  moved  out  under  Gen.
Joseph  E.  Johnston  to  attack  the  National  left,
which  it  would  be  difficult  to  support  from  the
north.  Early  the  next  day  Longstreet  and  Hill
attacked,  and  there  was  fought  the  battle  of  Fair
Oaks,  called  by  the  Confederates  Seven  Pines.
Casey's  division  was  driven  back,  and  Couch  and
Heintzelman  coming  to  his  support  were  about  to
succumb.  The  enemy  audaciously  attempted  to
pass  between  the  left  wing  and  the  river  and  to
seize  Bottom's  bridge,  when  McC'lellan,  sick  in
bed,  ordered  Sumner  to  attempt  the  crossing  of
the  tottering  bridge  in  his  front.  Sumner  already
had  his  corps  prepared  to  move  at  a  word,  and
Sedgwick's  division  rushed  across,  planted  a  bat
tery  of  twenty-four  Napoleon  guns  so  as  to  flank
the  Confederate  advance,  and  hurled  the  attacking
force  back  upon  Fair  Oaks  station.  Had  the  en
tire  army  crossed,  the  capture  of  Richmond  might
soon  have  followed.  When  the  Confederates  re
newed  their  attack  on  1  June,  it  was  without
proper  concert,  and  they  were  repelled  with  a  loss
of  4.233  men.  The  Federal  loss  was  5.739.  Soon
afterward  the  National  army  recovered  its  posts  at
Fair  Oaks,  but  made  no  further  attempts  to  cap
ture  Richmond.  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston  had  been
severely  wounded,  and  his  place  was  taken  by  Gen.
G.  \V.  Smith,  while  Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee  was  in
chief  command  in  the  city.

Two  events  now  occurred  to  embarrass  MeClel
lan's  further  movement :  the  first  was  a  demonstra
tion  that  had  been  made  by  "  Stonewall  "  Jackson
upon  Washington,  and  the  other  a  raid  of  Gen.  J.
E.  B.  Stuart,  on  12  and  13  June,  with  1,500  cavalry,
around  the  right  flank  of  the  National  army,  de
stroying  stores  and  capturing  provisions.  The
course  taken  by  McC'lellan,  whatever  may  be  the
opinion  whether  a  retreat  was  necessary,  was  bold,
and  skilfully  carried  out.  McDowell  withheld,  and
Jackson  again  in  line  before  Richmond,  he  deter
mined  to  fall  back  to  reorganize  and  plan  anew,
and,  preparatory  to  this,  he  would  make  a  change
of  base.  White  House  could  no  longer  be  safely
held ;  the  James  river  was  open ;  transports  had
already  reached  City  Point.  Thus  the  new  base
was  correct  for  a  new  movement  upon  Richmond.
He  determined  upon  a  flank  movement  to  the
James  by  substantially  a  single  road,  open  on  his
flank  to  many  roads,  of  which  he  would  have  to
contest  every  foot  of  the  way.  The  divisions  north
of  the  Chickahominy  were  to  be  carefully  and  se
cretly  withdrawn,  the  bridges  utilized  for  trains.
Large  detachments  thrown  out  toward  Richmond
were  to  resist  the  enemy's  assaults  and  cover  the
movement.  To  divert  the  attention  of  the  enemy,
McC'lellan  sent  Gen.  Stoneman  with  cavalry  to
make  a  raid  in  their  rear  on  23  June,  but  they  were
not  entirely  deceived.  Ignorant  at  first  of  McC'lel
lan's  purpose,  they  swarmed  upon  him,  and  then
occurred  that  contest  called  the  Seven  days'  bat
tles,  from  25  June  to  1  July.

On  25  June  Hooker  had  been  advanced  bevond


McCLELLAN


McCLELLAN


Fair  Oaks  toward  Richmond,  and  after  an  action
at  Oak  Grove  had  held  his  ground,  and  it  seemed
that  there  might  yet  be  a  rapid  march  upon  Rich
mond  ;  but  the  news  of  "  Stonewall  "  Jackson's  re
turn  had  caused  McClellan  to  decide  at  once,  and
Hooker  was  recalled.  On  26  June  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill
attacked  Fitz-John  Porter  at  Mechanicsville.  Por
ter  fought  valiantly  as  he  fell  back,  and,  from
want  of  concert  on  the  part  of  the  enemy,  he  re
pelled  every  attack  with  enormous  loss  to  them.
On  the  27th  was  fought  the  severe  battle  of  Gaines's
Mills,  to  cover  the  National  right,  in  which  Porter
was  confronted  by  Jackson  and  D.  H.  Hill,  while
the  bridges  were  threatened  by  A.  P.  Hill  and
Longstreet.  Trains  and  parts  of  heavy  guns  had
been  taken  across  the  river,  and  the  troops  clus
tered  around  the  bridges  on  the  north  side,  waiting
to  cross.  This  passage  in  presence  of  the  enemy
was  a  delicate  and  dangerous  task.  Falling  back
from  Mechanicsville,  they  had  reached  Gaines's
Mills  opposite  the  New  bridge.  The  troops  were
to  defend  the  approaches  during  the  day  and  to
cross  in  the  evening,  destroying  the  bridges  behind
them.  Porter's  force  formed  an  arc  of  an  extend
ed  circle  on  an  elevated  plateau.  He  was  first  at
tacked  about  noon  by  A.  P.  Hill,  whom  he  repelled  ;
but  the  enemy  returned  with  such  vigor  to  the  at
tack  that  Porter  used  all  his  reserves  and  asked
urgently  for  re-enforcements.  Slocum's  division
came  and  made  a  diversion  in  his  favor,  but  was
soon  overpowered  and  outflanked  by  Jackson  and
Ewell.  The  defeat  would  have  been  a  fatal  rout
but  for  the  timely  appearance  of  new  re-enforce
ments  under  French  and  Meagher,  and  the  Con
federates  were  arrested  while  on  the  verge  of  a
great  victory.  Porter  crossed  that  night  and  de
stroyed  the  bridges  behind  him.  The  National  loss
was  about  9,000  men.  At  the  close  of  this  battle
McClellan,  in  an  assembly  of  his  generals,  pro
posed,  even  at  that  moment,  to  make  a  rush  upon
Richmond ;  but  this  was  opposed  by  his  lieuten
ants  and  abandoned.  The  Confederates,  now  sure
that  McClellan  was  cut  off  from  his  base,  expected
to  destroy  and  capture  his  whole  army.  It  was
only  at  this  juncture  that  their  eyes  were  fully
opened ;  but  they  soon  found  that  White  House
had  been  evacuated  and  a  new  base  secured,  which
was  already  defended  by  the  National  flotilla.  In
announcing  the  results  thus  far,  on  28  June,  to  the
secretary  of  war,  McClellan  asserted  that,  if  the
government  had  sustained  him,  he  could,  with
10,000  additional  troops,  have  captured  Richmond
the  next  day,  and  he  closed  the  despatch  to  Sec.
Stanton  with  the  bold  assertion :  "  If  I  save  this
army  now,  I  tell  you  plainly  that  I  owe  no  thanks
to  you,  or  to  any  other  persons  in  Washington.
You  have  done  your  best  to  sacrifice  this  army."
On  the  third  day,  Saturday,  28  June,  the  move
ment  was  conducted  rapidly  but  in  good  order.
Immediately  after  the  battle  of  Gaines's  Mills,
McClellan  had  been  inclined  to  cross  the  Chicka-
hominy  and  persevere  in  his  efforts  to  hold  his  po
sition  ;  but,  after  a  consultation  with  his  corps
commanders,  he  decided  upon  the  change  of
base,  and  proceeded  promptly  to  its  execution.  The
grand  retrograde  movement  was  now  to  be  made
through  the  swamp  formed  by  the  White  Oak
creek,  a  branch  of  the  Chickahominy,  and  then  by
the  Quaker  road  principally  to  Malvern  Hill,  the
point  beyond  which  they  would  be  secure  from  at
tack,  both  by  the  strength  of  the  position  and  the
flank  fire  of  the  fleet.  Diverging  from  Richmond
and  running  to  intersect  at  different  intervals,  the
route  of  McClellan  were,  counting  from  the  north,
the  Williamsburg  turnpike,  the  Charles  City  road,


the  Derby  or  Central  road,  and  the  New  Market
road,  from  which  the  Varina  road  diverges  to  the
south.  Along  these  roads,  upon  the  flank  of  the
National  army,  the  columns  of  Lee  were  launched —
Magruder  on  the  Williamsburg  road,  Huger  on  the
Charles  City,  A.  P.  Hill  on  the  Central,  while  Jack
son,  crossing  the  Grapevine  bridge,  moved  upon
their  rear.  The  situation  was  grave  in  the  extreme ;
but  a  bold  rear-guard  checked  Jackson  from  time
to  time,  while  strong  detachments  protected  the
right  flank,  fought  the  battles,  and  proved  the
mettle  of  the  excellent  but  exhausted  troops.

On  the  morning  of  29  June  was  fought  the  bat
tle  of  Savage's  Station,  in  which  the  fighting  was
severe.  Magruder,  marching  upon  Fair  Oaks  and
finding  it  abandoned,  had  hurried  on  to  the  station,
which  was  held  by  Sumner  and  Heintzelman,  who
were  to  hold  it  till  nightfall.  Unfortunately
Heintzelman,  through  a  misunderstanding,  retired
too  soon,  and  the  brunt  of  Magruder's  attack  by
the  Williamsburg  road  fell  upon  Sumner,  who  held
his  post  so  well  that  he  was  able  to  retire  at  night
fall,  though  leaving  his  wounded  behind  him.  The
fifth  day  of  battle  was  30  June,  and  the  fighting
was  at  Frazier's  farm,  where  the  Central  road
joins  the  Quaker  road.  Longstreet  and  A.  P.  Hill,
who  had  crossed  the  Chickahominy  at  New  bridge,
marched  to  and  then  followed  the  Central  road.
McClellan's  line  was  now  eight  miles  long — Jack
son  upon  its  rear,  Magruder,  who  had  made  a  de
tour,  moving  parallel  by  the  New  Market  road,
and  Longstreet  and  II ill  advancing  upon  Frazier's
farm.  The  destruction  of  the  National  army
seemed  sure.  The  Confederate  attack  was  vigor
ous,  but  Magruder  and  Huger  did  not  come  up
as  expected;  the  troops  from  Fort  Darling  were
driven  back  by  shells  from  the  National  gun-boats  ;
Jackson,  who  had  been  delayed  by  the  destruction
of  the  White  Oak  bridge,  found  himself  obliged  to
reconstruct  it.  and  was  further  checked  by  Frank
lin.  McClellan's  army  fell  back  after  dark  to
Malvern  Hill,  where  the  last  of  the  trains  and  all
the  reserve  artillery  had  arrived  in  the  afternoon,
and  where  the  last  great  battle  of  the  peninsula
was  to  be  fought.  Malvern  is  an  elevated  plain,
in  some  degree  fortified  by  ravines  radiating  to
ward  the  front  and  on  the  northwest.  It  is  about
a  mile  and  a  half  long  by  three  fourths  of  a  mile
deep,  and  not  far  behind  it,  defended  by  the  gun
boats  from  Turkey  Point  to  Haxall's  and  Harri
son's  Landing,  is  James  river.  In  front  it  is  envel
oped  by  a  small  stream  and  thick  underwood.  Both
flanks  of  the  National  army  touched  the  river  here
during  the  night.  Sykes,  with  the  regulars,
guarded  the  road  from  Richmond  to  Ilaxall's,  then
came  the  rest  of  Porter's  corps,  Heintzelman  in  the
center,  then  Sumner,  Franklin,  and  Keyes.  The
approaches  were  defended  by  heavy  guns,  while
the  lighter  batteries  were  disposed  for  use  accord
ing  to  circumstances.  The  only  roads  by  which
the  Confederates  could  approach  were  that  from
Richmond  to  Haxall's  and  the  Quaker  road.  Their
first  movement  was  upon  the  National  left.  The
position  seemed  impregnable ;  the  outer  line  bris
tled  with  guns,  and,  could  that  be  taken,  there  re
mained  the  inner  and  still. more  difficult  defences,
but  Gen.  Lee  ordered  an  attack  along  the  whole
line.  Under  the  best  circumstances,  success  seemed
impossible.  The  movement  was  dependent  upon
a  signal,  which  was  mistaken,  and  this  gave  rise  to
some  confusion.  The  Confederates  attacked  furi
ously,  and,  being  hurled  back,  returned  again  and
again.  At  a  signal  the  final  attack  was  made  by
Magruder  and  D.  H.  Hill,  whose  troops  melted
away  before  the  National  fire,  and  the  defeat  of


McCLELLAX


McCLELLAX


83


the  Confederates  was  assured.  As  soon  as  the
conflict  was  ended,  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  re
sumed  its  retreat  upon  Harrison's  Landing,  which
it  reached  by  noon  on  2  July,  and  was  then  secure
from  any  further  attack.  The  boldest  and  most
impulsive  spirits  in  the  army  were  of  opinion  that,
had  a  vigorous  advance  been  ordered  as  a  riposte
after  the  attack  on  Malvern,  such  were  the  con
fusion  and  disorder  in  the  Confederate  ranks,  that
Richmond  could  have  been  captured  without  fur
ther  delay.  But  the  condition  of  the  men  rendered
this  almost  impossible.

When,  on  7  July,  President  Lincoln  visited  the
army,  he  found  more  than  80,000  men  there,  al
though  Gen.  McClellan  had  reported  a  smaller
number  by  reason  of  confused  returns.  He  asked
for  more  troops  and  another  trial ;  but  he  had  lost
the  confidence  of  the  President  and  his  advisers,
and  neither  his  request  nor  his  advice  was  lis
tened  to.  On  8  July  Gen.  Burnside  brought  up  re-
enforcements  from  Roanoke  island,  and  some  days
later  Lee's  army  began  to  withdraw  for  a  north
ern  campaign.  On  the  llth  Gen.  Halleck  was
made  general-in-chief.  and  on  3  Aug.  McClellan  was
ordered  to  evacuate  the  peninsula.  He  was  di
rected  also  to  repair  in  person  first  to  Fort  Mon
roe  and  then  to  Alexandria,  and  was  relieved  of
his  command,  and  ordered  to  send  every  available
soldier  to  the  new  army  of  Virginia  under  Gen.
John  Pope,  an  army  that  had  been  formed  by  con
solidation  of  the  forces  under  Gens.  Fremont,
Banks,  and  McDowell.  These  three  organizations
were  now  known  as  the  1st,  2d.  and  3d  corps  re
spectively.  (See  POPE,  JOHN.)  The  second  battle
of  Bull  Run,  30  Aug.,  1862,  was  even  more  disas
trous  than  the  first,  and  on  2  Sept.  Pope  resigned
the  command.  In  this  emergency  the  government
looked  to  McClellan  as  the  only  man  who  could
inspire  confidence  and  bring  order  out  of  chaos.
Pie  himself  says  that,  pending  the  time  when  a
general  could  be  selected,  he  had  only  a  verbal
order  or  request  to  assume  control ;  that  in  point
of  fact  he  never  was  fully  in  command,  and  that
thus,  without  a  warrant  to  show,  not  only  his  repu
tation,  but  his  life  depended  upon  some  measure  of
success  in  a  situation  that  seemed  almost  hopeless.
Before  setting  out  to  meet  the  Confederate  army
in  Maryland,  he  left  his  card  with  a  P.  P.  C.  for
the  President,  and  departed  without  an  official
word  from  the  secretary  of  war  or  the  general-in-
chief.  lie  had  been  in  virtual  command,  from  2
to  7  Sept.,  in  charge  of  the  defences  of  the  city.
Flushed  with  his  recent  victories,  Lee  was  march
ing  into  Maryland,  and  must  be  met  and  checked
by  the  remnants  of  Pope's  army  and  the  Army  of
the  Potomac.  It  is  touching  to  read  of  the  men's
joy  and  renewed  confidence  when  they  knew  that
"Little  Mac"  was  again  in  command.  The  mag
netism  was  like  that  ascribed  to  Xapoleon.  Or
ganizing  as  he  proceeded,  he  marched  into  Mary
land  parallel  with  Lee.  who  had  advanced  as  far  as
Frederick.  Lee  was  disappointed  by  the  coolness
of  his  reception,  and  on  the  approach  of  McClellan
fell  back  to  Turner's  and  Crampton's  gaps  in  the
South  mountain,  where  he  was  defeated  and  driven
from  the  former  by  Reno's  corps,  and  from  the  lat
ter  by  Franklin  on  13  and  14  Sept.  McClellan  was
now  to  encounter  the  full  force  of  the  enemy  on
Antietam  creek,  a  small  tributary  of  the  Potomac,
which  it  joins  about  seven  miles  north  of  Harper's
Ferry.  By  the  failure  of  Gen.  Miles  to  fortify
Maryland  heights,  and  in  spite  of  the  entreaties  of
McClellan  that  Harper's  Ferry  should  be  aban
doned  and  its  garrison  added  to  his  army.  Jackson
captured  the  post  on  13  Sept.  and  took  11,500  pris-


[  oners.  He  was  thus  enabled  to  join  forces  with
!  Lee  at  Antietam.  On  the  IGth  Lee  had  only  two
divisions  across  the  Potomac,  but  the  National
army  did  not  come  into  position  till  the  17th.  Mc
Clellan  placed  Hooker  and  Mansfield  on  the  right,
next  came  Sumner,  with  Franklin  as  a  support,
Burnside  was  on  the  left,  and  Porter  in  the  centre.
Lee  had  placed  his  army  in  the  acute  angle  in
closed  by  the  Potomac  and  the  Antietam  ;  on  the
heights  between  the  two  streams,  to  the  right  and
left  of  the  Boonsboro  road,  he  had  posted  Long-
street  and  Hill,  with  Hood  on  the  left.  In  the
centre  of  the  position  was  the  Dunker  church,
which  seemed  an  objective  point  for  both  armies.
Three  stone  bridges  cross  the  Antietam,  and  there
are  also  several  fords.  The  bridge  on  the  left  was
in  front  of  Burnside,  the  central  one  in  front  of
Porter,  and  the  right  opposite  Hooker  and  Mans
field.  McClelland  plan  was  for  Hooker  to  cross  and
attack  the  enemy's  left,  supported  if  necessary  by
Sumner  and  Franklin,  and  upon  the  apparent  "suc
cess  of  that  attack  Burnside  was  to  cross  the  bridge
in  his  front,  press  the  enemy's  right,  passing  if
possible  to  the  south  and  rear  of  Sharpsburg.  At
daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  17th  Hooker,  fol
lowed  by  Mansfield,  having  crossed  the  stream,
made  so  furious  an  attack  upon  Hood  and  Jackson
that  they  were  driven  back  beyond  the  Dunker
church.  Re-enforced  by  D.  II.  Hill,  the  Confed
erates  returned  the  attack,  and  drove  Hooker  back
in  turn.  Then  Sumner  came  up.  moved  forward,
was  driven  back,  and  again,  with  Franklin's  aid,
forced  them  beyond  the  Dunker  church.  Sumner
even  attempted  to  move,  with  a  portion  of  his
corps,  to  the  left  upon  Sharpsburg,  but  he  could
only  hold  his  ground.  But  the  movements  on  the
left  were  less  fortunate.  Burnside  had  been  or
dered  at  8  A.  M.  to  take  the  stone  bridge,  and  aid
the  general  movements  by  occupying  the  heights
beyond.  The  approach  to  the  bridge  being  swept
by  the  guns  of  the  enemy,  the  order  to  take  it  was
not  obeyed  until  1  o'clock,  when  the  Confederates
had  so  strengthened  their  position  beyond  it  that
it  was  impossible  to  dislodge  them.  Thus  it  hap
pened  that  the  principal  fighting  was  on  the  right,
where  Mansfield  was  killed,  and  Hooker  wounded.
The  desperate  attempts  of  the  enemy  to  pierce  the
National  line  on  the  right  and  centre  were  foiled.
In  spite  of  repeated  orders,  the  failure  of  Burn-
side's  corps  to  take  the  lower  stone  bridge  invali
dated  McClellan's  combinations,  and  to  some  ex
tent  neutralized  his  success.  Had  it  been  carried
early  in  the  day.  Lee  might  have  been  driven  pell-
mell  into  the  Potomac.  As  it  was,  when  we  con
sider  all  the  circumstances,  the  forcing  back  of  the
Confederate  line,  and  their  inability  to  make  any
effect  upon  the  Xational  line,  the  engagement  at
Antietam,  so  often  regarded  as  only  a  drawn  bat
tle,  must  be  looked  upon  as  a  decided  success.
About  13.000  men  fell  on  each  side,  but  McClellan
retained  the  field  when  the  enemy,  his  plans  entire
ly  foiled,  sullenly  withdrew.  As  an  offset  to  the
disaster  of  Harper's  Ferry,  McClellan  had,  in  this
brief  campaign,  taken  13  guns,  39  colors,  upward
of  15,000  stand  of  arms,  and  more  than  6,000  pris-
!  oners,  while  he  had  not  lost  a  gun  or  a  color.  No
swift  pursuit  was  attempted,  and  Lee  crossed  the
j  Potomac  at  his  leisure  on  the  19th.  McClellan  then
j  followed,  advancing  his  army  between  Longstreet's
corps  and  the  main  body  under  Lee.  and  halted  at
!  Warrenton  to  recruit,  while  the  powers  at  Wash-
:  ington,  withholding  all  praise  for  what  he  and  his
1  army  had  achieved,  were  scolding  him  for  his  de-
J  lay.  He  needed  supplies  of  all  kinds,  and  with  re-
i  gard  to  the  arrival  of  these  there  has  since  been  a


84


McCLELLAN


long  controversy.  He  believed  that  what  time  was
lost  in  iin mediate  pursuit  of  the  enemy  would  be
more  than  compensated  by  the  concentration,
freshness,  equipments,  good  spirits,  and  recovered
morale  of  his  army.  Urgent  orders  were  sent  him
to  move  on,  and  irritating  insinuations  were  hurled
upon  him.  At  last  an  order  from  the  President
came  on  7  Nov.,  relieving  McClellan  of  the  com
mand,  and  conferring  it  upon  Gen.  Burnside,  who
then  (as  he  had  before)  declared  his  unfitness  for  it
and  his  indisposition  to  accept  it.  McClellan  was
directed  to  await  orders  at  Trenton,  N.  J.,  and
afterward  at  New  York.

Though  he  was  set  aside  by  the  government,  his
hold  upon  the  people  of  the  country  was  never  re
laxed.  The  army  idolized  him,  and  his  popularity
followed  him.  lii  1863  he  visited  Boston,  where  he
was  received  enthusiastically,  and  in  1864  he  was
chosen  to  deliver  the  oration  at  West  Point  on  the
occasion  of  the  unveiling  of  the  monument  erected
to  the  memory  of  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  the
regular  army,  lie  took  no  further  part  in  the
war,  but  in  his  enforced  inactivity  prepared  his
"  Report  on  the  Organization  and  Campaigns  of
the  Army  of  the  Potomac,"  which  was  published
by  the  government.  He  also  published  an  edition
himself,  with  a  preliminary  account  of  the  cam
paign  in  western  Virginia.  The  most  substantial
proof  of  his  popularity  was  his  nomination  at  Chi
cago  by  the  Democratic  party  as  their  candidate
for  the  presidency  of  the  United  States  in  August,
1864.  But  the  time  was  ill  chosen.  Mr.  Lincoln's
popularity  had  been  continually  growing,  and  the
conviction  of  many,  among  whom  were  warm
friends  of  McClellan,  was  that  a  change  of  adminis
tration  would  at  best,  in  that  emergency,  be  but  a
doubtful  policy.  McClellan 's  defeat  was  a  foregone
conclusion.  He  received  but  21  electoral  votes
against  212 ;  but  the  popular  vote  made  a  better
record— he  had  1,800,000  against  2,200,000.  As  he
had  not  sought  the  nomination,  he  was  not  dis
appointed  in  the  result.  He  had  resigned  his  com
mission  in  the  army  on  8  Sept..  1864,  and  imme
diately  after  the  election  he  went  to  Europe,  where
he  remained  until  1868.

On  his  return  he  took  up  his  residence  in  New
York  city.  In  1868-'9  he  was  employed  to  com
plete  the  Stevens  iron-clad  floating  battery  for  har
bor  defence.  This  was  a  visionary  caprice  of  the
inventor  and  owner,  for  which  McClellan  was  in
no  wise  responsible :  it  had  been  long  in  process  of
construction,  and  unforeseen  difficulties  presented
themselves,  which  led  to  its  abandonment.  He  de
clined  the  presidency  of  the  University  of  Califor
nia  in  1868,  and  that"  of  Union  college  in  1869.  In
1870  he  was  made  engineer-in-chief  of  the  depart
ment  of  docks  of  the  city  of  New  York,  which  post
he  left  in  1872,  having,  in  1871,  declined  an  ap
pointment  as  city  comptroller.  He  was  also  invited
to  become  superintendent  of  construction  of  the
railroad  bridge  across  the  Hudson  at  Poughkeep-
sie.  In  1881  he  was  appointed  by  congress  a  mem
ber  of  the  board  of  managers  of  the  National  home
for  disabled  soldiers,  which  office  he  held  until  his
death.  During  these  latter  years  his  principal
residence  was  in  Orange,  N.  J.,  but  in  the  winters
he  resided  in  New  York  or  Washington.  He  was
elected  governor  of  New  Jersey  in  1877,  served  for
one  term  with  credit,  and  declined  a  renomination.
He  made  several  tours  in  Europe,  visiting  the  East,
and  published  his  observations  in  magazine  articles.
In  the  series  of  military  papers,  appearing  in  the
current  issues,  he  wrote  several  monographs  illus
trating  his  campaigns,  and  vindicating  his  reputa
tion.  While  he  was  in  the  enjoyment  of  good


health,  with  a  long  life  apparently  before  him,
heart  disease  was  developed,  and  he  died  suddenly
at  his  country  residence.  In  1886  appeared  a  vol
ume  entitled  "McClellan's  Own  Story."  with  a
short  biographical  introduction  by  the  editor,  Will
iam  C.  Prime.  It  contains  his  own  views,  in  his
own  words,  with  extracts  from  his  private  corre
spondence  with  his  wife.

McClellan  was  about  5  feet  8  inches  in  height,
firmly  built,  with  broad  shoulders.  He  was  very
solid  and  muscular,  and  an  excellent  horseman.
Modest  and  retiring,  he  had  withal  a  great  self-
respect,  a  gracious  dignity.  His  personal  magnet
ism  has  no  parallel  in  military  history,  except  in
that  of  the  first  Napoleon;  he  was  literally  the
idol  of  his  officers  and  men.  They  would  obey  him
when  all  other  control  had  failed.  It:  the  opinion
of  many,  he  was  unduly  careful  of  his  troops,  so
that  his  power  to  organize  was  neutralized  by  his
caution  in  the  field.  He  was  a  clear  writer  and  an
effective  speaker.  As  a  student  of  military  history,
he  had  no  superior  in  his  systematic  knowledge  of
wars,  battles,  and  tactics.  He  was  also  an  accom
plished  engineer.  His  plans  of  campaign  were  just,
clear,  and  timely:  but  any  interference  with  them
threw  him  back  upon  his  natural  caution,  and
caused  him  to  take  more  time  to  reorganize  and  re
cast  than  the  exigencies  of  the  war  and  the  rapid
movements  of  the  enemy  would  permit.  He  be
lieved  himself  the  personal  butt  of  the  administra
tion,  and  that  it  did  not  wish  him  to  succeed.  He
was  constantly  engaged  in  controversies,  and  his
despatches,  reports,  and  later  papers  are  always  in
the  tone  of  one  vindicating  himself  from  real  or
fancied  injustice.  He  was  a  man  of  irreproachable
character,  a  model  Christian  gentleman  in  every
situation  of  life.  He  devised  the  McClellan  saddle,
which  has  proved  useful  and  popular,  in  1856.
His  writings  include  "A  Manual  of  Bayonet  Exer
cise,"  adapted  from  the  French  (1852);  "Govern
ment  Reports  of  Pacific  Railroad  Surveys"  (1854);
"Report  on  the  Organization  and  Campaigns  of
the  Army  of  the  Potomac  "  (1864) ;  papers  in  "  Har
per's  Magazine,"  1874-'7,  and  in  "Scribner's"  on
Egypt  and  the  Nile.

McCLELLAN,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Worces
ter,  Mass.,  4  Jan.,  1730;  d.  in  Woodstock,  Conn.,
17  Oct.,  1807.  His  parents  emigrated  to  America
early  in  the  18th  century  and  settled  on  a  farm
near  Worcester.  The  family  came  from  Kirkcud
bright,  on  the  Frith  of  Solway,  Scotland,  where  in
earlier  times  they  had  taken  part  in  Scottish  wars  as
stanch  upholders  of  the  cause  of  the  Stuarts.  Samuel
was  brought  up  as  a  farmer,  but  joined  the  army,
and  served  as  a  lieutenant  in  the  French  and  Indian
war.  The  experience  thus  gained,  and  the  example
of  the  British  officers  with  whom  he  served,  proved
of  great  advantage  to  him  in  the  Revolutionary
war.  In  1773  a. troop  of  horse  was  raised  in  Wood
stock  and  neighboring  towns,  of  which  he  was
made  captain.  On  the  news  of  the  battle  of  Lex
ington  the  company  immediately  marched  to  Bos
ton.  Subsequently  he  was  commissioned  major,
lieutenant-colonel,  and  colonel  of  the  12th  regi
ment  of  militia,  and  on  10  June,  1779,  brigadier  of
the  5th  brigade  of  militia.  His  commissions  are
preserved  in  the  family  residence  at  Woodstock,
Conn.,  all  signed  by  Gov.  John  Trumhull.  One
reads  by  authority  of  George  III.,  and  another  by
authority  of  the  Continental  congress.  After  the
invasion  of  New  London  and  the  massacre  at  Fort
Groton  he  was  placed  in  charge  of  those  posts,  and
continued  in  that  capacity  until  the  close  of  the
war.  When  only  a  major  in  the  militia  he  was  in
vited  by  Gen.  Washington  to  join  the  Continental


McCLELLAN


McCLELLAX


85


army,  with  the  promise  of  a  colonelcy,  but  he  de
clined.  When  peace  was  declared  he  returned  to
Woodstock  and  was  several  times  elected  to  the
state  assembly. — His  grandson,  George,  surgeon,
b.  in  Woodstock.  Conn..  23  Dec.,  1796;  d.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa..  9  May.  1847,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1816.  A  fondness  for  natural  science,  developed
under  the  influence  of  the  elder  Silliman,  led  him
to  adopt  medicine  as  his  profession,  and  he  began
his  studies  in  New  Haven  under  Dr.  Thomas  Hub-
bard,  but  was  .graduated  at  the  medical  department
of  theUniversity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1819.  Even  be
fore  he  obtained  his  degree  he  was  elected  resident
physician  to  the  hospital  of  the  Philadelphia  alms-
house.  During  his  first  year  of  practice  he  per
formed  the  most  important  operations  in  surgery,
such  as  lithotomy,  extraction  of  the  lens  for  cata
ract,  and  extirpation  of  the  lower  jaw.  He  opened
a  dissecting-room,  and  gave  private  courses  of
lectures,  both  on  anatomy  and  surgery,  and  his
class  soon  became  so  numerous  as  to  require  a
larger  room  for  their  accommodation.  His  success
was  so  great  that  he  conceived  the  idea  of  found
ing  a  medical  college,  and  with  others  he  obtained
from  the  legislature  of  Pennsylvania,  in  1825,  a
charter  for  Jefferson  medical  college.  In  1826  he
began  his  public  lectures  as  professor  of  surgery
in  the  new  college,  which,  notwithstanding  the  op
position  of  the  profession  and  difficult}'  in  obtain
ing  a  faculty,  grew  so  rapidly  that  in  ten  years  the
students  numbered  360.  In  1838  the  faculty  was
reorganized,  but  without  Dr.  McClellan's  name,  and
this  action  led  to  his  immediately  procuring  the
incorporation  of  the  medical  department  of  Penn
sylvania  college.  His  lectures  in  connection  with
the  new  institution  began  in  November,  1839,  and
continued  until  the  spring  of  1843.  He  was  the
originator  of  the  extended  system  of  medical  edu
cation  as  it  now  exists  in  this  country,  and  the
clinical  instruction  of  the  college  was  originated  by
him.  He  acquired  one  of  the  largest  practices
known  in  the  United  States,  and  his  reputation  ex
tended  to  Europe,  while  he  attracted  patients  from
all  parts  of  this  country,  the  West  Indies,  and
South  America.  As  a  surgeon  he  performed  almost
every  capital  operation  known,  together  with  many
others  that  were  original  with  himself.  He  was
especially  eminent  in  ophthalmic  surgery  and  his
operations  for  cataract  and  other  diseases  of  the
eye,  and  he  was  among  the  first  to  extract  the  lens.
Other  operations,  now  quite  common,  were  not  used
in  the  United  States  till  performed  by  him,  and  he
shares  with  Valentine  Mott,  of  New  York,  and
Jonn  C.  Warren,  of  Boston,  the  credit  of  establish
ing  many  procedures  new  in  this  country.  He  did
more  than  any  other  surgeon  by  the  number  and
success  of  his  operations  to  establish  completely,  as
safe  and  feasible,  the  removal  of  the  parotid  gland.
In  earlier  years  he  was  a  contributor  of  original
papers  to  medical  periodicals,  and  was  one  of  the
conductors  of  the  "  American  Medical  Review  and
Journal/'  Dr.  McClellan  edited  Eberle's  "  Theory
and  Practice  of  Physic  "  (Philadelphia,  1840),  and
left  in  manuscript  "  The  Principles  and  Practice  of
Surgery,"  (1847).  It  has  been  said  of  him  that, "  like
Bowditch,  he  infused  his  spirit  into  his  pupils.
There  are  now  hundreds  of  them  scattered  over  the
country  who  manifest  it  in  their  bold  and  efficient
surgery,  and  who  will  welcome  the  publication  of
these  principles  which  they  once  heard  from  his
eloquent  lips,  and  on  which  their  success  in  prac
tice  has  so  much  depended."  See  "  Memoir "  by
his  son  in  Gross's  "  Lives  of  Eminent  Physicians
and  Surgeons"  (Philadelphia.  1861). — His  brother,
Samuel,  physician,  b.  in  Woodstock,  Conn.,  21


|  Sept.,  1800;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  4  Jan..  1853,
I  was  graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  Yale
I  in  1823,  and  then  entered  the  office  of  George  Mc
Clellan  in  Philadelphia. After  a  few  years  he  set
tled  in  Bristol,  Pa,,  but  soon  returned  to  Philadel
phia,  where  he  renewed  his  association  with  his
j  brother,  particularly  :r>  ophthalmic  surgery. He
was  likewise  identified  wth  the  founding  of'Jeffer-
j  son  medical college,  in  which he was  demonstra
tor and afterward  professor  of anatomy, This
chair  he  relinquished  to accept  that  of  obstetrics.
Subsequently he was elected professor of that
branch  in  the  medical  department  of  Pennsylvania
college,  but soon  resigned to follow his private
practice,  in  which  he  continued  until  his  death. —
George's  son, John  Hill  Brinton,  physician,  b,
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  13 Aug.,  1823;  d.'in Edin
burgh,  Scotland,  20  July,  1874,  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1841,  and  at  its
medical  department  in  1844. In  1855  he  was  elected
professor  of  anatomy  in  the  medical  department  of
Pennsylvania college,  but  held  that  appointment
for  a short time only. He  was  surgeon at  St.
Joseph's hospital  from  1850  till  1862,  and  also  at
Will's  eye  hospital  for  many years. During  the
civil  war  he  was  connected  with  the  South  street
hospital,  and  afterward  was  acting  assistant  sur
geon  at  Mower's  hospital,  where  he  performed  some
notable  operations,  accounts  of  which  are  given  in
"The  Medical  and  Surgical  History  of  the  War  of
the  Rebellion  "  (Washington,  1870). Dr.  McClellan
had  an  extensive  practice,  both  in  surgery  and  in
medicine,  and  was  frequently  called  on  to'  operate
in  different  parts  of  the  state. Among  the  opera
tions  credited  to  him  are  the  removal  of  the  entire
parotid  gland,  reported  in  his  father's  "  Surgery,"
and  the  first  and  only  removal  of  the  entire  upper
extremity  for  disease,  including  the  shoulder-blade
and  collar-bone. He  inherited  much  of  his  father's
quickness,  and  his  diagnosis  of  disease  seemed  al
most  intuitive,  while  his extreme  delicacy  of  feel
ing  and  genial  nature  made  him  a  welcome  visitor
in  the  sick-room. Dr. McClellan  edited  "  Princi
ples  and  Practice  of  Surgery  "  (Philadelphia,  1848),
left  in  manuscript  by  his  father. His  son  GEORGE
was  graduated  at  the  Jefferson  medical  college  in
1870,  and now practises  in Philadelphia.  —  The
second Samuel's  son.  Carswell,  civil  engineer,  b.
in Philadelphia,  Pa.,  3  Dec,,  1835,  was  graduated
at  Williams.  Mass.,  in  1855,  and  on  6  May.  1862.
entered  the  32d  New  York  regiment,  was  wounded
at  Malvern  Hill,  and  on  3  July  became  topographi
cal  assistant  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Andrew  A.  Hum
phreys. He  was  present  at  Fredericksburg,  Chan-
cellorsville.  and  Gettysburg  where  he  was  wounded
again,  and  at  the  headquarters  of  the  Army  of  the
Potomac  until  April,  1864. He  was  taken  prisoner
in  the fight for  the  Weldon  railroad  on  19  Aug.,
1864,  but  was  paroled,  16  Nov.,  1864.  and  resigned
on  that  date. He  was  engineer  in  charge  of  loca
tion  and construction  works  upon  the  St.  Louis,
Vandalia  and  Terra  Haute,  Northern  Pacific,  St.
Paul  and  Pacific,  and  other  western  railroads,  from
1867  till  1881.  when  he  became  U.  S.  civil  assistant
engineer,  which post he  now  (1887)  holds. He  is
the  author  of  the  "  Personal  Memoirs  and  Military
History  of  Ulysses  S.  Grant  rs.  the  Record  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac  "  (Boston,  1887). — CarswelPs
brother,  Henry  Brainerd,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadel
phia.  Pa..  17  Oct.,  1840.  was  graduated  at  Williams
in  1858. In 1862-'3 he was adjutant  of  the  3d
Virginia  cavalry,  and  from  1863  till  the  end  of  the
war  served  as  assistant adjutant-general of  the
cavalry  corps  of  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia.
He  was  chief  of  staff  to  Gens.  James  E.  B.  btuart


86


MCCLELLAND


McCLERNAND


and  Wade  Hampton,  and  served  by  assignment  on
the  staff  of  Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee  from  14  May  till
11  Aug.,  1803.  Since  1870  he  has  been  princi
pal  of  Sayre  female  institute,  in  Lexington,  Ky.
He  is  the  author  of  "  Life  and  Campaigns  of  Major-
General  J.  E.  B.  Stuart,  Commander  of  the  Cavalry
of  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia  "  (Boston,  1885).

McCLELLANl),  Alexander,  clergyman,  b.  in
Schenectady,  N.  Y..  in  1790;  d.  in  New  Brunswick,
N.  J.,  19  Dec.,  1804.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
in  1809,  and  at  the  age  of  nineteen  was  licensed
by  the  Associate  Reformed  presbytery  of  New
York,  and  elected  pastor  of  Rutgers  street  Pres
byterian  church,  where  he  remained  for  seven
years.  He  was  professor  of  rhetoric,  logic,  and
metaphysics  in  Dickinson  college,  Pa.,  in  1822-'9,
of  languages  at  Rutgers  in  1829-'32,  of  oriental
literature  and  languages  there  from  1833  till  1840,
and  of  oriental  languages  and  literature  and  bib
lical  criticism  in  the  theological  seminary  of  the
Reformed  church  from  1840  till  1851.  After  his
resignation  he  travelled  in  Europe,  and  then  re
sided  in  New  Brunswick  until  his  death.  He  re
ceived  the  degree  of  I).  D.  from  Princeton  in  1818,
and  from  Union  and  Dickinson  in  1830.  His  pub
lications  consist  of  occasional  sermons,  pamphlets,
and  "  Manual  of  Sacred  Interpretation "  (New
York,  1842;  2d  ed., entitled  "Canon  and  Interpre
tation  of  Scripture,"  1800).  His  sermons  were
edited,  with  a  memoir,  and  published  by  Rev.
Richard  W.  Dickinson  (New  York,  1807).

McCLELLANl),  James  Henderson,  surgeon,
b.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  20  May,  1845.  His  father,
of  the  same  name,  came  to  this  country  from  Ire
land  in  1810,  took  an  active  part  in  anti-slavery
movements,  and  was  the  architect  of  many  build
ings  in  Pittsburg.  The  son  was  graduated  at  the
Ilahnemann  medical  college  of  Philadelphia  in
1807,  and  on  his  return  to  Pittsburg  was  appointed
to  the  surgical  staff  of  the  newly  established  Homa1-
opathic  medical  and  surgical  hospital,  which  post
he  has  since  held.  He  organized  the  Anatomical
society  of  Alleghany  county,  and  was  for  several
years  its  demonstrator  and  president.  He  became
professor  of  surgery  in  the  Hahnemann  college,
Philadelphia,  in  1870.  In  1885  he  was  appointed
a  member  of  the  State  board  of  health,  and  he  has
been  reappointed  for  a  term  of  six  years.  He  has
contributed  much  to  various  medical  journals,  in
cluding  papers  on  "Hip -joint  Amputations,"
"  Bone  Diseases,"  and  "  Excision  of  the  Kidney,"
and  wrote  the  article  on  "  Diseases  of  the  Kidneys"
in  the  "  System  of  Medicine  "  edited  by  Dr.  Henry
Arndt  (Philadelphia,  1880).

McCLELLANl),  Milo  Adams,  physician,  b.  in
Sharon,  Beaver  co.,  Pa.,  28  Jan.,  1837.  His  ances
tors  were  among  the  early  settlers  of  Pennsylvania.
He  was  graduated  at  the  Bellevue  hospital  medical
college,  New  York,  in  1807,  and  settled  in  Canton.
111.,  but  removed  to  Knoxville,  where  he  now  (1888)
practises  his  profession.  For  eight  years  he  was
county  physician  of  Knox  county.  He  has  con
tributed  papers  to  various  medical  journals  and  to
his  local  society.  His  "Report  on  Malpractice"
(1873)  was  enlarged  and  issued  under  the  title  of
"Civil  Malpractice,  a  Treatise  on  Surgical  Juris
prudence  ''  (Boston,  1877).

McCLELLANl),  Robert,  statesman,  b.  in
Greencastle,  Pa.,  1  Aug.,  1807  ;  d.  in  Detroit.  Mich.,
27  Aug.,  1880.  His  father,  John  McClelland,  was
a  physician  of  Philadelphia.  The  son  was  gradu
ated  at  Dickinson  in  1829,  studied  law,  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1831,  and  practised  in  Pitts
burg  for  a  year.  In  1833  he  removed  to  Monroe,
Mich.,  and  in  1835  was  a  member  of  the  State  con


stitutional  convention.  He  was  a  member  of  the
legislature  from  1838  till  1843,  serving  in  the  latter
year  as  speaker,  and  was  then  elected  to  congress
as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  4  Dec..  1843,  till  3
March,  1849.  He  was  one  of  the  eighteen  Demo
crats  that  joined,  with  David  Wilmot,  of  Pennsyl
vania,  in  passing  the  Wilmot  proviso,  which
abridged  the  further  extension  of  slavery  into  the
territories  of  the  United  States.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  National  Democratic  conventions  of  1848.
1852,  and  1808,  and  a  member  of  the  Constitutional
conventions  of  Michigan  of  1850  and  1807.  He
took  an  active  part  in  the  canvass  that  resulted  in
the  election  of  Gen.  Pierce  to  the  presidency.  Mr.
McClelland  acted  a.s  provisional  governor  of  Michi
gan  in  1851,  and  was  re-elected  in  1852  for  a  term
of  four  years,  but  resigned  in  1853  to  accept  the
post  of  secretary  of  the  interior,  which  he  held
during  President  Pierce's  administration.

McCLENACHAN,  Charles  Thomson,  lawyer,
b.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  13  April,  1829.  He  was
graduated  at  Germantown  college,  went  to  New
York  in  1844,  and  was  instructor  in  the  Institute
of  the  blind  from  1845  till  1850.  From  1850  till
1801  he  was  clerk  of  the  board  of  councilmen  of
New  York  city,  and  during  the  civil  war  he  was
quartermaster  of  the  7th  New  York  regiment.
Subsequently  he  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  New  York  bar  in  1807.  He  was  general
accountant  in  the  street  department,  and  after
ward  in  the  department  of  public  works,  for
twenty-six  years.  lie  has  published  "The  Laws
of  the  Fire  Department  "  (New  York.  1855) ; "  Com
pilation  of  the  Opinions  of  Counsels  to  the  Cor
porations '' (1859) ;  "  New  York  Ferry  Leases  and"
Railroad  Grants  from  1750  to  1800  "'(1800) ;  "The
Atlantic  Telegraph  Cable  of  1858  "(1803);  "The
Book  of  the  Ancient  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  of
Freemasonry"  (1807);  and  an  addendum  to  Dr.
Albert  G.  Mackey's  "Masonic  Encyclopaedia"
(Philadelphia,  1884).  He  is  now  (1888)  engaged,
by  appointment  of  the  grand  lodge,  on  the  "  History
of  Freemasonry  in  the  State  of  New  York."

McCLERNAND,  John  Alexander,  lawyer,  b.
in  Breckenridge  county,  Ky.,  30  May,  1812.  On
the  death  of  his  father  in  1810,  his  mother  removed
to  Shawneetown,  111.,  where  the  son  subsequently
worked  on  a  farm.  In  1829  he  began  the  study  of
law,  and  in  1832  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  In  the
same  year  he  volunteered  in  the  war  against  the
Sacs  and  Foxes,  and  on  his  return  was  engaged
for  a  time  in  trade.  In  1835  he  established  the
Shawneetown  "  Democrat,"  and  also  resumed  the
practice  of  his  profession.  In  1830-'4()  and  1842
he  was  elected  to  the  legislature,  and  in  1843
was  sent  to  represent  his  state  as  a  Democrat  in
congress,  where  he  served  till  1851.  His  first
speech  was  upon  the  bill  to  remit  the  fine  that  had
been  imposed  on  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson  by  Judge
Hall,  of  Louisiana.  He  was  the  chairman  of  the
committee  on  resolutions  of  the  Illinois  Democratic
convention  of  1858,  and  in  that  year  was  re-elected
to  congress,  serving  from  5  Dec.,  1859,  until  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war.  He  then  resigned,  re
turned  home,  and,  with  John  A.  Logan  and  Philip
B.  Fouke,  raised  the  McClernand  brigade,  the
president  appointing  him  brigadier-general  of  vol
unteers.  He  accompanied  Gen.  Grant  to  Belmont,
did  good  service  himself  at  Fort  Donelson,  where
he  commanded  the  right  of  the  National  line,  and
was  made  major-general  of  volunteers,  21  March,

1802.  The  following  month  he  commanded  a  divis
ion  at  the  battle  of Sluloh,  Tenn. In  January,

1803.  he  relieved  Gen.  Sherman  in  command  of  the
expedition for the capture of Vicksburg. He


McCLINTOCK


MACCLINTOCK


87


afterward  led  the  force  that  stormed  and  captured  '
Arkansas  Post,  and  was  at  Port  Gibson,  Champion
Hills,  Big  Black  River,  and  Vicksburg. He  led  j
the  13th  army  corps  until  he  was  relieved  in  July,
1863.  and  resigned  from  the  army  on  30  Xov.,  1864.

McCLINTOCK,  Sir  Frauds  Leopold,  British  j
explorer,  b.  in  Dundalk,  Ireland,  in  1819.  He  en-  j
tered  the  navy  at  the  age  of  twelve,  and  for  his
conduct  in  recovering  the  "  Gorgon,"  when  it  was
stranded  near  Montevideo,  was  promoted  to  a
lieutenancy  in  1843.  He  accompanied  Sir  James
Ross  in  one  of  the  three  arctic  expeditions  sent  out
in  search  of  Sir  John  Franklin  in  the  spring  of  1848,
and  early  in  the  following  year  joined  another  ex
pedition  under  Capt.  Austin,  it  was  his  fortune,
in  August,  1850,  to  see  at  Cape  Riley  the  first
traces  of  the  missing  mariners.  In  April,  1851,
while  the  ships  were  fast  in  the  ice  in  Crozier  chan
nel,  he  began  a  sledge  journey  of  eighty  days  along
the  north  shore  of  Parry  sound,  travelling  760  miles,
and  reaching  the  most  westerly  point  that  had  yet
been  attained  from  the  east  in  the  arctic  regions.
The  comparative  perfection  to  which  sledge-trav
elling  has  since  been  carried  is  due  in  great  part  to
the  improvements  which  he  effected.  The  squadron
returned  to  England  in  the  autumn  of  the  same
year,  and  Lieut.  McClintock  was  at  once  promoted
to  the  rank  of  commander.  The  following  spring
saw  him  in  charge  of  the  "  Intrepid,"  one  of  the
five  vessels  sent  out  to  the  polar  regions  under  Sir
Edward  Belcher.  In  accordance  with  instructions
from  the  admiralty,  he  sailed,  in  company  with
Capt.  Kellett,  toward  Melville  island  in  search  of
McClure,  whom  he  rescued  from  a  three  years'  im
prisonment  in  the  ice ;  but  he  was  subsequently
compelled  to  abandon  his  own  ship  with  three
others  of  Belcher's  fleet,  the  whole  expedition
reaching  home  in  September,  1854.  McClintock's
services  were  recognized  by  his  promotion  to  the
rank  of  captain,  but  he  did  not  obtain  active  em
ployment  until  Lady  Franklin  offered  him  in  1857
the  command  of  the  expedition  that  was  fitted  out
by  her,  which  resulted  in  solving  the  mystery  of
Sir  John  Franklin's  fate.  On  his  return  in  1859
from  this  important  voyage.  Captain  McClintock
was  received  with  great  enthusiasm.  The  British
universities  conferred  on  him  their  highest  de
grees,  the  corporation  of  London  voted  him  the
freedom  of  the  city,  the  queen  granted  him  the
full  pay  of  captain  in  the  navy  for  the  two  years
he  was  absent,  and  Lady  Franklin  presented  to
him  the  vessel  in  which  he  had  made  his  voyage.
He  was  knighted,  33  Feb.,  1860,  and  in  the  spring
of  the  same  year  appointed  by  the  government  to  j
survey  a  deep-sea  route  for  a  proposed  North  At
lantic  telegraph.  He  was  made  a  rear-admiral  in  I
the  fleet  in  October,  1871,  and  vice-admiral  in  1877.  •
From  1879  till  1882  he  served  as  commander-in-
chief  of  the  North  American  and  \Vest  Indian  '
station.  In  1884  he  became  full  admiral.  He  is  j
the  author  of  "  The  Voyage  of  the  '  Fox '  in  the  J
Arctic  Seas "  (London,"  1860),  which  has  passed
through  five  editions.

McCLIXTOCK,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  27  Oct.,  1814;  d.  in  Madison,  Morris  '
co.,  N.  J.,  4  March,  1870. He  was  graduated  at  !
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1835. Before  '.
his  graduation  he  had  begun  to  preach  in  the  New  ,
Jersey conference of the Methodist Episcopal  j
church. In  1836  he  was  appointed  professor  of  I
mathematics in Dickinson college.  Carlisle,  Pa.,  '
where  he  remained  twelve  years,  exchanging  the
mathematical  chair  in  1840  for  that  of  Greek  and
Latin. In 1846 he began, in connection with
George  R.  Crooks,  a  series  of  text-books  of  those  j


languages,  in  which  the  method  of  "  imitation  and
repetition,"  now  generally  used,  was  first  intro
duced.  In  1848  he  was  elected  by  the  general  con
ference  editor  of  the  "Methodist  Quarterly  Re
view,"  and  this  place  he  filled  for  eight  years,  dur
ing  which  time  he  gave  that  periodical  a  high
literary  and  scholarly  character.  While  in  his
hands  the  "  Review  "  rendered  especial  service  by
its  examination  of  the  positive  philosophy  of
Comte,  and  the  detection  of  its  errors.  These  es
says  attracted  the  attention  of  the  French  philoso
pher,  and  led  to  correspondence  between  him  and
their  author.  In  1856  Dr.  McClintock  was  ap
pointed,  with  Bishop  Simpson,  a  delegate  to  the
Wesleyan  Methodist  conference  of  England,  and
was  also  present  in  a  similar  capacity  at  the  Berlin
meeting  of  the  Evangelical  alliance  the  same  year.
Returning  to  the  United  States,  he  became  pastor
of  St.  Paul's  church,  New  York  city,  in  1857.  where
he  soon  became  known  as  one  of  the  eloquent
preachers  of  the  metropolis.  His  charge  of  the
church  expiring  by  limitation  in  1860.  he  sailed  for
Europe  in  June  to  become  pastor  of  the  American
chapel  in  Paris,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Ameri
can  and  foreign  Christian  union.  Here  he  re
mained  during  the  civil  war,  and  did  good  service
in  diffusing  information  regarding  the  merits  of
the  struggle.  In  these  efforts  he  secured  the  aid
of  the  Comte  de  Gasparin  in  France  and  the  Rev.
William  Arthur  in  England.  He  also  kept  his
countrymen  informed  of  the  fluctuations  of  Euro
pean  opinion  by  letters  to  the  New  York  "  Meth
odist."  After  his  return  in  1864  he  was  again  as
signed  to  the  pastorate  of  St.  Paul's  church,  but,
owing  to  failing  health,  he  was  compelled  to  resign
at  the  end  of  a  year.  In  1866  he  was  made  chair
man  of  the  central  centenary  committee  having  in
charge  the  centennial  commemoration  of  the  ori
gin  and  history  of  American  Methodism.  Daniel
Drew,  of  New  York,  signified  his  intention  of
founding,  in  connection  with  that  event,  a  biblical
and  theological  school,  and  Dr.  McClintock  was
chosen  its  first  president.  This  institution,  at
Madison,  N.  J.,  known  as  Drew  theological  semi
nary,  was  opened  in  1867.  Dr.  McClintock's  style
as  a  writer  was  characterized  by  clearness,  direct
ness,  and  precision.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1848,
and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Rutgers  in  1866.  His
chief  literary  work,  to  which  a  great  part  of  the
last  twenty  years  of  his  life  was  devoted,  is  the
"  Cyclopaedia  of  Biblical,  Theological,  and  Ecclesi
astical  Literature"  (12  vols.,  New  York).  It  was
begun  by  him  in  1853.  in  conjunction  with  James
Strong,  but  the  first  volume  did  not  appear  until
1867,  and  the  fourth  was  only  partially  prepared  at
the  time  of  his  death.  He  also  published  a  transla
tion  of  Neander's  "  Life  of  Christ."  in  connection
with  Prof.  Carolus  E.  Blumenthal  (New  York,
1847) ;  "  An  Analysis  of  '  Watson's  Theological  In
stitutes  '  "  (1850) ;""  Sketches  of  Eminent  Methodist
Ministers'"  (1852);  "The  Temporal  Power  of  the
Pope "  (1853) ;  and  a  translation  of  Bungener's
"  History  of  the  Council  of  Trent  "  (1855).  Since
his  death  have  been  issued  "  Living  Words,"  a  vol
ume  of  his  sermons  (1870),  and  "  Lectures  on  The
ological  Encyclopaedia  and  Methodology "  (1873).
See  his  "  Life  and  Letters "  by  Rev.  George  R.
Crooks.  D.  D.  (New  York,  1876).

MACCLINTOCK.  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in
Medford,  Mass..  1  May,  1732;  d.  in  Greenland,
N.  II.,  27  April.  1804.  He  was  graduated  at  Prince
ton  in  1751,  and  in  1756  was  ordained  pastor  of  a
Congregational  church  at  Greenland,  N.  H.,  where
he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life,  except  the  period


88


McCLOSKEY


McCLOSKEY


during  which  he  officiated  as  chaplain  in  the  French
war  and  for  the  New  Hampshire  troops  in  1775.
He  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill,  and
figures  prominently  in  Trunibull's  picture  of  that
event  as  the  clergyman  in  bands.  His  sermons
were  characterized  by  soundness  of  thought  and
parity  of  style.  lie  was  given  the  degree  of  M.  A.
by  Harvard  in  1761,  and  received  that  of  1).  I).
from  Yale  in  1791.  He  published  "A  Sermon
on  the  Justice  of  God  in  the  Mortality  of  Man  "
(1759);  "The  Artifices  of  Deceivers  "Detected"
(1770);  "  Herodias,  or  Cruelty  and  Revenge  the
Effects  of  Unlawful  Pleasure"  (1772)  ;  "An  Epis
tolary  Correspondence  with  Rev.  John  C.  Ogden  "
on  apostolic  succession  (1791);  "The  Choice."  a
sermon  (1798);  and  "An  Oration  Commemorative
of  Washington  "  (1800).

McCLOSKEY,  John,  cardinal,  b.  in  Brook
lyn,  N.  Y.,  20  March,  1810,  of  Irish  parentage;  d.
in  New  York  city,  10  Oct.,  1885.  When  a  boy  he
had  a  delicate  constitution,  and  an  accident,  in
which  a  log  rolled  over  him,  weakened  his  lungs,

so  that  he  was  never
robust.  He  was
sent  to  Mount  St.
Mary's  college,  Em-
mettsburg,  Md.,  and
after  a  seven  years'
preparatory  and  col
legiate  course,  en-
tei-ed  the  theological
department  of  the
institution  to  pre
pare  for  the  priest
hood.  After  com
pleting  a  seminary
course  of  five  years
he  was  ordained  a
priest  by  Bishop
Dubois,  '12  Jan.,
1834)  in  the  ol(l


eighteenth  priest  that  was  ordained  in  the  diocese.
He  was  sent  to  Rome  to  continue  his  studies,  with
the  design  of  placing  him  at  the  head  of  a  proposed
college  and  seminary.  Early  in  1835  he  entered  the
Gregorian  college,  where  he  spent  two  years,  and
on  his  return  he  visited  the  various  countries  of
Europe.  He  was  appointed,  1  Nov.,  1837,  pastor  of
St.  Joseph's  church,  New  York  city.  On  24  June,
1841,  Bishop  Hughes  opened  St.  John's  college,
Fordham,  and  appointed  him  president  ;  but  he
held  the  post  only  a  year,  and  then  returned  to
his  parish  work.  On  10  March,  1844,  he  was  con
secrated  bishop  of  Axieren  in  jtartibun,  and  made
coadjutor  of  the  diocese  of  New  York,  with  the
right  of  succession.  In  1847  the  new  sees  of
Albany  and  Buffalo  were  created,  and  he  was
transferred  to  the  former,  21  May,  1847.  During
the  seventeen  years  of  his  administration  the
growth  of  the  emirch  in  the  new  diocese  was  very
rapid.  He  introduced  various  religious  organiza
tions,  including  Ladies  of  the  Sacred  Heart,  Sisters
of  Charity,  Sisters  of  Mercy.  Sisters  of  St.  Joseph,
those  of  the  third  order  of  St.  Francis,  and  Hospital
ers,  Jesuits,  Oblates,  Augustinians.  Franciscans,
and  Capuchins,  and  he  built  the  cathedral  of  the
Immaculate  Conception  and  founded  the  theologi
cal  seminary  at  Troy.  In  1850,  while  on  his  way
to  attend  a  provincial  council  in  New  York,  he  was
injured  in  a  railroad  collision  near  Tarrytown,  his
right  foot  being  badly  crushed.  In  1851  he  visited
Rome,  where  he  was  received  with  favor.  On  the
death  of  Archbishop  Hughes  he  was  made  arch


bishop  of  New  York,  6  May,  1864,  and  installed  on
21  Aug.  of  that  year.  The  province  then  included
New  England,  New  York,  and  New  Jersey.  Dur
ing  his  administration  communities  of  various  re
ligious  orders  were  introduced,  many  fine  churches
were  built,  and  the  Foundling  asylum,  the  Institute
for  deaf-mutes  at  Fordham,  homes  for  destitute
boys  and  girls  in  connection  with  St.  Stephen's  and
St.  Ann's  churches,  homes  for  aged  men  and
women,  and  orphan  asylums  without  the  city  were
established.  lie  was  especially  active  in  the  erec
tion  of  the  Catholic  protectory  in  Westchester,  and
in  the  building  of  the  new  cathedral,  the  corner
stone  of  which  Archbishop  Hughes  had  laid  on  15
Aug.,  1858.  He  attended  the  Vatican  council  in
1809,  and  served  on  the  committee  on  discipline,
also  visiting  Rome  in  1874.  On  15  March,  1875,
the  pope  appointed  him  a  cardinal  priest,  with  the
title  of  Sancta  Maria  supra  Minervam,  and  on  27
April  of  the  same  year  the  ceremony  of  investiture
took  place  in  the  old  cathedral.  In  1878  he  was
summoned  to  Rome  to  take  part  in  the  conclave
that  was  called  to  elect  a  successor  to  Pius  IX.
On  25  May,  1879,  he  dedicated  the  new  cathedral.
On  12  Jan.,  1884,  there  was  a  celebration  of  the
golden  jubilee  of  his  ordination  as  a  priest,  and  the
address  presented  to  him  by  the  clergy  said:
"Fifty  years  ago  there  were  in  this  city  but  six
churches ;  now  there  are  sixty.  There  were  then
but  twenty  priests  in  the  diocese ;  now  there  are
380.  At  that  time  there  were  in  the  whole  United
States  only  nine  bishops;  now  there  are  fifty-nine.
Then  there  was  but  one  archbishop  ;  now  there  arc
eleven,  one  of  whom  has  been  raised  to  the  great
senate  of  the  universal  church.''  During  the  last
ten  years  of  his  life  his  strength  failed  gradually,
and  as  early  as  1  Oct.,  1880,  Archbishop  Corrigan  was
made  coadjutor  at  his  request.  Cardinal  McClos-
key  was  tall  and  slender,  but  of  erect  and  elastic
bearing.  His  forehead  was  broad  and  his  features
pleasant,  his  eyes  being  bright  blue  and  deeply  set,
and  his  mouth  mobile.  His  manner  was  quiet,  but
impressive.  He  was  a  profound  scholar  and  an
effective  preacher.  It  has  been  said  that  the  his
tory  of  his  life  is  the  history  of  the  progress  of  the
Roman  Catholic  church  in  New  York,  but  it
would  be  a  mistake  to  attribute  that  progress  alto
gether  to  him,  or  even  to  him  more  than  to  any
other  man.  He  was  fortunate  in  succeeding  Arch
bishop  Hughes,  for  he  was  enabled  to  enter  into
the  results  of  that  prelate's  controversies  without
inheriting  any  of  the  animosities  that  they  engen
dered,  and  his  episcopate  was  like  a  calm  after  a
storm.  His  remains  were  deposited,  15  Oct.,  1885,
in  the  vault  under  the  sanctuary  of  St.  Patrick's
cathedral,  New  York.

MeCLOSKEY,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Carlow,
Ireland,  in  1817 ;  d.  in  Emmett'sburg,  Md.,  24  Dec.,
1880.  He  came  to  this  country  at  an  early  age,
and  entering  St.  Mary's  college,  Eminettsburg,  Md.,
in  1830,  was  graduated  there  and  at  the  seminary.
He  was  ordained  by  Bishop  Hughes,  of  New  York,
in  1840,  who,  at  the  solicitation  of  the  college
authorities,  allowed  him  to  attach  himself  to  the
faculty  of  St.  Mary's.  He  was  elected  vice-presi
dent  and  treasurer  in  1844,  and  became  president
in  1871.  He  resigned  in  1877,  but  was  again
called  to  the  presidency  in  1879,  which  office  he
held  until  his  death.  He  was  unflagging  in  his
zeal  for  the  welfare  of  the  college,  and  devoted
himself  to  its  interests  throughout  his  life. — His
brother,  "William  George,  R,  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  10  Nov.,  1823,  also  pursued  his
classical  and  theological  studies  at  St.  Mary's,  and
was  ordained  by  Archbishop  Hughes  in  New  York


McCLUXEY


McCLURE


89


in  1852.  After  spending  one  year  on  the  mission
in  New  York  as  assistant  to  his  brother  John,  he
was  appointed  to  a  chair  at  St.  Mary's  college,  and
became  professor  of  moral  theology  and  sacred
scripture  in  1857.  In  December,  1859,  Pope  Pius
IX.  made  him  the  first  president  of  the  American
college  in  Rome,  which  had  just  been  founded  by
that  pontiff.  Here  he  presided  with  great  success
for  several  years,  until  he  was  appointed  to  the  see
of  Louisville,  Ky..  in  1868.  He  has  given  much
attention  to  the  advancement  of  education  in  his
diocese,  and  has  been  instrumental  in  establishing
various  convents  and  parochial  schools.

McCLUNEY,  William  J.,  naval  officer,  b.  about
1796 :  d.  in  Brooklyn,  X.  Y.,  11  Feb.,  1864.  He  was
appointed  midshipman  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  1  Jan.,
1812.  and  was  in  the  action  between  the  "  Wasp  "
and  the  "  Frolic  "  on  18  Oct.  of  that  year.  He  was
commissioned  lieutenant,  1  April,  1818,  command
er,  9  Dec.,  1839,  and  captain,  13  Oct.,  1851,  and
placed  on  the  retired  list,  21  Dec.,  1861.  He  took
part  in  the  Mexican  war,  and  in  1853  was  ordered
to  command  the  "  Powhatan,"  of  Com.  Perry's  Ja
pan  expedition.  He  returned  to  the  United  States
in  February,  1856,  and  after  a  brief  respite  was  or
dered  to  New  York  on  duty  as  general  supervisor
of  the  construction  of  the  Stevens  battery.  In
1858  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  Atlantic
squadron,  which  office  he  held  until  May,  1860.
He  was  commissioned  commodore,  16  July,  1862.

McCLUNG,  John  Alexander,  clergyman,  b.  in
Washington,  Mason  co.,  Ky.,  25  Sept.,  1804 ;  d.  in
Niagara  river,  7  Aug.,  1859.  He  was  a  son  of
Judge  William  McClung.  and  a  nephew  of  Chief-
Justice  Marshall.  In  1823  he  entered  Prince
ton  theological  seminary,  where  he  remained  be
tween  one  and  two  years.  He  was  licensed  to
preach  in  1828,  but  he  abandoned  the  pulpit,  stud
ied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1835,  prac
tising  until  1849.  He  was  again  licensed  to  preach
in  1851,  and  was  pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church  in
Indianapolis  in  1851-'7,  and  then  of  one  in  Mays-
ville,  Ky.,  until  his  death  by  drowning.  During  his
career  at  the  bar  he  frequently  contributed  to  the
press,  and  wrote  "Sketches  of  Western  Adventures  "
(Philadelphia.  1832).  See  '•  Additional  Sketches  of
Adventure.  Compiled  by  the  Publishers,  and  a  Bi
ography  of  McClung,  by  Henry  Waller  "  (Coving-
ton,  Ky.,  1872). — His  brother,  Alexander  K.,  law
yer,  b.  in  Mason  county,  Ky.,  about  1812 ;  d.  in
Jackson,  Miss..  23  March,  1855,  enlisted  in  the
navy  as  midshipman,  1  April.  1828,  but  resigned.  29
Aug.,  1829.  He  then  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  practised  in  Mississippi.  He  subse
quently  served  as  a  volunteer  in  the  army  during
the  Mexican  war,  attaining  the  rank  of  lieutenant-
colonel,  and  being  dangerously  wounded  at  Monte
rey.  He  was  appointed  charge  d'affaires  in  Bolivia
by  President  Taylor,  but  resigned  about  two  years
before  his  death.  Col.  McClung  left  behind  him  a
brilliant  reputation  as  an  orator,  but  none  of  his
addresses  were  published  save  a  eulogy  on  Henry
Clay,  delivered  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  in  1852.

McCLURE,  Alexander  Kelly,  journalist,  b.
in  Sherman's  Valley,  Perry  co..  Pa,,  9  Jan.,  1828.
In  the  earlier  years  of  his  life  he  divided  his  time
between  his  father's  farm  and  the  village  school,
and  at  the  age  of  fourteen  he  was  apprenticed  to
the  tanner's  trade.  In  1846,  on  the  urgent  advice
of  his  friend,  the  editor  of  the  "  Perry  Freeman,"
to  whose  paper  he  had  contributed,  he  began  the
publication  of  a  Whig  journal,  the  "  Sentinel,"  at
Mifflin,  Pa.  At  the  close  of  the  first  year  he  set
up  the  type,  and  did  the  press-work,  besides  editing
the  paper,  with  the  aid  of  a  single  apprentice.  He


sold  the  "  Sentinel  "  in  1850.  purchased  an  interest
in  the  "  Chambersburg  Repository,"  became  its
editor,  and  made  it  one  of  the  most  noted  anti-
slavery  journals  in  the  state.  In  1853  he  was  the
Whig  candidate  for  auditor-general,  being  the
youngest  man  ever  nominated  for  a  state  office  in
Pennsylvania.  In  1855  he  was  a  member  of  the
|  convention  that  met  at  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and  organ-
i  ized  the  Republican  party,  and  in  the  following
'  year  was  a  delegate  to  the  National  convention  that
I  nominated  Fremont  for  the  presidency.  In  1856
he  sold  the  "  Repository,"  quitted  journalism,  arid
shortly  thereafter  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  In
1857-'8  he  was  chosen  to  the  legislature,  and  in
1859  to  the  senate  of  Pennsylvania,  over  a  Demo
cratic  opponent  from  a  strong  Democratic  district.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Republican  con
ventions  of  1860  and  1864.  and  in  the  former  played
a  conspicuous  part  in  inducing  the  delegation  from
his  state  to  disregard  their  instructions  for  Simon
Cameron  and  vote  for  Abraham  Lincoln.  He  was
chosen  chairman  of  the  Republican  state  committee,
and  organized  and  led  his  party  in  the  canvass  of
that  year.  In  1862  he  repurchased  the  "  Cham
bersburg  Repository."  but  in  the  burning  of  Cham
bersburg,  in  1864.  almost  his  entire  property  was
destroyed.  In  1868  he  settled  in  Philadelphia,
where  he  resumed  the  practice  of  the  law.  In  1872
he  was  chairman  of  the  Pennsylvania  delegation
to  the  National  convention  that  nominated  Horace
Greeley  for  the  presidency,  was  chosen  chairman
of  the  state  committee  that  supported  his  election,
and  was  elected  as  an  Independent  Republican  to
the  state  senate.  In  the  following  year  he  was  an
independent  candidate  for  the  mayoralty  of  Phila
delphia,  and  came  within  nine  hundred  votes  of
being  elected.  During  this  year,  with  Frank  Mc-
Laughlin,  he  established  the  "  Times,"  a  daily
newspaper,  and  since  its  foundation  he  has  been
its  editor-in-chief.  He  has  opposed  machine  power
in  party  management  and  official  incompetency
and  dishonesty  in  Philadelphia.

McCLURE,  Alexander  Wilson,  clergyman,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  8  May,  1808 ;  d.  in  Canonsburg,
Pa.,  20  Sept..  1865.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst
in  1827,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in
1830.  and  after  preaching  at  Maiden,  Mass.,'two
years,  he  was  ordained  there  in  1832.  He  subse
quently  was  stationed  at  St.  Augustine,  Fla.,  where
he  labored  successfully  among  the  soldiers  that
were  on  duty  there.  In  1846  he  returned  to  Bos
ton,  and  soon  after  began  the  publication  of  the
'•Christian  Observatory,"  which  he  edited  more
than  three  years.  He  also  assisted  Dr.  Parsons
Cooke  in  conducting  the  "  Puritan  Recorder,"  In
1855  he  became  secretary  of  the  American  and  for
eign  Christian  union,  and  labored  for  some  time
abroad.  In  1859  he  was  disabled  by  illness.  Dr.
McClure  was  a  prolific  writer  for  the  religious
press,  and  published,  among  other  works,  a  tract
called  the  "  Life-Boat,"  which  had  a  wide  circula
tion  ;  another  entitled  "  Four  Lectures  on  Ultra
Universalism  "  ;  "  A  Series  of  Letters  upon  the  Bible
in  the  Public  Schools."  written  in  controversy  with
a  Roman  Catholic  priest  in  Jersey  City  ;  two  vol
umes  of  the  '•  Lives  of  the  Chief  Fathers  of  New
England,"  in  the  series  published  by  the  Massa
chusetts  Sunday-school  society  :  and  "  Translators
j  Reviewed,"  giving  a  biographical  sketch  of  each
i  translator  concerned  in  King  James's  version  (New
I  York.  1853).  This  has  been  adopted  by  the  board
;  of  publication  of  the  Reformed  Dutch  church.

McCLURE,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newport,

R,  I.,  18  Nov.,  1748;  d.  in  East.  Windsor,  Conn.,

,  25  June,  1820. He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1769,


90


McCLURE


McCLURG


and,  after  some  time  spent  in  teaching,  was  or
dained  at  Dartmouth  college,  20  May,  1772.  and
spent  sixteen  months  as  a  missionary  to  the  Dela
ware  Indians,  near  Pittsbnrg,  Pa.  On  13  Nov.,
1776,  he  was  installed  pastor  of  the  Congregational
church  at  North  Hampton,  N.  II.,  where  he  re
mained  until  August,  1785,  when  he  was  dismissed
at  his  own  request.  The  following  year  he  was
called  to  the  church  at  East  Windsor,  Conn.,  and
continued  in  that  relation  until  his  death,  a  period
of  thirty-four  years.  He  was  trustee  of  Dartmouth
college  from  1777  till  1800,  and  received  the  de
gree  of  I).  D.  from  the  same  institution  in  1803.
Dr.  McClure  published,  in  addition  to  eleven  occa
sional  discourses,  an  "  Oration  at  the  Opening  of
Exeter  Phillips  Academy"  (1783);  "Sermons  on
the  Moral  Law  "  ( 1 795  :  "new  ed.  in  1818);  "Ora
tion  on  the  Death  of  Gen.  Washington  "  (1800) ;
and,  in  connection  with  Rev.  Dr.  Parish,  "Me
moirs  of  the  Rev.  Eleazer  Wheelock,  D.  D."  (1810).

McCLURE,  George,  soldier,  b.  near  London
derry,  Ireland,  in  1771 ;  d.  in  Elgin,  111.,  16  Aug.,
1851.  He  emigrated  to  Baltimore  in  1791,  and
subsequently  settled  in  Bath,  N.  Y.,  where  he
studied  law,  and  was  successively  a  member  of  the
legislature.  sherifT,  surrogate,  and  judge  of  Steuben
county.  lie  volunteered  in  the  war  of  1812.  and
in  1813  commanded  a  brigade  on  the  Buffalo  fron
tier,  being  brought  prominently  into  notice  by  or
dering  the  burning  of  Newark  (afterward  Niaga
ra),  Canada  West.  When  he  had  determined  early
in  December  to  abandon  Fort,  George,  after  endeav
oring  to  destroy  the  former  work  by  blowing  it
up  while  its  garrison  was  crossing  the  river  to
Fort  Niagara,  lie  set  fire  to  the  neighboring  village
of  Newark.  The  weather  was  intensely  cold,  and
the  inhabitants,  who  had  only  been  given  a  few
hours'  notice,  including  a  large  number  of  women
and  children,  were  driven  from  their  homes  into
the  deep  snow,  with  but  little  food  and  clothing.
Only  one  dwelling  out  of  one  hundred  and  fifty
was  left  standing.  When  the  British  took  posses
sion  of  the  abandoned  fortification  they  decided  on
swift  retaliation,  and  soon  six  villages,  and  many
isolated  houses  on  the  American  bank  of  the  Niaga
ra  river,  together  with  several  vessels,  were  set  on
lire,  and  scores  of  innocent  persons  lost  their  lives.

McCLURE,  John,  patriot,  b.  in  Chester  district,
S.  C.,  about  1730;  d.  in  Charlotte,  N.  C.,  18  Aug.,
1780.  After  the  fall  of  Charleston,  S.  C.,  12  May,
1780,  the  South  Carolina  patriots  were  greatly  dis
heartened,  and  in  the  following  month  Sir  Henry
Clinton  wrote  to  the  British  ministry :  "  I  may
venture  to  assert  that  there  are  few  men  in  South
Carolina  who  are  not  either  our  prisoners,  or  in
arms  with  us."  Many  patriots  had  found  refuge
in  North  Carolina,  while  others  had  gone  up  to
the  mountains  and  were  gathering  their  country
men  into  bands  to  avenge  the  insults  of  their
oppressors.  Early  in  July,  Gen.  Thomas  Sumter
returned  to  South  Carolina  with  a  few  followers.
He  found  that  the  Whigs,  led  by  John  McClure,
Richard  Winn,  and  others,  had  already  attacked
the  enemy  at  different  points.  To  crush  these
patriots,  and  bind  the  loyalists  together,  the  Brit
ish  authorities  sent  out  marauding  parties,  chiefly
Tories.  At  Mcbley's  meeting-house,  on  the  banks
of  Little  river.  Fail-field  district,  Capt.  McClure
and  Capt.  Bratton  fell  upon  a  party  of  loyalists
and  dispersed  them.  This  disaster,  following  closely
upon  that  at  Beckamville,  where  McClure,  at  the
head  of  thirty-three  men,  had  routed  a  party  of
Tories  and  British  soldiers  the  previous  month,
caused  the  commander  at  Rocky  Mount,  Chester
co.,  to  send  out  Capt.  Christian  Huch  with  400


cavalry  and  a  body  of  well -mounted  loyalists.
After  Huch  had  committed  various  depredations,
he  encamped  in  a  lane  on  the  plantation  of  James
Williamson,  now  Brattonville,  where  he  passed  the
night  of  11  July.  Early  on  the  following  morn
ing  they  were  surprised  by  McClure  and  Bratton,
whose  forces,  only  133  in  number,  entered  each
end  of  the  lane.  After  a  fierce  struggle,  lasting  an
hour,  Huch  and  Col.  Ferguson,  of  the" Tory  militia,
were  killed  and  the  forces  under  them  were  dis
persed,  ('apt.  McClure  leading  the  pursuit.  On  6
Aug.  that  officer  was  present  at  the  battle  of
Hanging  Rock,  and  fell  at  the  first  fire  pierced  by
two  bullets.  When  his  friends  came  to  his  aid  he
urged  them  to  leave  him  and  pursue  the  enemy.
After  the  battle  he  was  taken  to  Waxhaw  church,
and  thence  to  Charlotte,  N.  C.,  where  he  died  in
Liberty  hall.  Gen.  William  R.  Davie  said  of  him  :
"Of  the  many  brave  men  with  whom  it  was  my
fortune  to  become  acquainted  in  the  army,  John
McClure  was  one  of  the  bravest."

McCLURE,  Sir  Robert  John  Le  Mesnrier,
British  arctic  explorer,  b.  in  Wexford,  Ireland,  28
Jan.,  1807;  d.  in  London,  England,  14  Oct.,  1873.
He  was  the  posthumous  child  of  a  British  officer
that  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Aboukir.  He  was
adopted  by  Gen.  Le  Mesurier,  and  through  his  in
fluence  educated  at  Eton  and  Sandhurst,  but,  being
averse  to  a  military  career,  obtained  an  appoint
ment  as  midshipman  in  the  navy.  After  serving
for  ten  years  on  various  stations,  he  accompanied
Sir  George  Bach  to  the  arctic  regions  as  mate  of
the  "  Terror,"  and  for  his  services  was  rewarded
with  a  lieutenancy.  In  1848  he  joined  the  Frank
lin  search  expedition  of  Sir  John  Ross,  and  was
promoted  commander.  In  1850  he  began  the  voy
age  which  secured  him  lasting  fame  as  the  dis
coverer  of  the  Northwest  passage.  He  left  Plym
outh  in  command  of  the  "  Investigator,"  which  was
provisioned  for  three  years  and  had  a  crew  of  sixty-
six  men,  under  orders  to  pass  through  Bering
straits,  and  thence,  if  practicable,  to  proceed  to  Mel
ville  island,  an  achievement  which  had  not  then
been  accomplished  by  any  vessel.  Capt.  McClure
entered  a  strait,  which  he  named  the  Prince  of
Wales  strait,  and,  after  his  ship  was  frozen  fast,
he  continued  the  exploration  by  sledges  until  he
reached  Melville,  or  Barrow's,  straits  in  the  winter
of  1850-'!.  This  was  called  the  first  discovery  of
the  Northwest  passage.  The  next  season  he  dis
covered  a  second  route  on  the  north  side  of  Baring
island.  In  1853  he  was  extricated  from  a  perilous
situation  by  Capt.  Kellett.  who  arrived  at  Melville
island  from  the  east.  McClure  remained  in  the  arc
tic  regions  until  1854,  and  his  whole  party  reached
England  on  28  September  of  that  year.  McClure
received  the  £5,000  that  had  been  offered  for  the
discovery  of  the  Northwest  passage,  and  a  similar
sum  was  distributed  among  his  officers  and  crew.
He  was  also  knighted  and  subsequently  made  vice-
admiral.  From  his  journals  Capt.  Sherard  Osborne
published  "  The  Discovery  of  the  Northwest  Pas
sage"  (London,  1856).

McCLURO,  Alexander  Caldwell,  publisher,
b.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  about  1835.  lie  was  gradu
ated  at  Miami  university,  Oxford,  Ohio,  in  1853.
He  left  the  house  of  S.  C.  Griggs  and  Co.,  book
sellers  of  Chicago,  to  enter  the  National  army  as  a
private,  15  Aug.,  1862,  and  was  subsequently  com
missioned  captain  in  the  88th  Illinois  volunteers.
He  was  promoted  to  lieutenant-colonel  in  the
adjutant-general's  department,  and  chief  of  staff
of  the  14th  army  corps,  and  brevetted  colonel  and
brigadier-general.  He  served  to  the  end  of  the
war  in  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  and  accoin-


McCLURG


McCOOK


91


panied  Gen.  Sherman  in  his  march  to  the  sea.
After  the  war  he  returned  to  the  book  business
in  Chicago,  becoming  a  partner  in  the  firm  of  Jan-
sen.  McClurg  and  Co..  and  the  house  is  now  widely
known  under  the  name  of  A.  C.  McClurg  and  Co.,
booksellers  and  publishers.  Gen.  McClurg  has  been
a  frequent  contributor  to  periodical  literature.

McCLURG,  James,  physician,  b.  in  Hampton.
Va.,  in  1747:  d.  in  Richmond.  Va..  9  July.  1825.
lie  was  a  fellow-student  with  Thomas  Jefferson  at
William  and  Mary  college,  at  which  institution  he
was  graduated  in  1762.  He  took  his  degree  in
medicine  at  Edinburgh  in  1770.  and  subsequently
pursued  his  studies  in  London  and  Paris.  On  re
turning  to  this  country  in  1773  he  settled  in  Will-
iamsburg,  Va.,  where  he  soon  took  high  rank  as  a  j
physician,  but  in  1783  he  removed  to  Richmond.
He  sat  for  many  years  in  the  Virginia  council,  and
was  a  member  of  the  convention  that  framed  the
constitution  of  the  United  States.  During  his  resi
dence  abroad  he  published  an  "  Essay  on  the  Human
Bile"  (London),  which  was  translated  into  several
languages.  He  is  also  the  author  of  a  paper  on
"Reasoning  in  Medicine"  in  the  Philadelphia
"  Journal  of  the  Medical  Physical  Sciences."  lie
had  considerable  skill  as  a  writer  of  vers  de  societe,
and  his  "Belles  of  Williamsburg"  (1777).  a  few
stanzas  of  which  were  written  by  Judge  St.  George
Tucker,  is  published  in  John  Esten  Cooke's  "  Vir
ginia  Comedians"  (Xew  York.  1854).

McCLURG,  Joseph  Washington,  legislator,
b.  in  St.  Louis  county,  Mo.,  22  Feb.,  1818.  He  was
educated  at  Oxford  college,  Ohio,  and  taught  in
Louisiana  and  Mississippi  in  1835-'6.  He  then
went  to  Texas,  where  he  studied  law.  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  made  clerk  of  the  circuit  court  in
1840.  In  1844  he  returned  to  Missouri  and  en
gaged  in  mercantile  pursuits.  In  18G1  he  suffered
from  Confederate  depredations  on  his  property,
became  colonel  of  the  Osage  regiment,  and  subse
quently  of  a  regiment  of  National  cavalry.  Jle
was  a  member  of  the  state  conventions  of  Missouri
in  1861-'2-'3.  and  was  elected  and  re-elected  to
congress  while  residing  in  Linn  Creek.  Camden  co.,
first  as  an  Emancipation  and  afterward  as  a  Re
publican  candidate,  serving  from  7  Dec..  1863.  till
18(58.  when  he  resigned.  In  the  latter  year  he  was
elected  governor  and  served  the  full  term.

MacC'OLL.  Evan,  Canadian  poet.  b.  in  Kenmore.
Argyleshire,  Scotland,  21  Sept.,  1808.  He  received
a  good  education,  and  in  1837  became  a  contributor
to  the  "Gaelic  Magazine"  published  in  Glasgow.
In  1831  Mac-Coil's  family  emigrated  to  Canada,  but
he  remained  behind,  and  in  1837  was  appointed  a
clerk  in  the  Liverpool  custom-house.  In  1850  he
removed  to  Canada,  and  soon  afterward  obtained
a  situation  in  the  Kingston  custom-house,  where
he  remained  till  he  was  retired  in  1880.  During
his  residence  in  Canada  he  has  written  numerous
poems,  chiefly  of  a  lyrical  character,  the  most  noted
of  which  is  "  My  Rowan  Tree."  He  has  been  for
many  years  the  bard  of  the  St  Andrew's  society  of
Kingston.  He  has  published  in  book-form  •'  Clar-
ssich  Xan  Beann,  or  Poems  and  Songs  in  Gaelic  "
(Glasgow,  1837:  new  edition.  1880),  and  "The
Mountain  Minstrel,  or  Poems  and  Songs  in  Eng
lish  " ;  third  Canadian  edition  of  his  works  (Toron
to,  1887).  See  Wilson's  "  Poets  and  Poetry  of  Scot
land"  (Xew  York,  1870).— His  daughter,  Mary
Jemima,  b.  in  Liverpool,  England.  7  May.  1847.
was  educated  in  Kingston.  Ont..  taught  for  several
years,  and  in  1881  married  Prof.  Otto  Henry
Schulte.  of  Hasbrouck  institute.  Jersey  City,  X.  J.
She  is  the  author  of  "  Bide  a  Wee,  and  other
Poems  "  (Buffalo,  1879 ;  4th  ed.,  Toronto).


Mcf'OLLESTRE.  Sullivan  Holman.  clergy
man,  b.  in  Marlborough.  X.  II..  18  Dec.,  1826.  He
was  graduated  at  Xorwich.  Vt.,  university  in  1851,
and  studied  theology  at  Cambridge  divinity-school.
He  began  preaching  to  a  Universalist  congregation
at  Swanzey.  X.  H.,  in  1853.  and  subsequently  held
a  pastorate  at  Westmoreland.  He  was  then  chosen
president  of  the  State  board  of  commissioners,  and
after  teaching  and  preaching  in  Westbrook  (now
Deering),  Me.,  he  obtained  in  1864,  from  the  Maine
legislature,  a  charter  for  a  female  college.  In
1872-'0he  was  president  of  Buchtel  college,  Akron,
Ohio,  and  he  has  since  established  churches  at  Bel
lows  Falls,  Vt.,  and  Dover.  X.  H.,  from  which  last
pastorate  he  resigned  in  1885.  He  received  the  de
gree  of  D.  D.  from  St.  Lawrence  university  in  1874.
Besides  being  a  frequent  contributor  to  religious
and  educational  journals,  he  has  published  "After-
Thoughts  of  Foreign  Travel "  (Boston,  1880).

McCOXAUGHY,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Men-
alien.  York  co.  (now  Adams),  Pa!,  29  Sept..  1775;
d.  in  Washington,  Pa.,  29  Jan.,  1852.  He  was
graduated  at  Dickinson  in  1795.  and  after  studying
theology  was  licensed  to  preach  as  a  Presbyterian
in  1797.  In  1800  he  accepted  a  call  from  the  United
Christians  of  Upper  Marsh  creek  and  Conewago.  re
maining  there  until  1832.  From  1832  till  1849  he
was  president  of  Washington  college.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Jefferson  in  1833.  and
that  of  LL.  D.  from  Washington  in  1849.  Dr.
McConaughy  published  sermons  and  addresses,
tracts  on  the  "  Doctrine  of  the  Trinity  "  and  on
"Infant  Baptism,"  "A  Brief  Summary  and  Out
line  of  Moral  Science"  (1838).  and  "Discourses,
chiefly  Biographical,  of  Persons  Eminent  in  Sacred
History"  (Washington.  Pa..  1850).

McCOXXEL,  John  Lndlmn,  author,  b.  in  Jack
sonville,  111.,  11  Nov..  1826;  d.  there.  17  Jan.,  1862.
His  father,  Murray  McConnel.  fought  in  the  Black
Hawk  war,  was  in  both  branches  of  the  legislature,
and  in  1855-'9  was
fifth  auditor  of  the
treasury.  The  son
studied  law  under
his  father,  and  was
graduated  at  the
law-school  of  Tran
sylvania  university.
Lexington,  Ky.  In
1846  he  enlisted  as
a  private  for  the
Mexican  war,  be
came  1st  lieutenant
of  his  company,  and
was  promoted  to
captain  after  the
battle  of  Buena  Vis
ta,  where  he  was
twice  wounded.  Af
ter  the  war  he  re
turned  to  Jackson
ville  and  practised
law  there  till  his  death,  which  was  caused  by  an
illness  that  he  had  contracted  in  Mexico.  His
books,  which  illustrate  western  life  and  character,
include  "  Talbot  and  Vernon  "  (X'ew  York.  1850) :
"Grahame.  or  Youth  and  Manhood"  (1850):  "The
Glenns"  (1851):  and  "Western  Characters,  or
Types  of  Border  Life"  (Boston.  1853).  At  the
time  of  his  death  he  was  engaged  in  a  work  to  be
entitled  "  History  of  Early  Explorations  in  Amer
ica."  with  special  reference  to  the  labors  of  the
early  Roman  Catholic  missionaries.

McCOOK.  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in  Canonsburg,
Pa.,  20  June.  1798;  d.  near  Buffington's  island,


McCOOK


McCOOK


Ohio,  21  July,  18G3.  He  was  the  son  of  George
Mr-Cook,  an  Irishman  of  Scotch  descent,  who  was
concerned  in  movements  of  the  "  United  Irish-
men"  about  1780.  and  on  their  failure  fled  to  the
United  States.  Daniel  was  educated  at  Jefferson
college  and  removed  to  New  Lisbon,  and  then  to
Carrollton,  Ohio.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war,  although  sixty-three  years  of  age,  he  offered
his  services  to  the  government,  was  commissioned
major,  and  fell  mortally  wounded  while  leading  an
advance  party  to  oppose  and  intercept  Gen.  John
Morgan  in  his  raid.  His  wife.  MARTHA  LATIMKR,
b.  in  Washington,  Pa.,  8  March,  1802 :  d.  in  New
Lisbon,  Ohio,  10  Nov.,  1879,  was  married  in  1818.
Her  courage  and  intelligence  greatly  influenced
their  ten  sons  who  were  in  the  National  army. —
Daniel's  brother,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Canons-
burg,  Pa.,  21  Feb.,  1806:  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,
11  Oct.,  1865,  was  educated  at  Jefferson  college
and  graduated  in  the  Medical  school  of  Cincinnati.
He  practised  medicine  for  many  years  in  New  Lis
bon,  and  afterward  in  Steubenville,  Ohio,  and  dur
ing  the  civil  war  served  for  a  time  as  a  volunteer
surgeon.  He  died  at  the  headquarters  of  his  son,
Gen.  Ansou  G.  McCook,  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  dur
ing  a  visit.  His  wife,  CATHERINE  JULIA  SHELDON,
b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  21  May,  1807;  d.  in  Steu
benville,  Ohio,  11  March,  1865,  was  noted  for  her
gift  of  song.  His  five  sons  enlisted  in  the  Na
tional  army.  These  two  families  have  been  called
the  "fighting  McCooks,"  and  are  familiarly  dis
tinguished  as  the  "  tribe  of  Dan  "  and  the  "  tribe
of  John." — Daniel's  son,  George  >Vythe,  law
yer,  b.  in  Canonsburg,  Pa.,  21  Nov.,  1821 ;  d.  in
Steubenville.  Ohio,  28  Dec.,  1877,  was  graduated
at  Ohio  university,  studied  law  with  Edwin  M.
Stanton,  and  afterward  became  his  partner.  He
served  as  an  officer  in  the  3d  Ohio  regiment
throughout  the  Mexican  war,  and  returned  as  its
commander.  He  was  one  of  the  first  four  briga
dier-generals  selected  by  the  governor  of  Ohio  to
command  the  troops  from  that  state  in  the  civil
war,  but,  owing  to  impaired  health  from  his  Mexi
can  service,  was  prevented  from  accepting  that
post.  He  organized  and  comrnaaded  for  short  pe
riods  several  Ohio  regiments.  In  1871  he  was  the
Democratic  candidate  for  governor  of  the  state.
He  was  at  one  time  attorney-general  of  the  state
and  edited  the  first  volume  of  "Ohio  State  Re
ports." — Another  son,  Robert  Lalimer,  soldier,
b.  in  New  Lisbon,  Ohio,  28  Dec.,  1827;  d.  near  Sa
lem,  Ala.,  6  Aug.,  1862,  studied  law  and  removed
to  Cincinnati,  where  he  secured  a  large  practice.
He  organized  the  9th  Ohio  regiment  in  1861,  be
came  its  colonel,  and  commanded  a  brigade  in  the
West  Virginia  campaign  tinder  McClellan.  His
brigade  was  then  transferred  to  the  Army  of  the
Ohio,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  battle' of  Mill
Spring,  Ky.,  19  Jan.,  1862,  where  he  was  severely
wounded.  The  Confederate  forces  were  driven
from  their  lines  by  a  bayonet  charge  of  McCook's
brigade,  and  so  closely  pursued  that  their  organi
zation  was  destroyed.  He  was  promoted  briga
dier-general  of  volunteers,  21  March,  1862.  rejoined
his  command  before  his  wound  had  healed,  and
was  shot  by  Confederate  guerillas  while  lying  help
less  in  an  ambulance. — Another  son,  Alexander
McDowell,  soldier,  b.  in  Columbiana  county.  Ohio,
22  April.  1831,  was  graduated  at  the  U.S.  military
academy  in  1852,  and  assigned  to  the  3d  infantry.
After  a  brief  service  in  garrison  he  was  engaged
against  the  Apaches  in  New  Mexico  until  1857,
and  from  12  Feb.,  1858.  till  24  April,  1861,  was  as
sistant  instructor  of  infantry  tactics  at  West  Point.
On  6  Dec.,  1858,  he  became  1st  lieutenant.  At  the


beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  appointed  colo
nel  of  the  1st  Ohio  regiment,  and  in  April,  1861,
he  was  mustering  and  disbursing  officer  at  Colum
bus,  Ohio.  lie  commanded  his  regiment  at  the
first  battle  of  Hull
Kun.  and  for  his
services  there  was
brevetted  major.
lie  was  appointed
brigadier-general
of  volunteers  on  3
Sept.,  1861,  and
commanded  a  di
vision  of  the  Army
of  the  Ohio  in
the  Tennessee  and
Mississippi  cam
paign.  He  was
brevetted  lieuten
ant-colonel  at  the
capture  of  Nash
ville,  3  March,
1862,  and  colonel

on  7  April,  1862,  for  services  at  Shiloh.  On  17
July,  1862,  he  became  major-general  of  volunteers
and  was  placed  in  command  of  the  20th  army
corns,  with  which  he  served  during  the  campaigns
of  Perryville.  Stone  River,  Tullahoma,  and  Chicka-
mauga.  He  engaged  in  the  defence  of  Washing
ton  on  11  and  12  July,  1864,  was  in  the  middle
military  division  from  November,  1864,  till  Febru
ary,  1865,  and  in  command  of  eastern  Arkansas  from
February  till  May  of  the  latter  year.  He  received
the  brevet  of  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,  on  13
March,  1865,  for  gallant  and  meritorious  services
at  Perrysville,  Ky.,  and  also  on  the  same  date  that
of  major-general,  U.  S.  army,  for  services  in  the
fieid  during  the  war.  He  investigated  Indian  af
fairs  with  a  joint  committee  of  congress  from  May
till  October,  1865,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war  was
made  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  26th  infantry.  On
15  Dec.,  1880,  he  became  colonel  of  the  6th  infant
ry,  and  he  is  now  (1888)  stationed  at  Fort  Leav-
enworth,  Kan.,  as  commandant  of  the  school  of
instruction  for  infantry  and  cavalry. — Another
son,  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in  Carrollton,  Ohio,  22
July,  1834;  d.  near  Kenesaw  Mountain,  Ga.,  21
July,  1864,  was  graduated  at  Alabama  university,
Florence,  Ala.,  in  1858,  studied  law  in  Steuben
ville,  Ohio,  and,  after  admission  to  the  bar.  re
moved  to  Leavenworth,  Kan.,  where  he  formed  a
partnership  with  William  T.  Sherman  and  Thomas
Ewing.  When  the  civil  war  began  the  office  was
closed,  and  all  of  the  partners  soon  became  gen
eral  officers.  Mr.  McCook  was  captain  of  a  local
company,  with  which  he  volunteered,  and  as  part
of  the  1st  Kansas  regiment  served  under  Gen.
Nathaniel  Lyon  at  Wilson's  Creek.  Subsequently
he  was  chief  of  staff  of  the  1st  division  of  the
Army  of  the  Ohio  in  the  Shiloh  campaign,  and
became  colonel  of  the  52d  Ohio  infantry  in  the
summer  of  1862.  He  was  at  once  assigned  to.  the
command  of  a  brigade  under  Gen.  William  T.
Sherman,  and  continued  to  serve  with  the  Army
of  the  Cumberland.  He  was  selected  by  Gen.
Sherman  to  lead  the  assault  that  was  made  on
Kenesaw  Mountain  in  July,  1864,  and  took  his  bri
gade  directly  up  to  the  Confederate  works.  Just
before  the  assault  he  calmly  recited  to  his  men  the
stanza  from  Macaulay's  poem  of  "  Horatius"  begin
ning  "  Then  how  may  man  die  better  than  facing
fearful  odds?"  He  had  reached  the  top  of  the
enemy's  works,  and  was  encouraging  his  men  to
follow  him,  when  he  was  fatally  wounded.  For  the
courage  that  he  displayed  in  this  assault  he  was


McCOOK


93


promoted  to  the  full  rank  of  brigadier-general,  to
date  from  16  July,  1864,  but  survived  only  a  few
days. — Another  son,  Edwin  Stanton,  soldier,  b.
in  Carrol Iton,  Ohio,  26  March,  1837;  d.  in  Yank-
ton,  Dak.,  11  Sept..  1873.  was  educated  at  the  U.S.
naval  academy,  but  when  the  civil  war  began
raised  a  company  for  the  31st  Illinois  regiment,  of
which  his  friend  John  A.  Logan  was  colonel.  He
served  with  this  regiment  at  Fort  Henry  and  Fort
Donelson,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.  In
his  promotion  he  succeeded  Gen.  Logan  and  fol
lowed  him  in  the  command  of  his  regiment,  bri
gade,  and  division,  throughout  the  Vicksburg  and
other  campaigns  under  Grant,  and  in  the  Chatta
nooga  and  Atlanta  campaigns,  and  the  march  to
the  sea  under  Sherman.  He  was  brevetted  briga
dier-general  and  major-general  of  volunteers  on
13  March,  1865,  for  his  services  in  these  campaigns.
Gen.  McCook  was  three  times  severely  wounded,
but  survived  the  war.  While  acting  governor  of
Dakota  and  presiding  over  a  public  meeting,  he
was  shot  and  killed  by  a  man  in  the  audience. —
Another  son,  Charles  Morris,  b.  in  Carrollton,
Ohio,  13  Nov.,  1843  ;  d.  in  Virginia,  21  July,  1861,
was  a  member  of  the  freshman  class  at  Kenyon
college  when  the  war  began,  and  volunteered  as  a
private  in  the  2d  Ohio  regiment.  He  was  killed
at  the  battle  of  Bull  Run,  in  sight  of  his  father,
who  had  volunteered  as  a  nurse. — Another  son,
John  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Carrollton.  Ohio, 22  May,
1845,  was  also  a  student  at  Kenyon  when  the  war
began,  and  after  completing  his  freshman  year  en
listed  in  the  6th  Ohio  cavalry.  He  served  through
the  war,  attaining  the  rank  of  captain  and  aide-de-
camp  in  September,  1863.  He  was  brevetted  ma
jor  for  gallant  and  meritorious  services  in  action  j
at  Shady  Grove,  Va.,  where  he  was  dangerously
wounded,  and  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel  for
his  services  during  the  war.  Col.  McCook  is  now
(1887)  practising  law  in  New  York  city. — John's
son,  Edward  Moody,  soldier,  b.  in  Steubenville,
Ohio.  15  June,  1833,  received  a  common-school
education,  and  was  one  of  the  earliest  settlers  in
the  Pike's  Peak  region,  where  he  went  to  practise
law.  He  represented  that  district  in  the  legisla
ture  of  Kansas  before  the  division  of  the  terri
tories.  Mr.  McCook  was  temporarily  in  Washing
ton  just  before  the  civil  war,  and,  by  a  daring  feat
as  a  volunteer  secret  agent  for  the  government,
won  such  approbation  that  he  was  appointed  in
the  regular  army  as  2d  lieutenant  of  the  1st  cav
alry,  8  May,  1861.  He  became  1st  lieutenant,  17
July,  1862.  His  brevets  in  the  regular  army  were
1st  "lieutenant,  7  April,  1862,  for  Shiloh,  Tenn. ;
captain,  8  Oct.,  1862,  for  Perrvsville,  Ky. ;  major,
20  Sept.,  1863,  for  Chickamauga,  Ga. ;  lieutenant-
colonel,  27  Jan.,  1864,  for  service  during  the  cav
alry  operations  in  east  Tennessee ;  colonel,  13
March,  1865,  for  the  capture  of  Selma,  Ala.,  and
also  on  that  date  brigadier-general  for  gallant  and
meritorious  service  in  the  field.  He  also  was  com
missioned  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  27
April,  1864,  and  brevetted  major-general,  13  March.
1865.  Gen.  McCook's  most  difficult  and  danger
ous  service  was  in  penetrating  the  enemy's  lines  by
way  of  diversion  previous  to  Sherman's  march  to
the  sea.  lie  resigned  his  commission  in  1866  to  ac
cept  the  appointment  of  U.  S.  minister  to  the  Sand
wich  islands,  which  he  held  until  1869.  He  was
twice  appointed  governor  of  Colorado  territory  by
President  Grant. — Another  son  of  the  first  John,
Anson  George,  soldier,  b.  in  Steubenville,  Ohio,  10
Oct.,  1835.  received  a  common-school  education  at
New  Lisbon.  Ohio,  and  went  while  still  a  youth  to
California  in  an  overland  train.  He  remained  on


the  Pacific  coast  several  years,  returned,  and  stud
ied  law  at  Steubenville  in  the  office  of  Stanton  and
McCook,  and  had  just  been  admitted  to  the  bar  at
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  On  the  first  call
for  troops  he  entered  the  service  as  captain  in  the
2d  Ohio  infantry,  and  as  such  served  in  the  first
battle  of  Bull  Run.  At  the  reorganization  of  his
regiment  for  three  years,  he  was  made  major,  and  he
subsequently  became  its  lieutenant -colonel  and
colonel,  serving  in  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland
under  Buell.  Rosecrans.  and  Thomas.  He  was  also
with  Sherman  in  the  Atlanta  campaign,  command
ing  a  brigade  part  of  the  time,  especially  at  the
battle  of  Peach  Tree  Creek  near  Atlanta*  When
the  regiment  was  mustered  out  at  the  expiration
of  its  service  he  was  made  colonel  of  the  194th
Ohio,  ordered  to  the  valley  of  Virginia,  and  as
signed  to  command  a  brigade.  At  the  close  of  the
war  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volun
teers  for  gallant  and  meritorious  services.  From
1865  till  1873  he  resided  in  Steubenville,  Ohio,  as
U.  S.  assessor  of  internal  revenue,  and  then  re
moved  to  New  York  city.  Pie  was  elected  to  con
gress  from  Xew  York  as  a  Republican,  holding  his
seat  from  1877  till  1883,  and  serving  on  the  mili
tary  committee.  He  is  now  (1888)  secretary  of  the
U.  S.  senate.  —  Another  son  of  John,  Henry
Christopher,  clergyman,  b.  in  Xew  Lisbon,  Ohio,
3  July,  1837,  after  learning  the  printer's  trade,  and
teaching  for  several  years,  was  graduated  at  Jeffer
son  college,  Pa.,  in  1859.  He  studied  theology
privately  and  in  Western  theological  seminary  at
Alleghany,  Pa.,  and  after  serving  for  nine  months
as  1st  lieutenant  and  chaplain  in  the  army,  held
pastorates  at  Clinton,  111.,  and  St.  Louis,  Mo."  Dur
ing  this  period  he  was  active  as  a  leader  in  Sun
day-school  movements.  In  1869  he  became  pastor
of  the  Seventh  Presbyterian  church  of  Philadel
phia,  now  known  as  the  Tabernacle  Presbyterian
church.  Dr.  McCook  is  vice-president  of  the  Ameri
can  entomological  society,  and  of  the  Academy  of
natural  sciences  in  Philadelphia,  in  whose  proceed
ings  he  has  published  numerous  papers  upon  the
habits  and  industry  of  American  ants  and  spiders.
The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  La
fayette  in  1880.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Object  and
Outline  Teaching"  (St.  Louis,  1871);  "The  Last
Year  of  Christ's  Ministry"  (Philadelphia,  1871);
"  The  Last  Days  of  Jesus'"  (1872) ;  "  The  Tercente
nary  Book,"  edited  (1873);  "The  Mound-Making
Ants  of  the  Alleghanies  "  (1877) :  "  Historic  Eccle
siastical  Emblems  of  Pan-Presbyterianism  "  (1880) ;
"  The  Natural  History  of  the  Agricultural  Ant  of
Texas  "  (1880) ;  "  Honey  and  Occident  Ants  "  (1882) :
"Tenants  of  an  Old  "Farm"  (New  York.  1884):
"  The  Women  Friends  of  Jesus  "  (1884) ;  "  The  Gos
pel  in  Nature"  (Philadelphia,  1887):  and  "Amer
ican  Spiders  and  their  Spinning- Work  "  (1888). —
Another  son,  Roderick  Sheldon,  naval  officer,  b.
in  New  Lisbon,  Ohio,  10  March,  1839 ;  d.  in  Vine-
land.  N.  J.,  13  Feb.,  1886,  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1859.  He  was  appointed
lieutenant,  31  Aug.,  1861,  lieutenant-commander,
25  Dec.,  1865,  and  commander,  25  Sept.,  1873.
During  the  civil  war  he  took  part  in  various  en
gagements  on  the  James  river,  in  the  sounds  of
North  Carolina,  and  in  both  Fort  Fisher  fights,
and  commanded  a  battery  of  naval  howitzers  at
New  Berne.  14  March,  1862,  where  he  was  highly
commended  in  the  official  despatches.  In  this
conflict  he  received  the  surrender  of  a  Confederate
regiment  of  infantry,  probably  the  only  surrender
of  this  character  that  occurred  in  the  civil  war.
During  his  service  on  the  monitors  at  Fort  Fisher
he  seriously  injured  his  health.  His  last  service


94


McCORD


McCORMICK


was  in  light-house  duty  on  Ohio  river.  Failing  in
health,  he  was  retired  from  active  service,  23  Feb.,
1885. — Another  son,  John  James,  clergyman,  b.
in  New  Lisbon,  Ohio,  4  Feb.,  1843,  was  graduated
at  Trinity  college,  Hartford,  Conn.,  in  1803.  He
began  the  study  of  medicine,  but  abandoned  it
to  enter  the  Protestant  Episcopal  ministry.  He
served  during  a  short  campaign  in  West  Virginia
as  lieutenant  in  the  1st  Virginia  volunteers,  a  regi
ment  recruited  almost  exclusively  from  Ohio.  He
has  held  pastorates  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  and  East
Hartford,  Conn.,  and  since  1883  has  been  professor
of  modern  languages  in  Trinity  college.  He  was
editor  of  the  "Church  Weekly,"  is  a  frequent  con
tributor  to  periodicals,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Pat
and  the  Council"  (Xew  York,  1870).

McCORD,  David  James,  lawyer,  b.  in  Fort
JVlotte,  S.  C.,  in  January,  1797;  d.  in  Columbia,
S.  C.,  12  May,  1855.  He  was  graduated  at  South
Carolina  college  in  1810,  studied  law,  and  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1818.  From  1825  till  1827  he
was  state  reporter,  and  in  1825  he  was  made  in-
tendant,  or  mayor,  of  Columbia,  S.  C.  Between
1828  and  1830  he  travelled  in  Europe,  and  wit
nessed  the  revolution  in  Paris.  He  returned  to
Carolina  during  the  nullification  excitement,  en
tered  the  legislature,  and  was  active  as  an  advocate
of  extreme  state  rights.  For  many  years  Mr.  Mc-
Cord  was  chairman  of  the  important  committee  on
Federal  relations,  and  exerted  himself  efficiently
for  the  improvement  of  the  judiciary  system.  As
a  trustee  of  South  Carolina  college,  he  became  in
timate  with  Dr.  Thomas  Cooper,  of  whom  he  left
interesting  reminiscences.  In  1836  he  retired  from
the  bar,  became  president  of  the  state  bank  in  Co
lumbia,  and  aided  in  establishing  the  "South  Caro
lina  Law  Journal,"  which  was  not  long  continued.
In  183!)  he  was  appointed  compiler  and  editor  of
the  "  Statutes  at  Large  of  South  Carolina,"  a
work  which  had  been  begun  by  Dr.  Thomas  Cooper.
After  1840  he  devoted  himself  to  agriculture  as  a
cotton-planter,  and  contributed  many  papers  upon
political  economy  to  the  "Southern  Review  "and
to  "  De  Bow's  Review."  He  published  "Reports
of  Cases  determined  in  the  Constitutional  Conven
tion  of  South  Carolina"  (4  vols.,  1821-'8),  and
"  Chancery  Cases  in  the  Court  of  Appeals  of  South
Carolina  "'(2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1827-'9).— His  wife,
Louisa  Susannah,  poet.  b.  in  Columbia,  S.  C.,  3
Dec.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  27  Nov.,  1880,
was  the  daughter  of  Langdon  Cheves,  and  was
educated  in  Philadelphia.  In  1840  she  married
Mr.  McCord,  and  settled  on  "  Langsyne  "  planta
tion  at  Fort  Motte,  on  Congaree  river.  She  con
ducted  the  hospital  on  her  plantation,  attending
to  the  negroes,  and  once  set  a  fractured  arm.  Her
publications  are  "  Sophisms  of  the  Protective
Policy,"  a  translation  from  the  French  of  F.  Bas-
tiat  (New  York,  1848);  a  volume  of  poems  en
titled  "My  Dreams"  (Philadelphia,  1848);  "Caius
Gracchus,"  a  tragedy  (New  York,  1851) ;  and  nu
merous  contributions  to  current  literature.

McCORD,  George  Herbert,  artist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  1  Aug.,  1848.  He  was  a  pupil  of  Moses
Morse  in  180(5,  and  first  exhibited  in  the  Academy
of  design  in  1808.  In  1880  he  was  elected  an  asso"-
ciate,  and  in  1883  he  received  a  silver  medal  at  the
Massachusetts  charitable  mechanics'  institute  ex
hibition,  and  in  1884  a  bronze  medal  and  diploma
at  the  World's  fair,  New  Orleans.  During  1875-'8
he  travelled  in  New  England,  Canada,  Florida,  and
the  west,  where  he  made  many  sketches.  Mr.  Mc
Cord  is  a  member  of  the  American  water-color  so
ciety,  the  Salmagundi  club,  and  the  Artists'  fund
society,  of  which  last  he  was  secretary  during  1878-


'80.  His  principal  works  are  "  Sunnyside,  Home  of
Washington  Irving"  (1870);  "Cave  of  the  Winds,
Niagara,"  and  "Wintry  Night,  Fifth  Avenue"
(1878) ;  "  Near  Biddeford,  Maine,"  and  "  Napanock
Mills"  (1879):  "Hunting  Days"  (1880);  "Winter
Evening  on  the  Hudson"  (1881);  "Market  Place,
Montreal"  (1882);  "Vesper  Hour"  and  "Where
Swallows  Skim"  (1883);  "Memory  of  June,"  "Ice
Harvest,"  and  "Cross-Road  Bridge"  (1884);  "Old
Mill-Race  on  Whippany  River,  New  Jersev ''  (1885) ;
and  "Long  Pond,  New  Hampshire"  (1880).

McCORD,  John,  Canadian  pioneer,  b.  in  Ar
magh,  Ireland,  in  1711 ;  d.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  in
1793.  He  was  of  Scotch-Irish  descent,  and  among
the  first  settlers  in  New  France  after  the  conquest.
He  was  a  strong  advocate  of  the  rights  of  the  peo
ple,  and  was  one  of  the  leaders  in  the  movement
in  1773  to  claim  from  Great  Britain  the  fulfil
ment  of  its  promise,  made  ten  years  before,  to  es
tablish  in  the  province  of  Quebec  a  legislature
similar  to  those  in  the  other  British  colonies.  He
was  chairman  of  the  first  meeting  that  was  called
for  this  purpose  in  Quebec.  Mr.  McCord  opposed
the  measures  that  resulted  in  the  Quebec  act  of
1774,  which  gave  much  offence  to  the  British  colo
nies  in  America,  and  which  was  an  important  factor
in  the  causes  of  the  Revolution. — His  grandson,
John  Samuel,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  near  Dublin,  Ire
land.  18  June.  1801 ;  d.  in  Montreal,  28  June,  1805,
came  to  Canada  in  1800,  studied  law,  and  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1823.  He  engaged  in  practice
until  the  rebellion  in  1837,  when  he  entered  the
volunteer  service,  raised  a  cavalry  corps,  com
manded  a  brigade,  and  was  for  a  time  in  command
of  the  whole  military  force  of  Montreal.  After
the  restoration  of  peace  he  was  appointed  com
missioner  of  public  works,  and  also  a  commis
sioner  for  the  abolition  of  the  feudal  system  in
Canada.  On  the  reorganization  of  the  courts  by
the  special  council,  he  became  a  district  judge  and
judge  of  the  court  of  requests,  and  afterward
judge  of  the  circuit  court.  On  the  reorganization
of  the  judiciary  in  1857  he  was  appointed  a  judge
of  the  superior  court.  lie  was  an  ardent  student
of  natural  history  and  meteorology,  wrote  impor
tant  articles  on  the  latter  science,  and  was  one  of
the  founders  of  the  Montreal  natural  history  so
ciety  and  of  the  Art  association  of  that  city.  He
was  successively  vice-chancellor  and  chancellor  of
the  University  of  Bishop's  college,  Lennoxville,
and  aided  in  introducing  synods  into  the  Church
of  England  in  Canada.

McCORKLE,  Samuel  Eusebius,  clergyman,  b.
near  Harris's  Ferrv,  Lancaster  co..  Pa.,  23  Aug.,
1740;  d.  in  North"  Carolina,  21  Jan.,  1811.  In
1750  his  family  removed  to  Thyatira,  N.  C.,  and
settled  on  the  lands  of  the  Earl  of  Granville.
Samuel  assisted  his  father  in  clearing  and  culti
vating  the  farm,  and  was  afterward  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1772.  He  studied  theology,  was
licensed  by  the  presbytery  of  New  York  in  1774,
and.  after  spending  two  years  in  Virginia,  accepted
a  call  from  Thyatira,  N.  C.  About  1785  he  opened
a  classical  school,  which  he  called  Zion-Parnassus,
and  which  continued  for  ten  or  twelve  years.  In
1792  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Dickin
son.  Dr.  McCorkle  published  sermons,  "  Dis
courses  on  the  Terms  of  Christian  Communion,"
and  "  Discourses  on  the  great  First  Principles  of
Deism  and  Revelation  contrasted"  (1797).

McCORMICK, Cyrus Hall, inventor, b. in

Walnut  Grove,  Va.,  15  Feb.,  1809;  d.  in  Chicago,

j  111.,  13  May,  1884. He  was  educated  at  common

I  schools,  and  then  worked for  his father  on  the

|  farm  and  in workshops. At  the  age  of  twenty-


McCORMICK


McCOSH


95


/*»  L-j 7-Vs
C-./7.  //I


one  he  invented  two  new  and  valuable  ploughs,  but
his  chief  invention  was  in  1831,  when  with  his  own
hands  he  built  the  first  practical  reaping-machine
that  was  ever  made.  As  early  as  1816  his  father

had  attempted  to
construct  a  reaper,
but  it  was  a  total
failure.  The  son
worked  in  an  entire
ly  different  chan
nel.  He  patented
his  reaper  in  1834,
and  improvements
on  it  in  1845-'7  and
1858.  In  1847  he
removed  to  Chica
go,  where  he  built
large  works  for  the
construction  of  his
inventions.  Mr.  Mc
Cormick  was  award
ed  numerous  prizes
and  medals  for  his
reaper,  and  in  1878
received  for  the  third  time,  for  his  reaping  and
self-binding  machine,  a  grand  prize  of  the  French
exposition,  and  the  rank  of  officer  of  the  Legion  of
honor  was  conferred  upon  him.  He  was  also,  at
that  time,  elected  a  corresponding  member  of  the
F'rench  academy  of  sciences,  "as  having  done  more
for  the  cause  of  agriculture  than  any  other  living
man."  Reverdy  Johnson  said,  in  1859  :  "  The  Mc
Cormick  reaper  has  already  contributed  an  annual
income  to  the  whole  country  of  $55,000,000  at  least,
which  must  increase  through  all  time."  About
this  time  William  H.  Seward  said :  "  Owing  to  Mr.
MeCormick's  invention,  the  line  of  civilization
moves  westward  thirty  miles  each  year."  In  1859
Mr.  McCormick  gave  $100,000  to  found  the  Pres
byterian  seminary  of  the  northwest  in  Chicago,
and  he  also  endowed  a  professorship  in  Washing
ton  and  Lee  university,  Virginia.  See  "Memoir"
(printed  privately,  Boston,  1884).

McCORMICK,  Richard  Cunningham,  author,
b.  in  Xew  York  city,  23  May,  1832.  He  received  a
classical  education  and  became  a  broker  in  1850.
In  1858-'9  he  edited  the  "  Young  Men's  Magazine,"
and  in  1860  entered  the  editorial  department  of
the  Xew  York  "  Evening  Post."  He  was  a  war-
correspondent  of  several  Xew  York  newspapers,
and  became  chief  clerk  of  the  U.  S.  department  of
agriculture  in  1862.  He  was  secretary  of  Arizona
territory  in  1863-'6,  and  governor  in  1866-'9,  was
elected  a  delegate  to  congress  from  that  terri
tory  for  three  consecutive  terms,  and  served  in
l869-'75.  He  established  "The  Arizona  Miner"
in  1864,  and  "The  Arizona  Citizen"  in  1870,  and
was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Republican  conven
tions  of  1872,  1876,  and  1880.  He  was  a  commis
sioner  to  the  Centennial  exhibition  in  1871-'6,  as
sistant  secretary  of  the  treasury  in  1877-'8,  and
commissioner-general  to  the  Paris  exposition  in  the
latter  year,  was  made  a  commander  of  the  Legion
of  honor  by  the  French  government,  and  was  tend
ered  the  mission  to  Mexico  on  his  return,  which
he  declined.  He  published  a  "  Visit  to  the  Camp
before  Sebastopol "  (Xew  York,  1855) ;  "  St.  Paul's
to  St.  Sophia"  (1860);  and  "Arizona,  its  Re
sources"  (1865).  The  reports  of  the  U.  S.  commis
sioners  to  the  Paris  exposition  (5  vols.)  were  pre
pared  and  published  under  his  direction.

McCOSH,  James,  educator,  b.  in  Carskeoch,
Ayrshire,  Scotland,  1  April.  1811.  He  studied  at
the  University  of  Glasgow  from  1824  till  1829,  and
at  that  of  Edinburgh  from  1829  till  1834.  In  the


i  latter  institution  he  was  a  pupil  of  Dr.  Thomas
Chalmers.  Having  written  an  essay  on  the  Stoic
philosophy,  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  was  con
ferred  upon  him  on  motion  of  Sir  William  Hamil-

!  ton.  He  was  ordained  a  minister  of  the  Church  of
Scotland  at  Arbroath  in  1835,  but  removed  in  1839
to  Brechin,  where  he  ministered  to  1,400  commu
nicants.  In  1843  he  took  an  active  part  in  the
organization  of  the  Free  church  of  Scotland.
WThile  pastor  at  Brechin  he  published  a  work  enti
tled  "  Method  of  the  Divine  Government,  Physical
and  Moral "  (Edinburgh,  1850 ;  5th  ed.,  revised,
London,  1856),  in  which  he  endeavors  to  interro
gate  nature  by  the  inductive  method,  inquiring
what  is  the  method  of  the  divine  government,
primarily  in  the  physical  world,  and  secondarily  in
providence  as  related  to  the  character  of  man  and
tending  to  his  restoration.  This  work  discusses
the  laws  of  substance  and  phenomenon  and  of
cause  and  effect  in  physical  nature  and  in  the  hu
man  mind.  He  subsequently  continued  the  argu
ment  in  "  The  Supernatural  in  Relation  to  the
Xatural  "  (Belfast.  1862),  which  was  intended  as  the
first  part  of  a  work  on  "  The  Method  of  the  Divine
Government,  Supernatural  and  Spiritual."  The
publication  of  the  "  Method  "  attracted  public  at
tention  to  its  author  both  in  Great  Britain  and  the
United  States.  Some  one  having  sent  a  copy  of  it
to  Earl  Clarendon,  then  lord-lieutenant  of  Ire
land,  that  nobleman  began  to  read  it  before  divine
service  on  a  Sabbath  morning,  and  became  so  in
terested  in  it  that  he  forgot  to  attend  church.  He
immediately  afterward  appointed  Mr.  McCosh  pro
fessor  of  logic  and  metaphysics  in  Queen's  college,
Belfast.  Here  he  remained  for  sixteen  years,  draw
ing  to  the  institution  a  large  body  of  students,  and
taking  a  deep  interest  in  defending  the  national
system  of  education  in  Ireland.  While  there  he
wrote  his  "Intuitions  of  the  Mind  Inductively  In
vestigated  "  (London,  1860),  which  established  his
reputation  as  a  meta
physical  writer.  It
explains  what  intui
tions  properly  are,
which  of  them  are
moral  convictions,
and  how  they  are
related  to  the  sci
ences,  particularly
to  metaphysics  and
theology,  "in  1868
he  removed  to  the
United  States,  hav
ing  been  elected
president  of  the  Col
lege  of  Xew  Jersey,
at  Princeton,  where
his  administration
has  been  remarkably
successful.  The  staff
of  professors  has

been  increased  from  seventeen  to  forty-one,  and
the  average  attendance  of  students  from  264  to
603.  Having  been  thus  successful  in  his  adminis
tration,  and  desiring  to  be  relieved  on  account  of
advancing  years,  Dr.  McCosh  offered  his  resigna
tion  in  November,  1887,  which  took  effect  in  June,
1888.  He  was  voted  a  salary  as  president  emeri
tus,  and  retained  the  chair  of  philosophy.  He  re
ceived  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Aberdeen  in
1850,  and  from  Harvard  in  1868,  while  Queen's
university,  Ireland,  has  given  him  that  of  D.  Lit.
Dr.  McCosh  has  been  a  voluminous  writer,  and  be
sides  the  works  already  mentioned,  and  many  im
portant  addresses  and  contributions  to  various  pe-


96


McCOSKRY


McCREA


riodicals.  he  has  published  "  Typical  Forms  and
.Special  Ends  in  Creation,"  with  Dr.  George  Dickie
(Edinburgh,  1855) ;  "Examination  of  Mill's  Philoso
phy,  being  a  Defence  of  Fundamental  Truth  "  (New
York,  18ou) ;  "  Laws  of  Discursive  Thought,  being
a  Treatise  on  Formal  Logic  "(New  York.  180!));
•'  Christianity  and  Positivism  "  (1871) ;  "  The  Scot
tish  Philosophy,  Biographical,  Expository,  Critical,
from  Hutcheson  to  Hamilton"  (1874);  "A  Reply
to  Prof.  Tyndall's  Belfast  Address  "  (1875) ;  "  The
Development  Hypothesis  "-(1876) :  and  "  The  Emo
tions  "  (1880).  He  completed  in  1880  the  "  Philo
sophical  Series  "  which  he  had  begun  in  1882,  and
which  includes  "Criteria  of  Divers  Kinds  of  Truth
as  opposed  to  Agnosticism  "  (1882) ;  "  Energy,  Elli-
cient  and  Final  Cause,"  "  Development :  What  it
Can  Do  and  What  it  Cannot  Do,"  and  "Certitude,
Providence,  and  Prayer  "  (1883) ;  "  Locke's  Theory
of  Knowledge,  with  Notice  of  Berkeley,"  "  Agnos
ticism  of  Hume  and  Huxley,  with  Notice  of  the
Scottish  School,"  and  "  Criticism  of  the  Critical
Philosophy "  (1884);  "Herbert  Spencer's  Philoso
phy  as  Culminating  in  his  Ethics"  and  "The  New
Departure  in  College  Education  "  (1885) ;  and  "  Psy
chology,  the  Cognitive  Powers "  (1886).  In  1887
Dr.  McCosh  combined  the  philosophic  series  in
"Realistic  Philosophy"  (2  vols.)  and  "Psychology
of  the  Motive  Powers,"  his  aim  being  to  formulate
an  American  philosophy  of  realism.

McCOSKRY,  Samuel  Allen,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  9  Nov.,  1804:  d.  in  New  York  city,
1  Aug.,  1883.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  military  acade
my  in  1820,  but  after  two  years  resigned  and  en
tered  Dickinson  college,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1825.  He  then  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  practises!  for  six  years  in  his  native
place.  In  1881  he  began  the  study  of  theology
preparatory  to  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church.  He  was  ordained  deacon  in  Christ
church.  Reading,  Pa,,  28  March,  1833,  by  Bishop
Henry  V.  Onderdonk,  and  priest,  in  the  same
church,  13  Dec.,  1833,  by  the  same  bishop.  A
year  later  he  accepted  the  rectorship  of  St.  Paul's
church,  Philadelphia,  where  he  remained  for  two
years.  He  was  then  elected  to  be  the  first  bishop
of  Michigan,  and  was  consecrated  in  St.  Paul's
church,  Philadelphia,  7  July,  1836.  He  took  up  his
residence  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  became  rector  of  St.
Paul's  church  in  that  city,  and  held  the  post  for
twenty-seven  years.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Columbia  and  from  the  University  of  Pennsyl
vania  in  1837,  and  the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.  from  the
University  of  Oxford,  England,  in  1852.  Bishop
McCoskry  resigned  his  jurisdiction  in  March,  1878,
on  the  plea  of  feeble  health  and  the  infirmities  of
age,  and  asked  the  bishops  to  release  him.  Soon
afterward  grave  allegations  touching  his  moral
character  became  public ;  whereupon  he  abandoned
his  diocese  and  left  the  United  States,  thus  pre
venting  any  investigation  of  the  charges  against
him.  The  house  of  bishops,  under  the  circum
stances,  acting  as  a  court,  at  a  meeting  held  in
New  York  city,  3  Dec.,  1878,  deeming  his  course
an  acknowledgment  of  his  guilt,  formally  deposed
him  from  the  sacred  ministry  and  all  the  functions
thereof.  See  "Journal  of  General  Convention  of
the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  for  1880."

McCOWN,  John  Porter,  soldier,  b.  in  Tennes
see  about  1820.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1840,  and  appointed  2d  lieu
tenant  in  the  4th  artillery.  He  became  1st  lieu
tenant,  30  Sept.,  1843,  was  regimental  quarter
master  in  1847-'8,  and  was  brevetted  captain  for
bravery  at  Cerro  Gordo,  18  April,  1847.  He  re
signed  from  the  U.  S.  army,  17  May,  1861,  and,


entering  the  Confederate  service,  became  a  briga
dier-general.  He  commanded  at  New  Madrid,
Mo.,  in  March,  1862,  but  evacuated  that  town  af
ter  its  investment  by  Gen.  Pope.

McCOY,  Isaac,  clergyman,  b.  in  Fayette  county.
Pa.,  13  June,  1784;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  21  June,
1846.  In  1790  he  removed  with  his"  father  to
Shelby  county,  Ky.,  and  received  a  limited  educa
tion.  He  went  to  Vincennes,  Ind.,  in  1804,  in
1805  to  Clark  county  in  that  state,  and  in  that
year  was  licensed  to  preach  as  a  Baptist.  On  13
Oct.,  1810,  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  church  at
Maria  Creek,  Clark  co.,  Ind.,  where  he  remained
eight  years,  making,  meantime,  occasional  mis
sionary  tours  in  the  surrounding  country.  In  1817
he  was  appointed  a  missionary,  and  labored  in  the
western  states  and  territories.  In  1842  he  became
the  first  corresponding  secretary  and  general  agent
of  the  American  Indian  mission  association  at
Louisville,  Ky.  He  published  "  History  of  Baptist
Indian  Missions"  (Washington,  D.  C.,  1840).

McCRAE,  William,  Canadian  senator,  1).  in
Burritt's  Rapids,  Ontario.  10  Nov.,  1810.  He  stud
ied  law  and  became  a  barrister  in  1850,  was  mayor
of  Chatham,  Ontario,  in  1859,  member  of  the  legis
lative  council  in  1862,  and  Dominion  senator  in
1867.  He  was  appointed  district  judge  of  Algoma
in  1870,  and  revising-officer  in  1885.

McCRARY,  George  Washington,  statesman,
b.  in  Evansvillc,  Ind.,  29  Aug.,  1835.  In  1836  he
was  taken  by  his  parents  to  that  part  of  Wisconsin
territory  that  afterward  became  the  state  of  Iowa.
He  was  educated  in  a  public  school  and  in  an
academy,  and  studied  law  in  Keokuk,  Iowa,  where
he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1856.  He  was  elect
ed  to  the  legislature  in  1857,  and  served  in  the  state
senate  from  1861  till  1865,  being  chairman  of  the
committee  on  military  affairs.  In  1868  he  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  and  served  by
successive  re-elections  until  3  March.  1877.  On  7
Dec.,  1876,  Mr.  McCrary  introduced  into  congress
the  bill  that  was  the  first  step  in  the  legislation  for
creating  the  electoral  commission.  He  was  one  of
the  first  to  support  the  Republican  position  in  the
Florida  case,  and  spoke  before,  the  commission
against  the  right  of  congress  to  go  behind  the  re
turns.  When  President  Hayes  formed  iiis  cabinet,
Mr.  McCrary  was  chosen  secretary  of  war,  12
March,  1877,  but  resigned  in  order  to  accept  a
judgeship  of  the  U.  S.  circuit  court,  to  which  he
was  appointed  in  December,  1879.  He  also  re
signed  this  office  in  March,  1884,  and  removed
from  Keokuk.  Iowa,  to  Kansas  City,  Mo.,  where  he
has  since  practised  law,  and  is  general  consulting
counsel  of  the  Atchison,  Topcka,  and  Santa  Fe
railroad  company.  He  is  the  author  of  "  The
American  Law  of  Elections"  (Chicago,  1875).

McCREA,  Jane,  b.  in  Bedminster  (now  Lam-
ington),  N.  J.,  in  1753  ;  d.  near  Fort  Edward,  N.  Y.,
27  July,  1777.  She  was  the  second  daughter  of
Rev.  James  McCrea,  a  Presbyterian  clergyman  of
Scotch  descent,  whose  father,  William,  was  an  elder
in  White  Clay  Creek  church,  near  Newark.  Del.
After  his  death  she  made  her  home  with  a  brother
at  Fort  Edward.  No  event,  either  in  ancient  or
modern  warfare,  has  received  more  versions  than
that  of  her  death.  It  has  been  commemorated  in
story  and  in  song,  and  narrated  in  grave  histories
in  as  many  different  ways  as  there  have  been  writ
ers  on  the  subject.  The  facts  appear  to  be  as  fol
lows  :  David  Jones,  her  lover,  an  officer  in  Bur-
goyne's  army,  then  lying  four  miles  from  Fort  Ed
ward,  sent  a  party  of  Indians  under  Duluth,  a  half-
breed,  to  escort  his  betrothed  to  the  British  camp,
where  they  were  to  be  at  once  married  by  Chaplain


McCREERY


McCULLOCH


97


Brudenell,  Lady  Harriet  and  Madame  Riedesel  ;
having  good-naturedly  consented  to  grace  the  nup
tials  by  their  presence.  Duluth,  having  arrived
within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  the  house  of  a  Mrs.
McNeil  (where  Jane  was  waiting),  halted  in  the
woods  until  he  should  be  joined  by  her  by  precon
certed  arrangement.  Meanwhile  another  body  of
Indians  from  the  English  camp,  under  Le  Loup,  a
fierce  Wyandotte  chief,  returning  from  a  maraud
ing  expedition,  drove  in  a  scout  of  Americans,  and
stopping  on  their  return  at  Mrs.  McNeil's,  took  her
and  Jane  captive,  with  the  intention  of  bringing
them  into  the  British  camp.  On  their  way  back
they  encountered  Duluth's  party,  when  the  half-
breed  claimed  Jane  as  being  under  his  protection.
Le  Loup  being  unwilling  to  deliver  his  prisoner —
wishing  the  honor  of  being  her  escort — high  words
ensued  between  the  two  leaders,  when  Le  Loup,  en
raged  at  being  opposed,  in  a  fit  of  violent  passion
shot  her  through  the  heart.  Then,  having  scalped
his  victim,  he  carried  the  reeking  scalp  into  the
British  camp,  where  it  was  immediately  recognized
by  its  long  and  beautiful  hair  by  Mrs.  McNeil,
who,  having  been  separated  from  Jane  before  the
catastrophe,  had  arrived  at  Burgoyne's  head
quarters  a  little  in  advance.  The  next  day  her
mangled  body  was  conveyed  by  her  brother,  Col.
John  McCrea,  to  the  camp-ground  of  the  fort,  and
there  buried.  On  23  April,  1822,  the  remains  were
removed  to  the  burial-ground  at  the  lower  end  of
the  village  of  Fort  Edward,  and  in  1852  they  were
again  removed  to  the  Union  cemetery,  between
Fort  Edward  and  Sandy  Hill,  where  they  now  lie.
Miss  McCrea  is  described  by  those  who  knew  her
personally  as  a  young  woman  of  rare  accomplish
ments,  great  personal  attractions,  and  remarkable
sweetness  of  disposition.  She  was  of  medium
stature,  finely  formed,  and  of  a  delicate  blonde  com
plexion.  Her  hair  was  of  a  golden-brown  and
silken  lustre,  and,  when  unbound,  trailed  upon  the
ground.  Her  father  was  devoted  to  literary  pur
suits,  and  she  had  acquired  a  taste  for  reading  un
usual  in  one  of  her  age  in  those  early  times.  Her
tragic  death  was  to  the  people  of  New  York  what
the  battle  of  Lexington  was  to  the  New  England
colonies.  In  each  case  the  effect  was  to  consolidate
the  inhabitants  more  firmly  against  the  invaders.
The  blood  of  the  unfortunate  maiden  was  not  shed
in  vain.  As  has  been  justly  said,  her  name  was
passed  as  a  note  of  alarm  along  the  banks  of  the
Hudson,  and  was  a  rallying-cry  among  the  Green
mountains  of  Vermont.  It  thus  contributed  in
no  slight  degree  to  Burgoyne's  defeat,  which  be
came  a  precursor  and  principal  cause  of  American
independence.  Descendants  of  the  McCrea  family
are  still  living  at  Ballston  and  in  other  parts  of
the  state  of  New  York.

McCREERY,  Thomas  Clay,  senator,  b.  in  Ken
tucky  in  1817.  He  studied  law,  but  followed  agri
culture,  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1852  and  a
visitor  of  the  17.  S.  military  academy  in  1858,  and
in  1868  was  elected  a  U.  S.  senator  in  the  place  of
James  Guthrie,  who  had  resigned,  and  served  from
27  Feb.,  1808,  till  3  March,  1871.  He  was  again
elected  in  the  place  of  Willis  B.  Machen,  and  served
from  4  March,  1873,  till  3  March,  1879.

McCULLAGH,  John,  missionary,  b.  in  Edin
burgh,  Scotland,  in  1811.  When  a  member  of  the
church  of  Rev.  Thomas  Chalmers,  in  Glasgow,  he
organized  Sunday-schools  among  the  fishermen
and  coal-miners  of  Scotland,  and  subsequently
among  the  Roman  Catholics  of  Connaught,  Ire
land.  In  1834  he  emigrated  to  the  United  States,
connected  himself  with  the  American  Sunday-
school  union  as  a  volunteer,  and  labored  at  first
VOL.  iv.— 7


among  the  so-called  "  bark-peelers  "  of  Sullivan
county,  New  York,  then  in  southern  Illinois,  and
after  1839  in  Henderson,  Ky.  In  1840  he  entered
regularly  into  the  service  of  the  Sunday-school
union,  and  during  the  next  twelve  years  he  organ
ized  schools  in  seventy-five  counties  of  Kentucky.
In  1852  he  was  relieved  of  active  missionary  work,
and  made  superintendent  of  missions  in  the  south,
which  post  he  resigned  in  1884.

McCL'LLOCH,  Ben,  soldier,  b.  in  Rutherford
county,  Tenn.,  11  Nov.,  1811:  d.  near  Pea  Ridge,
Ark.,  7  March,  1862.  He  was  a  son  of  Lieut.  Alex
ander  McCulloch,  who  fought  under  Gen.  Andrew
Jackson  in  the
Creek  war.  His  ed
ucation  was  slight,
but  travel  and  ex
tensive  reading
supplied  the  lack
of  early  study.
Leaving  school  at
the  age  of  four
teen,  he  became  an
expert  hunter  and
boatman.  In  1835,
when  about  to  join
a  party  of  trappers
on  a  trip  to  the
Rocky  mountains,
he  heard  of  the  ex
pedition  of  his
neighbor,  David
Crockett,  and  other  friends,  in  aid  of  the  Texan
revolutionists,  and  hastened  to  unite  with  them,
but  arrived  too  late  at  Nacogdoches,  the  place  of
meeting,  and  started  alone  for  Brazos  river,  where
he  was  taken  ill,  and  did  not  recover  until  after
the  fall  of  the  Alamo.  When  health  returned,  he
joined  Gen.  Samuel  Houston's  army,  and  did  good
service  at  San  Jacinto,  in  command  of  a  gun.
After  the  army  was  disbanded  he  settled  in  Gon-
zales,  where  he  engaged  in  surveying  and  locating
lands  on  the  frontier,  and  was  elected  to  the  con
gress  of  Texas  in  1839.  In  1840-'!  he  was  engaged
in  repelling  Indian  raids,  notably  at  the  sanguinary
fight  at  Plum  creek.  He  subsequently  had  many
encounters  with  Comanches  and  other  Indian
tribes,  and  with  Mexican  raiders.  When  Texas
was  admitted  to  the  Union,  29  Dec.,  1845,  he  was
elected  to  the  first  legislature,  and  was  appointed
major-general  of  the  state  militia  for  the  western
district,  comprising  the  entire  region  west  of  the
Colorado  river.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Mexican
war  he  raised  a  picked  company  of  Texas  rangers,
who  provided  their  own  horses  and  arms.  His  ser
vices  as  a  scout  were  highly  valued  by  Gen.  Zach-
ary  Taylor,  and  at  Monterey  his  company,  which
was  sent  forward  to  feel  the  strength  and  position
of  the  Mexican  forces,  opened  the  fight.  He  was
made  quartermaster,  with  the  rank  of  major,  16
July,  1846,  led  his  scouts  on  a  daring  reconnois-
sance  at  Buena  Vista,  and  fought  with  bravery
throughout  the  day.  He  was  afterward  attached
to  the  army  of  Gen.  Winfield  Scott,  resigned  his
staff  appointment  on  6  Sept.,  1847,  and  with  his
company  of  spies  performed  useful  services  at  the
taking  of  the  city  of  Mexico.  In  1849  he  went
to  California,  settled  at  Sacramento,  and  was
elected  sheriff  of  the  county.  He  returned  to
Texas  in  1852,  and  in  the  following  year  was  ap
pointed  by  President  Pierce  U.  S.  marshal,  in  which
office  he  was  continued  by  President  Buchanan.
He  spent  much  time  in  Washington,  where  he  in
terested  himself  in  studying  improvements  in  ord
nance  and  small  arms.  In  1857  he  was  appointed.


98


McCULLOCH


McCULLOH


with  Lazarus  W.  Powell,  a  commissioner  to  adjust
difficulties  with  the  Mormons  of  Utah,  and,  after
the  despatch  of  troops  to  that  country,  was  com
missioned  to  report  on  the  condition  of  Arizona.
In  1861  he  was  in  Washington,  engaged  on  his
final  reports,  and  when  he  had  concluded  his  busi
ness  with  the  government  he  hastened  back  to
Texas,  and  was  appointed  to  raise  a  temporary
force  to  take  possession  of  the  U.  S.  arsenal  at
San  Antonio  and  other  posts.  After  declining  the
command  of  a  regiment,  he  was  commissioned
brigadier-general  in  the  Confederate  service  on  14
May,  1861,  and  ordered  to  take  command  of  In
dian  territory.  He  reached  Fort  Smith,  Ark.,
about  the  end  of  May,  organized  an  army  in  haste,
and  marched  to  the  succor  of  Gov.  Claiborne  Jack
son,  of  Missouri.  Forming  a  junction  with  Gen.
Sterling  Price's  Missouri  state  guards,  he  encoun
tered  the  troops  of  Gens.  Nathaniel  Lyon  and
Franz  Sigel  in  the  battle  of  Wilson's  Creek,  other
wise  called  Oak  Hills.  After  the  defeat  of  the  Na
tional  forces,  McCulloch,  having  no  orders  to  en
ter  Missouri,  refused  to  pursue  them,  and  surren
dered  the  command  to  Gen.  Price.  He  took  part
in  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn's  ineffectual  attempt  to  sur
round  Gen.  Sigel's  force  at  Bentonville.  At  the
battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  or  Elkhorn,  he  commanded  a
corps  of  Arkansas,  Louisiana,  and  Texas  troops,
and,  while  riding  forward  to  reconnoitre,  was  killed
by  the  bullet  of  a  sharp-shooter.  Gen.  James  Mc-
Intosh,  the  second  in  command,  fell  almost  simul
taneously,  and  the  Confederates,  left  without  a
leader,  soon  fled  in  disorder.  See  "  Scouting  Ex
peditions  of  McCulloch's  Rangers,"  by  Samuel  C.
Reid  (Philadelphia,  1850).  and  "  Life  and  Ser
vices  of  Gen.  Ben  McCulloch,"  by  Victor  M.  Rose.
McCULLOCH,  Hui^h,  secretary  of  the  treasury,
b.  in  Kennebunk,  Me.,  7  Dec.,  1808.  He  entered
Bowdoin  in  1824,  but  leaving,  on  account  of  ill
ness,  in  1826,  taught  until  1829,  and  then  studied
law  in  Kennebunk  and  Boston.  In  1883  he  went

to  the  west,  and
settled  in  Fort
Wayne,  Ind.  In
1835  he  was  elect
ed  cashier  and
manager  of  the
branch  at  Fort
Wayne  of  the
State  bank  of  In
diana,  and  at  the
expiration  of  its
charter  in  1856
he  became  the
president  of  the
Bank  of  the  state
oflndiana,which
post  he  held  un
til  May,  1863.
He  then  resigned
to  accept  the  office  of  comptroller  of  the  currency,
which  was  tendered  to  him  by  Sec.  Salmon  P.  Chase,
undertaking  the  organization  of  the  newly  created
bureau  and  the  putting  into  operation  of  the  nation
al  banking  system.  His  own  reputation  for  conserv
atism  influenced  the  managers  of  the  large  state
banks,  and  promoted  the  conversion  of  the  leading
credit  institutions  of  the  commercial  cities  into  na
tional  banks.  In  March,  1865.  on  the  resignation  of
William  P.  Fessenden,  Mr.  McCulloch  was  appoint
ed  by  President  Lincoln  secretary  of  the  treasury,
at  which  time  the  government  was  in  great  finan
cial  embarrassment.  It  was  still  incurring  enor
mous  expenses,  and  heavy  demands  were  pressing
upon  a  nearly  empty  treasury.  His  first  and  most


important  duty,  therefore,  was  to  raise  by  further
loans  what  was  needed  to  pay  the  large  amount
due  to  500,000  soldiers  and  sailors,  whose  services
the  government  was  in  a  condition  to  dispense
with,  and  meet  other  demands.  This  was  success
fully  accomplished,  and  in  less  than  six  months
from  the  time  of  his  appointment  all  the  matured
obligations  of  the  government  were  paid,  and  the
reduction  of  the  debt  was  begun.  The  next  most
important  work  was  the  conversion  of  more  than
$1.000,000,000  of  short-time  obligations  into  a,
funded  debt.  This  was  quietly  effected,  and  in  a
little  more  than  two  years  the  whole  debt  of  the
country  was  put  into  a  satisfactory  shape.  In  his
annual  reports  he  advocated  a  steady  reduction  of
the  national  debt,  the  retirement  of  the  legal-tend
er  notes,  and  a  speedy  return  to  specie  payments,
urging  that  a  permanent  public  debt  might  be
dangerous  to  Republican  institutions.  He  believed,
also,  that  it  was  not  the  business  of  the  govern
ment  to  furnish  the  people  with  a  paper  currency,
that  it  had  no  power  under  the  constitution  to
make  its  own  notes  lawful  money,  and  that  the
paper  currency  of  the  country  should  be  fur
nished  by  the  banks.  His  views  upon  the  sub
ject  of  the  debt  were  sustained  by  congress,  as
were  also  for  a  short  time  those  in  regard  to  the
legal-tender  notes.  Sec.  McCulloch  held  office  till
4  March,  1869.  From  1871  till  1878  he  was  en
gaged  in  banking  in  London.  In  October,  1884,
on  the  resignation  of  Walter  Q.  Grcsham,  he  was.
again  appointed  secretary  of  the  treasury,  and
continued  in  office  until  the  expiration  of  Presi
dent  Arthur's  term,  4  March,  1885,  being  the  only
man  that  has  held  that  office  twice.  Since  his  re
tirement  he  has  resided  in  Washington,  1).  C.,  and
on  his  farm  in  Maryland.  Mr.  McCulloch  has  con
tributed  articles  on  financial  and  economical  ques
tions  to  the  magazines  and  public  journals.  A
series  of  letters  written  by  him  in  London  for  the
New  York  "Tribune"  in  1875  were  extensively
copied,  and  were  used  by  the  Republicans  in  Ohio
in  1875  for  political  purposes.

McCULLOH,  James  Haines,  author,  b.  in
Maryland  about  1793.  He  was  educated  as  a  phy
sician,  receiving  his  degree  from  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1814,  but  devoted  himself  mainly
to  archaeological  studies,  after  serving  as  garrison
surgeon  until  the  close  of  the  war  of  1812-'15.  He
became  curator  of  the  Maryland  academy  of  science
and  vice-president  of  the  Baltimore  apprentices'
library  in  1822.  In  1836  he  succeeded  his  father,
James  H.  McCulloh,  as  collector  of  the  port  of  Bal
timore.  He  was  also  president  of  the  National  bank
of  Baltimore,  but  declined  a  re-election  in  1853.
He  published  "  Researches  on  America,  being  an
Attempt  to  settle  some  Points  relative  to  the
Aborigines  of  America''  (Baltimore,  1816);  "Re
searches,  Philosophical  and  Antiquarian,  concern
ing  the  Aboriginal  History  of  America"  (1829);
"  Analytical  Investigations  concerning  the  Credi
bility  of  the  Scriptures  and  of  the  Religious  Sys
tem  Inculcated  in  them,  together  with  a  Historical
Exhibition  of  Human  Conduct  during  the  several
Dispensations  under  which  Mankind  have  been
placed  by  their  Creator"  (1852);  "An  Important
Exposition  of  the  Evidences  and  Doctrines  of  the
Christian  Religion,  addressed  to  the  Better  Edu
cated  Classes  of  Society"  (1856);  and  "On  the
Credibility  of  the  Scriptures,  a  Recast  and  En
larged  View  of  a  Former  Work  on  the  Subject,
together  with  a  Copious  Analysis  of  the  Systems
promulgated  during  the  Patriarchal,  Jewish,  and
Christian  Dispensations,  and  of  Human  Develop
ments  under  them  "  (1867).


McCULLOQGH


McDILL


99


McCULLOUGH,  John  Edward,  actor,  b.  in
Coleraine,  Ireland,  2  Xov.,  1837;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  8  Nov.,  1885.  His  parents,  who  were  small
farmers,  brought  him  to  this  country  in  1853  and
settled  in  Philadelphia,  where  the  lad  was  appren
ticed  to  learn  the  trade  of  a  chair-maker.  In  1855
McCullough  made  his  first  appearance  in  a  minor
character  in  "  The  Belle's  Stratagem,"  at  the  Arch
street  theatre  in  Philadelphia,  and  soon  afterward
chose  the  stage  as  a  regular  profession.  For  several
years  he  acted  in  small  parts  in  Boston,  Philadel
phia,  and  other  cities.  From  1866  until  1868  Mc-
Cullough  travelled  with  Edwin  Forrest,  filling  the
second  parts  in  the  latter's  plays.  In  1869,  and  for
some  years  afterward,  in  connection  with  Lawrence
Barrett,  he  managed  the  Bush  street  theatre  in  San
Francisco,  where  his  forcible,  robust  style  of  acting
had  many  admirers.  In  1872,  when  Forrest  died,
that  actor  left  his  manuscript  plays  in  McCullough's
possession,  looking  upon  him  as  his  legitimate  suc
cessor.  From  1873  until  1883  the  tragedian  played,
with  more  or  less  success,  throughout  the  United
States,  in  the  heroic  roles  of  John  Howard  Payne's
"Brutus,"  "Jack  Cade,"  "  The  Gladiator,"  "*Vir-
ginius,"  and  "Damon  and  Pythias."  with  occasion
al  performances  of  '•  Othello,"  "  Coriolanus,"  and
"  King  Lear.''  In  1884  he  became  prostrated,  both
mentally  and  physically,  but  rallied  for  a  time
and  filled  an  engagement  in  Milwaukee.  Thence
he  went  to  Chicago,  where  his  managers  induced
him  to  play  in  "  The  Gladiator,"  but  he  broke  down,
and  was  led  from  the  stage  in  the  midst  of  his  per
formance.  He  ended  his  days  in  a  lunatic  asylum.
In  1881  McCullough  appeared  in  London  in  a  found
of  his  favorite  parts,  but  made  no  marked  im
pression  on  English  audiences.  His  shortcomings
were  a  lack  of  originality  and  deficiency  in  liter
ary  culture.  He  was  inferior  to  his  model,  Forrest,
in  natural  endowments,  and  when  he  appeared  in
the  parts  that  distinguished  his  master  he  dis
played  all  his  defects,  and  too  closely  rendered  the
faulty  readings  that  were  based  on  the  judgment
of  his  predecessor.  Unlike  him,  however,  he  en
riched  the  stage  with  no  new  dramas,  and  created
no  original  characters.

McCULLY,  Jonathan,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
Amherst,  Nova  Scotia,  28  July,  1809  :  d.  in  Halifax,
Nova  Scotia,  2  Jan.,  1877.  He  was  admitted  to  the
bur  in  1837,  established  himself  in  practice  at  Hali
fax  in  1849,  and  in  1860  was  appointed  solicitor-
general  of  the  province.  He  was  a  frequent  writer
in  the  press  of  Halifax  and  an  earnest  advocate  of
colonial  union,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  confer
ences  on  the  Intercolonial  railroad  and  the  con
federation  of  the  provinces  at  Quebec  in  1861  and
1862.  He  was  an  active  member  of  the  legislative
council  from  1847  till  1867,  and  served  as  chairman
of  the  board  of  railways.  In  1867  he  entered  the
Dominion  senate,  but  resigned  in  1870,  being  ap
pointed  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Nova  Scotia.

McCURDY,  Charles  Johnson,  jurist,  b.  in
Lyme,  Conn.,  7  Dec.,  1797.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1817,  studied  law  with  Zephaniah  Swift,
became  eminent  as  a  counsellor,  and  was  for  many
years  a  member  of  either  the  upper  or  lower  house
of  the  legislature,  and  for  three  sessions  speaker.
He  was  lieutenant-governor  in  1847-'8,  and  origi
nated  the  law  allowing  parties  to  testify  in  their
own  suits.  He  wa,s  charge  d'affaires  at  Vienna  from
1850  till  1852.  He  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the
superior  court  of  Connecticut  in  1856,  and  was  sub
sequently  a  judge  on  the  supreme  court  bench  un
til  his  retirement  in  1867.  Judge  McCurdy  was  an
active  member  of  the  peace  congress  in  1861.  He
was  given  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  by  Yale  in  1868.


McCURDY,  James  Frederick,  orientalist,  b.
in  Chatham,  New  Brunswick,  18  Feb.,  1847.  He
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  New  Brunswick
in  1866,  and  in  1871  at  Princeton  theological  semi
nary,  where  he  was  instructor  in  oriental  languages
in  1873-'82.  After  studying  in  Gottingen  and  Leip-
sic  in  1882-'4,  he  lectured  on  the  Stone  foundation
in  Princeton  in  1885-'6,  and  in  the  latter  year  be
came  professor  of  oriental  languages  in  University
college,  Toronto,  Canada.  In  the  Lange-Schaff
commentary  on  the  Bible  he  translated  and  edited
the  Psalms,  part  ii.,  and  the  Book  of  Hosea,  and
wrote  the  commentary  on  Haggai  (New  York,
1872-'3),  and  he  has  published  "  Aryo-Semitic
Speech"  (Andoverand  London,  1881);  and  a  paper
on  "  The  Semitic  Prefect  in  Assyria  "  in  the  "  Trans
actions  of  the  Congress  of  Orientalists "  (Leyden,
1883);  and  is  preparing  for  publication  (1887)  his
Princeton  lectures  on  "  The  Assyrian  Inscriptions
and  the  Old  Testament."

McDANIEL,  Edward  Davies,  physician,  b.  in
Chester  district,  S.  C.,  7  July,  1822.  lie  was  gradu
ated  at  Erskine  college,  S.  C.,  in  1844,  and  began
the  study  of  medicine,  but  relinquished  it  to  be
come  principal  of  the  academy  at  Pine  Grove,  S.  C.,
in  1845.  After  teaching  for  ten  years,  he  was
graduated  in  1857  at  the  Medical  college  of  South
Carolina,  and  settled  at  Camden,  Ala.  In  1887
he  became  professor  of  materia  medica  and  thera
peutics  in  the  Medical  college  of  Alabama  at  Mo
bile.  He  was  chosen  president  of  the  Alabama
state  medical  society  in  1876.  Dr.  McDaniel  is  the
inventor  of  a  new  method  of  artificial  respiration,
and  has  advanced  the  theory  that  urinification  and
digestion  are  dependent  on  respiration.  Pie  is  the
author  of  a  report  on  ha?morrhagic  malarial  fever  in
Alabama  (1874)  and  of  various  professional  papers.

McDANlEL,  Henry  Dickerson,  governor  of
Georgia,  b.  in  Monroe,  Walton  co.,  Ga.,  4  Sept.,
1837.  He  was  graduated  at  Mercer  university,
where  his  father,  Ira  0.,  was  a  professor,  in  1856,
studied  law,  and  practised  in  Monroe.  He  was  the
youngest  member  of  the  Georgia  secession  conven
tion  in  1861,  and  at  first  opposed  disunion,  but
finally  voted  for  the  measure.  He  joined  the  Con
federate  army  as  a  lieutenant,  rose  to  the  rank  of
major  in  1862".  commanded  a  brigade  at  Gettysburg,
was  severely  wounded  at  Hagerstown  in  the  retreat
from  Gettysburg,  and  was  in  the  hospital  at  Ches
ter,  Pa.,  and  subsequently  a  prisoner  at  Johnson's
island,  Ohio,  until  the  close  of  hostilities.  He  re
sumed  practice  at  Monroe,  Ga.,  in  1865,  and  was  a
member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention  in
that  year.  On  the  removal  of  his  civil  disabilities
in  1872  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature,  and,  as
chairman  of  the  finance  committee  of  the  house,
proposed  a  law  for  the  taxation  of  railroads  that
has  been  followed  in  other  states.  After  the  adop
tion  of  the  constitution  of  1877.  as  chairman  of  the
judiciary  committee,  he  had  charge  of  the  legisla
tion  that  was  made  necessary  by  constitutional
changes.  On  the  death  of  Gov.  Alexander  H.
Stephens  he  was  elected  governor,  24  April,  1883,
for  the  unexpired  term,  and  in  1884  was  re-elected
without  opposition  for  the  succeeding  term,  which
ended  in  November,  1886.

McDILL,  Alexander  Stuart,  physician,  b.  in
Crawford  county,  Pa.,  18  March,  1822 ;  d.  near
Madison,  Wis.,  12  Nov.,  1875.  He  was  educated
at  Alleghany  college  and  Cleveland  medical  col
lege,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1848.  and  engaged
in  general  practice  in  Pennsylvania  till  1856,  when
he  removed  to  Plover,  Portage  co.,  Wis.  He  was
elected  to  the  state  house  of  representatives  in
1861,  and  to  the  senate  in  1863,  was  a  presidential


100


McDILL


MCDONALD


elector  in  1864,  and  a  member  of  the  board  of
managers  of  the  State  hospital  for  the  insane  from
1862  till  1868,  when  he  was  chosen  medical  super
intendent  of  that  institution.  When  elected  as  a
Republican  to  congress  he  resigned  that  post,  and
took  his  seat  on  1  Dec.,  1873.  He  was  defeated  at
the  next  election  by  an  Independent  Reform  can
didate,  and  when  his  term  ended,  4  March,  1875,
resumed  charge  of  the  Madison  insane  hospital.

McDILL,  James  Wilson,  senator,  b.  in  Monroe,
Butler  co..  Ohio,  4  March,  1834.  His  father,  Rev.
John  McDill.  was  a  clergyman,  of  Scottish  extrac
tion.  The  son  was  brought  up  in  Indiana  and
Ohio,  graduated  at  Miami  university  in  1855,  and
admitted  to  the  bar  in  Columbus,  Ohio,  in  1856.
In  that  year  he  removed  to  Burlington,  Iowa,  and
in  1857  to  Afton,  Union  co.,  where  he  practised
his  profession.  He  was  chosen  judge  of  Union
county  in  1860,  and  in  1861-'5  was  a  clerk  in  the
treasury  department  at  Washington.  He  became
a  circuit  judge  in  Iowa  in  1868,  a  district  judge  in
1870,  and  in  1872  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Re
publican,  serving  till  1877.  He  was  appointed  one
of  the  first  board  of  railroad  commissioners  of
Iowa  in  1878,  and  served  till  1881,  when  he  was
appointed  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  on  the  resignation  of
Samuel  J.  Kirkwood  to  become  secretary  of  the
interior.  The  succeeding  legislature  elected  him
to  the  seat,  and  he  served  till  1883.  In  1884  he
was  again  appointed  railroad  commissioner.

McDONALD,  Alexander,  senator,  b.  in  Clinton
county,  Pa.,  10  April,  1832.  He  was  educated  at
Lewisburg  university,  and  emigrated  to  Kansas  in
1857,  where  he  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits.
During  the  civil  war  he  took  an  active  part  in  rais
ing  troops  for  the  National  army,  and  for  a  time
supported  three  regiments.  He  settled  in  Arkansas
as  a  merchant  in  1863.  established  and  became
president  of  a  national  bank  at  Fort  Smith,  and
was  also  president  of  the  Merchants'  national  bank
of  Little  Rock.  On  the  readmission  of  Arkansas
into  the  Union,  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  as  a
Republican,  serving  from  23  June,  1868,  till  3
March,  1871.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Chicago
Republican  convention  in  1868.

MACDONALD,  Andrew  Archibald,  Canadian
statesman,  b.  in  Three  Rivers,  Prince  Edward  isl
and,  14  Feb.,  1829.  His  grandfather,  Andrew,  emi
grated  from  Scotland  with  his  retainers  in  1806,  and
settled  at  Three  Rivers.  The  grandson  was  edu
cated  privately  and  at  the  county  grammar-school.
He  was  consular  agent  for  the  United  States  at
Three  Rivers  from  1849  till  1870,  and  repi'esented
Georgetown  in  the  house  of  assembly  from  1854
till  1870.  When  the  legislative  council  became
elective  in  1863,  Mr.  Macdonald  was  elected  to  it
for  the  2d  district  of  King's  county,  re-elected
in  1867,  and  remained  a  member  of  that  body  till
June,  1873,  when  he  was  appointed  postmaster-
general  of  the  province.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
Charlottetown  conference  on  the  union  of  the
lower  provinces  in  1864,  and  in  September  of  that
year  to  the  Quebec  union  conference,  which  ar
ranged  the  basis  of  the  union  of  all  the  British
North  American  colonies,  and  he  was  also  a  dele
gate  to  the  International  convention  at  Portland,
Me.,  in  1868.  He  was  a  member  of  the  executive
council  from  1867  till  1872,  and  again  from  18
April,  1872,  until  confederation,  and  was  leader  of
the  government  party  in  the  legislative  council  for
several  years.  He  was  first  elected  as  a  Liberal,
but  when  the  Conservative  section  of  the  party
joined  the  Liberal  branch  of  the  Conservative
party  he  united  with  them  in  perfecting  the  free
education,  land-purchase,  railway,  and  confedera


tion  acts.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant-governor
of  Prince  Edward  island,  1  Aug.,  1884.  which
office  he  now  (1888)  fills.

McDONALD,  Charles  James,  jurist,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C.,  9  July,  1793;  d.  in  Marietta,
Ga.,  16  Dec.,  1860.  He  was  brought  up  in  Hancock
county,  Ga.,  was  graduated  at  the  College  of  South
Carolina  in  1816,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1817,  and,
settling  in  Milledgeville,  was  solicitor-general  in
1822,  and  a  judge  of  the  circuit  court  in  1825.  He
was  in  the  legislature  in  1834,  a  member  of  the
state  senate  in  1837,  and  was  elected  governor  of
Georgia  in  1839,  and  re-elected  in  1841.  The  be
ginning  of  his  administration  found  the  govern
ment  in  a  state  of  much  financial  embarrassment,
owing  to  the  panic  of  1837,  and  to  the  legislative
act  of  that  year  authorizing  the  counties  to  retain
the  general  tax  to  be  applied  by  the  inferior  courts
to  county  purposes.  He  recommended  a  resump
tion  of  the  entire  amount  of  state  taxes,  vetoed
the  bill  that  had  passed  the  legislature  reducing
the  taxes  one  per  cent.,  and  on  his  own  authority
suspended  all  payments  from  the  treasury,  except
upon  appropriations  actually  made  and  warrants
legally  drawn  thereon.  This  extreme  measure
enabled  him  to  pay  the  ordinary  expenses  of  the
government  and  the  interest  on  the  public  debt.
He  was  defeated  as  Democratic  candidate  for  gov
ernor  by  Howell  Cobb  in  1850,  and  the  same  year
was  a  member  of  the  Nashville  convention,  as  a
representative  of  the  extreme  state-rights  party.
From  1857  until  his  death  he  was  a  judge  of  the
supreme  court  of  Georgia.  Gov.  McDonald  was  a
man  of  great  probity  and  influence.

McDONALD,  Daniel,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.
in  St.  Andrew's,  Prince  Edward  island,  19  Feb.,
1822  ;  d.  in  Charlottetown,  4  Jan.,  1885.  lie  entered
St.  Andrew's  college  in  1841,  and  after  a  three
years'  course  of  study  went  to  Rome,  where  he
spent  the  succeeding  seven  years  in  the  study  of
rhetoric,  philosophy,  history,  canon  law,  and  the
ology.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.,  was  or
dained  at  Rome  in  1851,  and  in  1857  returned  to
Prince  Edward  island.  In  1861  Dr.  McDonald  was
appointed  vicar-general  and  senior  priest  of  St.
Dunstan's  cathedral.  In  1878  he  became  a  pro
fessor  in  St.  Dunstan's  college,  and  subsequent
ly  engaged  in  missionary  labor.  He  was  widely
known  for  his  ability  as  a  public  speaker.

MACDONALD,  Donald,  loyalist,  b.  in  Scotland
in  1712;  d.  in  London  after  1784.  He  raised  a
body  of  loyal  Scots  and  Regulators  in  January,
1776,  was  commissioned  as  their  general  by  Gov.
Josiah  Martin,  and  marched  upon  Wilmington.
The  militia  were  called  out  in  haste,  and  routed
the  loyalists  at  Moore's  Creek.  Gen.  Macdonald
was  among  the  prisoners  captured,  and  was  con
fined  in  Halifax  jail,  and  afterward  in  Philadel
phia,  until  he  was  exchanged.

McDONALD,  Donald,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in
Caledonia,  N.  Y..  in  1816 ;  d.  in  Toronto,  Canada,
21  Jan.,  1879.  His  father,  Alexander  McDonald,
a  native  of  Inverness-shire,  Scotland,  early  in  the
19th  century  settled  in  New  York  state,  whence  he
removed  to  Canada  with  his  family  in  1823.  His
son  received  his  education  chiefly  in  Upper  Canada
college,  and  afterward  followed  for  many  years  the
profession  of  a  surveyor  and  civil  engineer,  in
which  capacity  he  identified  himself  with  the  de
velopment  of  the  western  part  of  Upper  Canada.
Many  of  the  early  standard  maps  of  the  Huron  and
neighboring  districts  were  drawn  by  him  or  under
his  supervision.  Mr.  McDonald  was  elected  by  the
Liberal  party  to  the  legislative  council  of  Canada
in  1858,  and  held  that  post  till  the  confederation


MCDONALD


MAC  DONALD


101


of  the  provinces  in  1867.  In  May  of  that  year  he
was  called  to  the  senate  of  the  Dominion.  While
in  the  legislative  council  he  had  been  interested  in
the  formation  of  "  the  separate  school  system."  He
was  for  several  years  a  trustee  of  Queen's  university.
McDONALD,  Flora,  Scottish  heroine,  b.  in
Milton,  island  of  South  Uist,  Hebrides,  in  1720 ;  d.
there.  4  March,  1790.  She  was  the  daughter  of
Ronald  McDonald,  of  Milton  who  belonged  to

the  McDonalds  of
Clanranald.  Her
father  died  when
she  was  an  infant,
and,  her  moth
er  having  mar
ried  McDonald  of
Armadale,  Skye,
Flora  was  re
moved  to  that
island.  In  June,
1746,  while  on  a
visit  to  South
Uist,  she  met  Capt.
O'Xeil,  one  of  the
companions  of
Charles  Edward
Stuart,  then  on
his  wanderings
after  his  defeat
at  Culloden,  and
O'Neil  proposed
that  Flora  should
take  Charles  with  her  to  Skye,  disguised  as  a  woman.
She  refused,  but.  after  an  interview  with  the  prince,
entered  warmly  into  the  scheme.  After  encounter
ing  serious  dangers,  Flora,  the  prince,  and  an  at
tendant  reached  Skye,  where  they  were  assisted  by
Lady  McDonald,  who  consigned  the  prince  to  the
care  of  her  husband's  factor.  Soon  after  his  ar
rival  in  Skye,  the  prince  bade  farewell  to  Flora  at
Portree,  and  sailed  for  France.  The  part  she
had  taken  soon  became  known,  and  she  was  im
prisoned  until  the  act  of  indemnity,  in  1747.
In  1750  she  married  Allan  McDonald  the  young
er,  of  Kingsburgh,  and  emigrating  with  him  and
their  family  to  North  Carolina,  in  1774,  they  set
tled  in  Fayetteville.  They  had  been  preceded  by
many  of  their  countrymen,  after  the  battle  of
Culloden,  to  this  region,  where  at  one  time  Gaelic
was  spoken  in  six  counties  of  the  state.  After
ward  they  removed  to  Cameron  hill,  and  again
to  a  different  part  of  the  state.  On  3  July,  1775,
her  husband,  who,  though  aged,  was  a  man  of
energy  and  influence,  met  Martin,  and  concerted
with  him  a  rising  of  the  Highlanders.  He  served
with  the  loyalists  as  captain,  and  was  captured  at
Moore's  Creek,  and  confined  at  Halifax.  She  then
obtained  a  passport  from  a  Whig  officer,  and,  at  the
request  of  her  husband,  sailed  from  Charleston  to
her  native  land  in  a  British  sloop-of-war.  On  the
voyage  home  they  were  attacked  by  a  French  frig
ate  of  superior  force,  and,  when  capture  seemed  in
evitable,  Flora  left  her  cabin,  and  stimulated  the
crew  to  renewed  exertion  by  her  acts  and  courage.
Her  arm  was  broken  during  the  conflict.  She
landed  safely  in  Scotland,  and  never  again  left
that  country.  On  her  death-bed  she  requested  that
her  body  should  be  wrapped  in  one  of  the  sheets  in
which  the  prince  had  slept  at  the  house  of  Kings-
burgh  in  1746.  She  was  remarkable  for  her  beauty,
for  the  ease  and  dignity  of  her  manner,  and  her
loyalty  to  '•  Prince  Charlie  "  has  been  the  theme  of
scores  of  Scottish  poets.  "  Flora  McDonald's  La
ment  "  is  one  of  the  Ettrick  Shepherd's  finest  and
most  popular  productions.  Her  husband  survived


her  a  few  years.  Five  of  their  sons  served  their
king  in  a  military  capacity.  The  accompanying
picture  is  from  a  portrait  that  was  in  the  posses'sion
of  her  last  surviving  son,  Lieut.-Col.  John  McDon
ald,  of  the  British  army.

MacDONALD,  Husrh,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
Antigonish,  Nova  Scotia,  4  May,  1827.  He  was
educated  at  his  native  place,  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  of  Nova  Scotia  in  1855,  and
became  Queen's  counsel  in  1872.  He  was  defeated
when  first  a  candidate  for  the  provincial  parlia
ment,  but  was  elected  for  Inverness  in  1859,  and
represented  it  till  1862,  in  which  year  he  declined
the  solicitor-generalship.  In  1866  he  was  a  mem
ber  of  a  delegation  that  went  to  London  to  oppose
the  confederation  of  the  British  North  American
provinces,  and  in  1867  was  elected  to  the  Dominion
parliament  for  Antigonish,  and  represented  that
constituency  till  November,  1873.  Mr.  MacDonald
became  a  member  of  the  privy  council,  14  June,
1873,  and  was  president  of  that"  body  until  1  July,
when  he  was  appointed  minister  of  militia  and  de
fence.  On  5  Nov.,  1873,  he  was  appointed  for  life
a  judge  of  the  superior  court  of  Nova  Scotia.

McDONALD,  James,  physician,  b.  in  \Vhite
Plains,  N.  Y.,  18  July,  1803 ;  d.  in  Flushing,  L.  I.,
5  May,  1849.  He  was  graduated  at  the  New  York
college  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in  1825,  and  ap
pointed  the  same  year  resident  physician  of  the
Bloomingdale  insane  asylum.  In  1831  he  was  sent
by  the  governors  of  the  New  York  hospital  to  visit
the  insane  asylums  of  Europe,  with  the  under
standing  that  on  his  return  he  should  have  entire
charge  of  the  Bloomingdale  asylum  for  five  years.
He  became  a  visiting  physician  to  the  New  York
hospital  in  1837,  and  in  1841  opened  a  private  in
sane  asylum  at  Murray  hill,  which  he  aftenvard  re
moved  to  Flushing.  L.  I.  He  began  a  course  of
lectures  on  mental  diseases,  at  the  New  York  col
lege  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in  1842,  that  were
probably  the  first  of  that  character  that  were  ever
delivered  in  the  United  States.  He  published
"  Construction  and  Management  of  Insane  Hospi
tals,"  "A  Review  of  Ferrers  on  Insanity,"  "Puer
peral  Insanity,"  '•  Reports  on  the  Condition  of
Blackwell  Island  Asylum,"  and  contributed  to  the
"  American  Journal  of  Insanity."

McDONALD,  James,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
East  River,  Pictou,  Nova  Scotia,  1  July,  1828.  His
ancestors  came  from  Scotland,  and  settled  in  Pic
tou  in  the  18th  century.  He  was  educated  at  New
Glasgow,  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Nova  Scotia  in
1857,  and  created  Queen's  counsel  in  1867.  He  rep
resented  Pictou  in  the  legislature  of  Nova  Scotia
from  1859  till  1867,  and  from  1871  till  July,  1872,
when  he  resigned.  He  was  an  unsuccessful  candi
date  for  the  same  constituency  in  the  Canadian
parliament  in  1867,  was  elected  in  1874,  and  served
until  May,  1881.  Mr.  McDonald  was  chief  rail
way  commissioner  for  Nova  Scotia  from  June,
1863,  till  December,  1864,  when  he  was  appointed
financial  secretary,  and  held  that  office  till  the
union.  He  was  a'  member  of  the  commission  that
was  appointed  to  open  trade  relations  between  the
West  Indies,  Mexico,  and  Brazil,  and  the  British-
American  provinces  (1865-'6).  In  October,  1878,
he  was  appointed  minister  of  justice,  and  on  20
May,  1881,  chief  justice  of  Nova  Scotia.

MacDONALD,  James  Madison,  clergyman,  b.
in  Limerick.  Me.,  22  May,  1812 ;  d.  in  Princeton,
N.  J.,  19  April,  1876.  His  father.  John,  was  a  ma
jor-general  of  militia,  and  served  in  the  war  of
1812.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Union  college  in
1832,  and  at  Yale  theological  seminary  in  1835,  and
was  ordained  pastor  of  the  3d  Congregational


102


MAcDONALD


MACDONALD


church  of  Berlin,  Conn.,  the  same  year.  He  was
successively  pastor  of  churches  in  New  London,
Conn.,  Jamaica,  N.  Y.,  New  York  city,  and  Prince
ton,  N.  J.,  continuing  in  the  latter  charge  from
1853  until  his  death.  He  delivered  a  course  of
lectures  on  homiletics  in  Boston  university  in
1874.  Dr.  MacDonald  was  a  constant  writer  for
the  religious  press,  and  contributed  an  able  defence
of  the  historian  Gibbon  to  the  "  Bibliotheca  Sa
cra."  His  other  publications  include  "  Credulity
as  illustrated  by  Successful  Impostures  in  Science,
Superstition,  and  Fanaticism  "  (New  York,  1843) ;
"  A  Key  to  the  Book  of  Revelation  "  (1846) ;  "  His
tory  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  of  Jamaica,  Long
Island  "  (1847) ;  "  My  Father's  House,  or  the  Heaven
of  the  Bible  "  (1855) ;  "  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  Ex
plained  "  (1856) ;  and  "  The  Life  and  Writings  of
St.  John,"  published  after  his  death  (1879).— His
brother,  Moses,  congressman,  b.  in  Limerick,  Me.,
8  April,  1814;  d.  in  Saco,  Me.,  18  Oct.,  1869,  was
educated  at  Bowdoin,  studied  law,  and  in  1837  was
admitted  to  the  bar.  He  was  in  the  Maine  legisla
ture  in  1841-'5,  was  speaker  the  latter  year,  and  in
1847-'9  state  treasurer.  He  was  elected  to  con
gress  as  a  Democrat  in  1850,  served  till  1855,  was
collector  of  customs  at  Portland  in  1857-'61,  and
after  the  latter  date  returned  to  his  profession,
which  he  continued  to  practise  until  his  death.

MacDONALD,  James  Wilson  Alexander,
sculptor,  b.  in  Steubenville,  Ohio,  25  Aug.,  1824.
In  1840  he  saw  for  the  first  time  a  plaster  bust  of
Washington,  which,  together  with  his  natural  apti
tude  for  drawing,  decided  him  to  study  sculpture.
He  went  to  St.  Louis  in  1844,  where  he  was  em
ployed  in  a  business-house  during  the  day,  and  at
night  studied  art.  His  earliest  production  in  mar
ble  was  a  bust  of  Thomas  II.  Benton  (1854),  the
first  of  the  kind  produced  west  of  the  Mississippi.
Later  he  made  his  earliest  ideal  work,  a  bust  of
Joan  of  Arc,  which  he  followed  by  a  full-length
figure  called  "  Italia."  Mr.  MacDonald  settled  in
New  York  in  1865.  He  has  executed  a  colossal
head  of  Washington  for  Prospect  park,  Brooklyn,
N.  Y. ;  a  colossal  bronze  statue  of  Edward  Bates
for  Forest  park,  St.  Louis,  Mo. ;  a  statue  of  Fitz-
Greene  Halleck  for  Central  park,  New  York  ;  and  a
colossal  equestrian  statue  of  Gen.  Nathaniel  Lyon.
His  other  works  include  busts  of  Charles  O'Conor,
James  T.  Brady,  William  Cullen  Bryant,  Peter
Cooper,  Thurlow  Weed,  and  John  Van  Buren.  He
has  painted  portraits  and  landscapes  in  oil,  lec
tured  on  art  and  science,  and  written  analytical
criticisms  on  American  artists.

MACDONALD,  John,  Canadian  member  of
parliament,  b.  in  Saratoga,  N.  Y.,  10  Feb.,  1787;
d.  in  Gananoque,  Ontario,  20  Sept.,  1860.  His  fa
ther,  John,  came  to  Saratoga  from  Perthshire,  Scot
land,  a  few  days  before  the  birth  of  his  son.  The
latter  attended  school  at  Glenn's  Falls,  and,  after  en
gaging  in  business  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  removed  to  Gana
noque,  Canada,  and  became  a  partner  of  his  brother
Charles,  who  had  established  himself  in  that  place
in  1810.  In  1838  he  was  appointed  a  member  of
the  legislative  council  of  Upper  Canada,  and  at  the
time  of  the  union  of  Upper  and  Lower  Canada  in
1840  he  was  called  to  the  legislative  council  of  the
united  provinces,  of  which  he  was  a  member  until
the  removal  of  the  seat  of  government  from  Kings
ton  to  Montreal.  He  was  for  some  time  a  colonel  of
the  Leeds  militia,  held  local  offices  in  Gananoque,
and,  together  with  his  brother  Charles,  paid  for
the  building  of  the  first  church  that  was  erected  in
that  town. — His  son,  Herbert  Stone,  Canadian
jurist,  b.  in  Gananoque,  23  Feb..  1842,  was  edu
cated  at  Gananoque  grammar-school  and  at  Queen's


university,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1859.  He
then  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1863,
and  engaged  in  practice  in  Brockville.  In  1867
Mr.  Macdonald  was  appointed  deputy  judge  of  the
counties  of  Leeds  and  Grenville,  which  appoint
ment  was  revoked  in  1869.  At  the  general  election
of  1871  he  was  sent  in  the  Conservative  interest
to  the  legislative  assembly  of  Ontario,  but  resigned
in  autumn,  1873,  on  being  appointed  a  junior  judge.
In  1878  he  was  appointed  a  senior  judge,  and  in
October.  1885,  he  became  revising-officer  for  sev
eral  electoral  districts.  In  1873  he  had  charge  of
the  Orange  incorporation  bills,  which  passed  the
legislature,  but  were  reversed  by  the  lieutenant-
governor  and  never  became  law,  and  the  same  year
went  on  a  lecturing  tour  through  Ireland.

MACDONALD,  John,  Canadian  merchant,  b.
in  Perth,  Scotland,  27  Dec.,  1824.  When  a  mere
youth  he  came  to  Canada,  and  was  educated  first
at  Dalhousie  college,  Halifax,  and  then  in  Toronto.
He  served  mercantile  houses  in  Canada  and  in  Ja
maica,  W.  I.,  and  in  1849  engaged  in  business  on
his  own  account  in  Toronto,  becoming  one  of  the
wealthiest  merchants  in  the  country.  He  entered
public  life  as  a  member  for  west  "Toronto  in  the
legislative  assembly  of  Canada,  was  re-elected  in
1865,  and  served  till  1867,  when  he  was  defeated  as
a  candidate  for  the  Dominion  parliament.  In  1875
he  was  elected  for  centre  Toronto  by  acclamation,
but  was  defeated  in  1878.  Mr.  Macdonald  has
been  an  independent  Liberal  in  politics.  He  op
posed  the  coalition  of  1864,  and  voted  against  con
federation.  He  is  a  director  in  several  business
companies,  chairman  of  the  hospital  board,  a  mem
ber  of  the  senate  of  the  Provincial  university,  To
ronto,  and  a  visitor  of  Victoria  university,  Cobourg.
He  has  long  been  a  member  of  the  general  confer
ence  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and  has
been  actively  connected  with  the  Evangelical  alli
ance,  the  Bible  society,  and  the  Young  men's  Chris
tian  association.  In  November,  1887,  he  became  a
member  of  the  Dominion  senate,  and  about  the  same
time  gave  $40,000  to  found  a  hospital  in  Toronto.
He  has  published  a  pamphlet  "  Business  Success."

MACDONALD,  Sir  John  Alexander,  Canadian
statesman,  b.  in  Glasgow,  Scotland,  11  Jan.,  1815.
His  father,  Hugh  Macdonald,  emigrated  from
Sutherlandshire  to  Canada  and  settled  in  Kings
ton,  Ontario,  in  1820.  Young  Macdonald  was  edu
cated  at  the  Royal  grammar-school,  Kingston,
adopted  the  law  as  his  profession,  and  was  called
to  the  bar  of  Upper  Canada  in  1836.  Ten  years
later  he  was  appointed  Queen's  counsel,  and  after
ward  became  a  bencher,  ex  officio,  of  the  Law
society  of  Ontario.  As  counsel  he  achieved  dis
tinction  by  his  memorable  defence  of  Von  Schultz,
who  raided  Canada  in  1836  at  the  head  of  a  small
band  of  marauders.  But  it  is  as  a  politician  and
statesman  that  he  has  won  his  place  in  Canadian
history.  He  entered  public  life  in  1844  as  the  rep
resentative  of  the  city  of  Kingston  in  the  house  of
assembly,  and  continued  to  sit  for  this  constitu
ency  until  the  union  of  1867,  when  he  was  elected
to  the  house  of  commons  of  Canada  by  the  same
electorate  until  1878,  when  he  was  defeated.  Mar-
quette  in  Manitoba,  and  Victoria,  British  Colum
bia,  afterward  returned  him,  and  in  1882  Lennox
and  Carleton  counties  chose  him  as  their  member.
He  sat  in  parliament  for  the  former  county,  and  at
the  general  election  of  1887  Carleton  and  Kings
ton  both  elected  him.  In  May,  1847,  he  was  first
appointed  to  office,  becoming  receiver-general  and
subsequently  commissioner  of  crown  lands  in  the
Draper  ministry.  Early  in  the  following  year  the
government  was  defeated  by  the  Reformers,  and


MACDONALD


MACDONALD


103


Macdonald  and  his  colleagues  remained  in  opposi
tion  until  1854.  During  the  interim  he  developed
powers  of  assiduity  and  tact,  familiarized  himself
with  all  the  great  questions  of  the  day,  and  ac
quired  a  knowledge  of  procedure  and  practice
which  served  him  well  in  after-life.  He  took  a  first
place  at  once  among  the  debaters  of  the  time,  and
his  speeches  on  the  rebellion  losses  bill  and  the
secularization  of  the  clergy  reserves  attracted
marked  attention.  The  former  measure  he  op
posed  with  vigor  and  energy.  In  September,  1854,
the  latter  question  proved  the  issue  before  the  peo
ple,  and  Macdonald  entered  the  coalition  cabinet
of  MacNab-Morin,  pledged  to  settle  the  vexed
problem  at  once  and  forever.  He  accepted  an  office
for  which  his  training  well  fitted  him — that  of
attorney-general — and  during  the  sway  of  the  coali
tion  the  clergy  reserves  were  secularized  on  a  fair
and  equitable  basis.  Seignorial  tenure  in  Lower
Canada  was  also  abolished.  In  1856  the  nominal
leader  of  the  Conservatives,  Sir  Allan  MacNab,  suc
cumbed  to  gout,  and,  much  to  his  chagrin,  his
young  and  active  lieutenant,  Macdonald,  was  chosen
to  succeed  him  as  chief  of  the  party.  This  post
he  has  held  ever  since,  and  in  office  and  out  of  it
he  has  exercised  a  degree  of  personal  influence
over  his  followers  that  has  never  been  equalled
in  the  case  of  any  other  public  man  in  Canada.  In
1858  the  government  was  defeated  on  the  seat  of

government  question.  Macdonald  resigned,  and
eorge  Brown  was  called  on  to  form  a  new  admin
istration.  He  succeeded  in  the  task,  but,  being
defeated  on  the  first  vote  in  the  house  of  assembly,
he  made  way  for  Macdonald,  who  again  resumed
power,  taking  the  office  of  postmaster  -  general,
which  he  resigned  the  next  day  in  order  to  assume
his  more  congenial  office  of  attorney-general.  His
ministers  also  changed  offices,  and  this  incident  in
Canadian  politics  is  known  as  the  "  double  shuffle."
Macdonald  held  the  attorney  -  generalship  until
1802,  when  his  government  was  defeated  on  the
militia  bill.  With  Sir  George  Etienne  Carder  he
led  the  opposition  until  March,  1864,  when,  on  the
fall  of  the  Sandfield  Macdonald-Dorion  ministry,
he  formed  a  new  government,  with  Sir  Etienne  P.
Tache  leading  the  Lower  Canadian  contingent.  He
resumed  the  attorney-generalship,  but  it  was  found,
however,  impossible  to  carry  on  affairs  with  com
fort.  The  government,  owing  to  frequent  dead
locks,  was  quite  unable  to  command  the  confidence
of  parliament,  and  the  proposition  to  federalize
Upper  and  Lower  Canada  and  the  maritime  prov
inces  of  Nova  Scotia,  New  Brunswick,  and  Prince
Edward  island  was  received  with  enthusiasm  as  a
way  out  of  the  difficulty.  A  conference  took
place  between  the  leaders  on  both  sides,  and  the
question  was  very  fully  discussed.  In  1864  Mac
donald  attended  as  a  delegate  the  conference
that  had  been  called  at  Charlottetown,  Prince
Edward  island,  where  the  smaller  confederation  of
the  seaboard  provinces  was  under  consideration.
Macdonald  and  his  associates  turned  the  tide,  and
succeeded  in  convincing  most  of  the  gentlemen
present  that  the  larger  union  of  all  the  British
North  American  provinces  was  much  the  more
desirable  scheme  of  the  two.  Another  convention
was  held  a  few  months  afterward  in  the  city  of
Quebec,  delegates  from  all  the  provinces  being
present,  and  at  this  meeting  the  plan  of  union  was
formed.  In  bringing  about  confederation,  Mac
donald  took  an  active  part,  and  in  1866-'7  he  was
chairman  of  the  London  colonial  conference,  when
the  British  North  America  act  was  passed  by  the
Imperial  parliament.  In  1865  Sir  Etienne  P.
Tache  died,  and  his  colleague  was  asked  to  take


the  premiership ;  but  he  declined  in  favor  of  Sir
Narcisse  F.  Belleau.  Macdonald  held  the  office  of
minister  of  militia  jointly  with  that  of  attorney-
general  from  January  to  May,  1862,  and  from
August,  1865,  until  the  union.  On  1  July,  1867,
the  new  constitution  came  into  force  in  Canada,
and  Macdonald  was  sworn  as  a  privy  councillor
and  appointed  minister  of  justice  and  attorney-
general.  In  recognition  of  his  services,  he  was
created  a  knight  commander  of  the  bath  (civil)  by
the  Queen,  and  in  1884  he  received  the  grand  cross
of  the  same  order.  He  remained  prime  minister
until  1873,  when  his  government  resigned  on  the
Canadian  Pacific  charges.  Alexander  Mackenzie
accepted  the  responsibilities  of  office,  and  Sir  John
was  leader  of  the  opposition  for  nearly  five  years,
and  as  such  gave  the  administration  the  benefit
of  his  ability  and  long  experience  in  perfecting,
among  other  measures  of  importance,  the  insolvent
act  and  the  act  that  constituted  the  supreme  court
of  the  Dominion.  In  September,  1878,  the  Liberal
party  was  defeated  at  the  polls  on  the  cry  of  pro
tection  to  native  industries,  and  Sir  John  was  sent
|  for  by  the  Governor-general,  and  invited  to  form  a
government.  .  He  accepted  the  charge,  and,  true  to
his  promises,  a  high  tariff  on  imported  goods  at
once  became  the  fiscal  policy  of  the  country.  The
new  tariff  discriminated  in  favor  of  no  nation,  the
products  of  all,  not  even  excepting  Great  Britain,
being  placed  on  the  same  footing.  Sir  John  took
the  portfolio  of  the  interior,  and  subsequently  be
came  president  of  the  privy  council  and  superin
tendent  of  Indian  affairs.  In  1882  and  1887  he
was  alike  successful  at  the  polls,  though  in  the  lat
ter  year,  owing  to  defections  from  his  party  on  the
Riel  rebellion  question,  his  majority  in  the  house
of  commons  was  considerably  reduced.  Sir  John
has  been  charged  at  various  times  with  the  execu
tion  of  delicate  diplomatic  missions.  He  has  been
a  delegate  to  England  and  to  other  countries  on
public  business  very  frequently.  In  1871  he  was
appointed  one  of  her  majesty's  joint  high  commis
sioners  with  Earl  de  Grey,  Sir  Stafford  Northcote,
Sir  Edward  Thornton,  and  the  JRight  Hon.  Mon
tague  Bernard,  to  settle  the  Alabama  claims  ques
tion,  then  pending  between  Great  Britain  and  the
United  States.  The  treaty  of  Washington,  signed
May,  1871,  was  the  outcome  of  this  conference  with
the  American  commissioners.  For  this  service  Sir
John  was  called  to  the  privy  council  of  Great
Britain  (July,  1872),  an  honor  seldom  c'onferred
on  a  colonial  statesman.  In  1865  the  Univer
sity  of  Oxford  conferred  on  him  the  degree  of
D.  C.  L.,  and  later  Queen's  university,  Kingston,
and  McGill  university,  Montreal,  that  of  LL.  D.,
and  Trinity  college,  Toronto,  made  him  D.  C.  L.
During  his  long  political  career  Sir  John  has  car
ried  to  a  successful  issue  very  many  measures  of
the  highest  importance,  besides  those  that  have
been  briefly  referred  to  here.  Chief  among  them
are  the  improvement  of  the  criminal  laws  of  Can
ada  ;  the  consolidation  of  the  statutes ;  the  exten
sion  of  the  municipal  system ;  military  organiza
tion  ;  the  establishment  of  direct  steam  mail  com
munication  with  Europe ;  the  inspection  of  re
formatories,  prisons,  penitentiaries,  and  asylums ;
the  reorganization  of  the  civil  service  on  a  perma
nent  basis ;  the  construction  of  the  Intercolonial
and  the  Canadian  Pacific  railways ;  the  enlarge
ment  of  the  canals ;  the  enactment  of  a  stringent
election  law ;  the  extension  of  the  franchise ;  the
ratification  of  the  Washington  treaty ;  and  the  ex
tension  and  consolidation  of  the  Dominion.  At
the  time  of  the  Riel  outbreaks  in  the  northwest
territories  of  Canada,  Sir  John  was  at  the  head  of


104


MACDONALD


MCDONALD


affairs,  and  under  his  direction  the  insurgents  were
crushed  and  punished,  the  operations  being  con
ducted  with  spirit  and  determination.  Sir  John
has  natural  abilities  of  the  highest  order,  is  an  au
thority  on  constitutional  law,  and  ranks  high  as  a
public  speaker  and  parliamentary  debater.  He  has
always  devoted  himself  to  the  public  interest,  as
he  has  understood  it,  and  his  bitterest  opponents
cannot  charge  him  with  being  governed  by  avarice
or  personal  ambition  in  his  conduct  of  public  af
fairs. — His  wife,  SUSAN  AGNES,  whom  he  married
in  1867,  is  a  daughter  of  Thomas  J.  Bernard,  mem
ber  of  the  Queen's  privy  council,  Jamaica,  W.  I.,
and  is  known  as  a  writer  for  periodicals.

MACDONALD, John Sandfleld, Canadian
statesman,  b.  in  St.  Raphaels,  Glengarry,  12  Dec.,

1812  ;  d. in  Corn
wall,  1  June,  1872.
His  grandfather
came  from  Scot
land  in  178(5  with
one  of  those  High
land  migrations
by  which  the  coun
ty  of  Glengarry
was  almost  exclu
sively  colonized.
His  mother  died
when  he  was  a
boy,  and,  being
dissatisfied  with
the  career  that  was
intended  for  him,
he  ran  away  from
home  and  served

as  a  merchant's  clerk  for  about  two  years,  when  he
determined  to  abandon  commerce  for  law.  His
education  having  been  much  neglected,  in  Novem
ber,  1832,  he  entered  Cornwall  grammar-school,  and,
though  the  usual  course  was  three  years,  at  the  end
of  two  years  he  was  declared  "  dux  "  of  the  school.
In  1835  Mr.  Macdonald  passed  his  preliminary  ex
amination  before  the  Law  society,  and  in  June,
1840,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  practice
in  Cornwall.  He  achieved  an  immediate  success,
and  established  a  lucrative  practice,  which  he  re
tained  and  increased  even  after  his  attention  had
been  diverted  from  his  professional  duties  by  his
political  associations.  In  1841  he  was  elected  nomi
nally  as  a  Conservative  to  the  parliament  of  the  re
cently  united  provinces  of  Upper  and  Lower  Cana
da  for  Glengarry.  In  the  first  session  of  this  parlia
ment  the  resolutions  that  established  responsible
government  were  passed,  but  Sir  Charles  Metcalf
having  attempted,  in  November,  1843,  to  subvert
their  principles,  Mr.  Macdonald  separated  from
his  former  political  associates,  and  thenceforward
acted  as  an  independent  reformer.  Though  Glen
garry  was  a  Conservative  constituency,  Mr.  Mac-
donald's  Gaelic  and  English  harangues  secured  his
re-election,  and  produced  a  complete  change  in  its
politics.  In  1848,  1852,  and  1854  he  was  re-elected
without  opposition.  He  succeeded  William  Hume
Blake  as  solicitor-general  in  the  Baldwin-Lafon-
taine  government  in  December,  1849,  and  held
this  portfolio  till  his  resignation  in  1851.  He  was
speaker  of  parliament  in  1852-'4.  and  in  1858  was
attorney-general  in  the  Brown-Dorion,  or  "two-
days'  "  ministry.  In  1857  he  was  elected  for  Corn
wall,  and  in  1862  was  called  upon  by  Lord  Monk
to  form  a  government  after  the  defeat  of  the  Car-
tier-Macdonald  administration.  This  he  did,  and
remained  its  premier  until  he  resigned  in  1864.  In
1867  he  became  premier  of  the  province  of  Ontario,
and  the  leader  of  a  coalition  government,  but  after


the  elections  of  1871,  finding  himself  in  a  minority,
he  resigned  the  leadership,  though  he  remained  a
member  of  parliament  till  his  death.  Mr.  Mac
donald,  though  regarded  as  a  reformer  during  the
greater  part  of  his  public  life,  never  claimed  politi
cal  consistency,  nor  permitted  his  allegiance  to  [tarty
to  influence  his  judgment  or  determine  his  actions.
He  opposed  the  confederation  of  the  provinces,  rep
resentation  by  population,  and,  although  a  Roman
Catholic,  was  not  an  advocate  of  separate  schools.
He  possessed  great  administrative  powers,  and  was
personally  popular,  but  too  independent  to  be  a  good
party-leader,  and  was  regarded  even  by  his  political
opponents  as  being  above  the  suspicion  of  public  or
private  wrong-doing.  He  married  a  daughter  of
George  A.  Waggaman,  U.  S.  senator. — His  brother,
Donald  Alexander,  statesman,  b.  in  St.  Raphaels,
Glengarry,  Ontario,  17  Feb.,  1817,  was  educated  at
St.  Raphaels  college.  He  was  a  contractor  on  the
Grand  Trunk  railway  for  some  time,  for  several
years  warden  of  the  counties  of  Stormont,  Dundas,
and  Glengarry,  and  in  1857  was  elected  to  the  Can
ada  assembly  for  Glengarry.  He  represented  this
constituency  till  the  union  of  1867.  when  he  was  re-
elected  for  it  to  the  Dominion  parliament.  In  1871
he  was  offered  the  treasurership  of  Ontario,  which
he  refused.  He  was  elected  for  Glengarry  again  in
1872,  and  on  his  appointment  as  postmaster-general
in  the  Mackenzie  administration,  7  Nov.,  1873.  was
re-elected  by  acclamation,  as  well  as  afterward  in
1874.  He  remained  postmaster-general  until  lie
was  appointed  lieutenant-governor  of  Ontario,  18
May,  1875,  retired  from  the  latter  office  in  1880,
and  has  since  been  out  of  public  life.  Mr.  Mac
donald  is  lieutenant-colonel  commanding  the  Glen
garry  reserve  militia,  and  president  of  the  Mon
treal  and  Ottawa  junction  railway.

McDONALD,  Joseph  Swing;  senator,  b.  in
Butler  county,  Ohio,  29  Aug.,  1819.  His  father
died  while  the  son  was  an  infant,  and  the  latter
was  educated  by  his  mother  until  his  thirteenth
year,  when  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  saddler.  He
entered  Wabash  college,  Crawfordsvillc,  Ind..  at
eighteen  years  of  age,  supporting  himself  by  work
ing  at  his  trade  at  odd  hours  and  between  terms,
was  at  Asbury  university  in  1840-'2,  and  after  leav
ing  college  studied  law.  He  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1844.  and,  removing  to  Crawfordsville  in
1845,  established  a  practice.  He  was  elected  attor
ney-general  in  1856,  and  three  years  later  removed
to  Indianapolis,  where  he  has' since  followed  his
profession.  He  was
elected  to  congress
as  a  Democrat  in
1848,  and  served  in
1849-'51,  but  was
defeated  in  the  next
canvass,  and  also
in  1864  as  Demo
cratic  candidate  for
governor  against
Oliver  P.  Morton.
He  was  chairman
of  the  state  Demo
cratic  committee  in
1872,  reorganized
the  party,  and  se
cured  the  election
of  a  Democratic  le
gislature  by  which
he  was  sent  to  the
U.  S.  senate  in  1875,  serving  till  1881.  While  in
that  body  he  took  a  conspicuous  part  in  debates  on
finance,  and  was  in  favor  of  hard  money  and  a  pro
tective  tariff.


MCDONALD


MACDONELL


105


McDONALD,  Ronald.  Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Antigonish  county,  Nova  Scotia,  in  1835.  He
began  his  classical  studies  in  Cape  George,  and  fin
ished  his  theological  course  in  St.  Francis  Xavier's
college,  where  he  was  ordained  priest,  2  Oct.,  1859.
He  was  then  appointed  professor  in  the  college,
where  he  remained  for  three  years.  In  1862  he  was
sent  to  take  charge  of  the  Roman  Catholic  mission
in  Pictou.  During  his  ministry  he  erected  five
churches,  including  a  fine  one  at  Pictou,  and  in
1880  he  built  a  lay  convent  and  extensive  schools
in  that  place.  He  established  schools  among  the
Micmac  Indians,  in  which  all  the  Indian  children
of  school  age  are  at  present  (1888)  receiving  an  edu
cation.  His  congregation,  which  numbered  about
one  hundred  when  he  was  first  appointed  pastor,
was  considerably  over  1.000  in  1881.  Dr.  McDonald
was  consecrated  bishop  of  Harbor  Grace  in  the
church  of  Pictou,  21  Aug.,  1881.  The  Roman
Catholic  church  has  made  considerable  progress  in
his  diocese  under  his  administration.

MACDONELL,  Alexander,  Canadian  R.  C.
bishop,  b.  in  Glen  Urquhart,  in  the  Glengarry
Highlands,  Scotland,  in  1762;  d.  in  Dumfries,
Scotland,  14  Jan.,  1840.  He  was  sent  at  an  early
age  to  the  Scotch  college  at  Valladolid,  Spain,
where  he  studied  for  the  priesthood,  and,  after  his
ordination  in  1787,  returned  to  Scotland  and  did
missionary  duty  in  Lochaber.  At  this  period  the
rise  in  the  price  of  wool  and  meat,  owing  to  the
development  of  manufactures  in  the  Lowlands,  de
cided  several  of  the  Highland  chiefs  to  substitute
large  sheep-farms  for  small  holdings  on  their  prop
erty.  In  1792  Father  Macdonell,  who  was  then
laboring  on  the  borders  between  Inverness  and
Perth,  endeavored  to  secure  employment  in  the
Lowlands  for  the  evicted  Highlanders  who  were  too
poor  to  emigrate.  He  persuaded  Glasgow  manu
facturers  to  take  600  of  them  into  their  employ;
but  the  stagnation  of  trade,  caused  by  the  French
revolution,  threw  them  out  of  work.  Then  the
missionary  convened  a  meeting  of  representative
Roman  Catholics  at  Fort  Augustus  in  1794,  and
the  services  of  the  Clan  Macdonell  were  tend
ered  to  the  king.  They  offered  to  serve  in  any
part  of  his  majesty's  dominions  under  their  chief
tain,  Macdonell  of  Glengarry.  The  offer  was  ac
cepted,  the  1st  Glengarry  fencible  regiment  was
organized,  and  Father  Macdonell  was  appointed
chaplain,  although  such  an  appointment  was  con
trary  to  law.  They  served  with  other  Highland
rejjiments  in  the  Irish  rebellion  of  1798,  and  tra-
duuons  of  the  forbearance  and  humanity  of  these
Scotch  regiments  still  linger  among  the  Irish  peas
antry.  The  regiment  was  disbanded  in  1803,  and
Father  Macdonell  appealed  to  the  English  govern
ment  to  assign  its  members  a  tract  of  land  in  Can
ada.  The  P^nglish  ministry  was  at  this  time  doubt
ful  as  to  whether  they  could  keep  Canada,  and
offered  to  settle  the  Highlanders  in  Trinidad  in
stead,  but  in  1804  a  grant  of  160.000  acres  was  made
in  what  is  now  Glengarry  county,  Canada.  Father
Macdonell  accompanied  his  clan,  and  after  their  ar
rival  the  whole  work,  not  only  of  founding  churches
and  schools,  but  of  organizing  the  settlement,  fell
on  his  shoulders.  In  1812  he  raised  again  a  regi
ment  of  Glengarry  fencibles  and  hastened  to  the
defence  of  St.  Lawrence  river.  His  services  were
duly  acknowledged  by  the  government,  from  which
he  received  a  pension  of  £400,  and  afterward  £600
a  year,  and  he  was  also  formally  thanked  by  the
prince  regent.  Father  Macdonell  was  made  vicar
apostolic  of  Upper  Canada  on  12  Jan.,  1819,  and
received  episcopal  consecration  in  Quebec  in  De
cember,  1820,  under  the  title  of  Bishop  of  Regiopo-


lis  t'n  pariibus.  He  then  returned  to  Upper  Can
ada  and  fixed  his  episcopal  residence  at  Kingston.
With  the  exception  of  Kingston,  the  only  towns  that
had  Roman  Catholic  churches  were  Charlottenburg
and  Toronto.  The  Roman  Catholic  population  in
his  whole  vicariate
hardly  amounted
to  30,000,  of  whom
more  than  half
were  Indians,  and
to  minister  tothem
he  had  only  two
priests.  Under
hisadministratiori,
however,  the  num-
berof  Roman  Cath
olics  grew  rapidly,
and  it  was  soon
found  necessary  to
change  the  vicari
ate  into  a  regular
see.  The  city
of  Kingston  was
therefore  erected
into  a  titular  bish
opric,  18  Jan..  1826,
by  Pope  Leo  XII.

in  favor  of  Dr.  Macdonell,  to  whom  Cardinal  Weld
was  assigned  as  coadjutor,  but  the  latter  declined  to
go  to  Canada.  The  rest  of  his  episcopate  was  spent
in  founding  new  parishes,  erecting  churches  and
schools,  and  forming  new  missions  in  the  depths
of  the  solitary  forests  of  his  immense  diocese.  He
founded  the  Highland  society,  afterward  destined
to  have  no  inconsiderable  influence  in  Canada,  and
in  1837  he  took  steps  to  establish  a  Roman  Catholic
seminary  for  Upper  Canada  to  be  called  Regiopolis
college.  To  procure  funds  for  this  purpose  and
to  stimulate  emigration  among  the  Highlanders,
he  visited  Europe  in  1839.  He  spent  some  time  in
London  conferring  with  the  English  ministry,  and
then  went  to  Inverness,  where  he  entered  upon  the
work  for  which  he  had  come  to  Scotland.  He  went
to  Ireland  in  October  to  attend  a  meeting  of  the
Irish  bishops,  and  was  prostrated  by  sickness  there,
but  returned  to  Scotland,  intending  to  go  to  Lon
don  for  the  purpose  of  arranging  with  the  English
ministry  an  emigration  of  Highlanders  to  Canada
on  an  extensive  scale.  Bishop  Macdonell  was  a
man  of  liberal  views  and  unbounded  charity.  Dur
ing  his  episcopate  he  built  forty-eight  churches.

MACDONELL,  Allan.  Canadian  explorer,  b.  in
York  (now  Toronto),  5  Nov.,  1808.  His  father,
Alexander,  a  native  of  Inverness-shire,  Scotland,
was  for  many  years  a  member  of  the  legislature,
and  legislative  council  of  Upper  Canada.  The  son
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1832,  and
in  the  following  year  entered  into  partnership  with
Sir  Allan  N.  MacNab.  A  short  time  previous  to
the  rebellion  of  1837  he  was  appointed  sheriff  of
the  Gore  district,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  re
volt  raised  a  troop  of  cavalry  armed  and  equipped
at  his  own  expense.  After  holding  the  Gore  shriev
alty  for  five  years  he  resigned,  and  in  the  winter  of
1846  obtained  from  the  government  a  license  for
exploring  the  shores  of  Lake  Superior  for  mines.
Though  opposed  by  the  Hudson  bay  company,  he
was  successful,  and'as  a  result  the  Quebec  company
was  formed,  and  mining  operations  were  carried  on
successfully  for  several  years.  The  government,  in
overlooking  the  claims  of  the  Indians  for  compen
sation,  in  selling  the  lands  occupied  by  the  Quebec
company,  made  trouble  between  the  aborigines  and
the  miners.  Mr.  Macdonell  twice  accompanied
deputations  of  chiefs  to  urge  their  claims  upon  the


106


MACDONELL


MACDONOUGH


government.  Commissioners  were  appointed  by
the  latter  to  arrange  the  difficulty,  but,  owing  to
their  incompetence,  no  understanding  was  arrived
at,  and  finally  the  Indians  regained  possession  of
their  property  by  force,  in  which  they  were  sup
ported  by  Mr-  Macdonell.  Soon  afterward  a  mili
tary  expedition  was  sent  to  the  mines,  and  he  and
two  Indian  chiefs  were  arrested  and  taken  to  To
ronto,  but  were  released  on  a  writ  of  habeas  corpus.
The  question  of  the  Indian  title  to  the  land  was
finally  settled  in  1850,  when  by  treaty  the  Indians
received  payment.  In  1850  Mr.  Macdonell  pro
jected  the  construction  of  a  canal  around  the  Sault
Ste.  Marie  on  the  Canadian  side ;  but  the  govern
ment  refusing  to  grant  a  charter,  the  scheme  proved
abortive.  In  his  explorations  of  the  country  west
of  Lake  Superior  he  had  acquired  a  good  knowledge
of  the  country  and  its  capabilities,  and  at  an  early
date  had  published  a  series  of  articles  in  the  To
ronto  newspapers  advocating  the  scheme  of  a  Pacific
railway.  He  applied  to  parliament  for  a  charter
for  its"  construction,  the  road  to  extend  from  the
head  of  Lake  Superior  to  the  Pacific  ocean,  but
was  refused  on  the  ground  that  such  an  under
taking  was  premature.  He  continued  to  interest
himself  in  the  work  of  opening  communication
with  the  northwest,  and  in  1858  secured  from  par
liament  the  charter  for  the  Northwest  transit  com
pany,  of  which  Sir  Allan  N.  MacNab  was  afterward
president,  and  Sir  John  Beverley  Robinson  secre
tary.  Mr.  Macdonell  afterward  removed  to  To
ronto,  where  he  now  (1887)  resides.

MACDONELL,  Miles,  governor  of  Assiniboia,
b.  in  Inverness,  Scotland,  in  1767;  d.  at  Point
Fortune,  on  Ottawa  river,  in  1828.  His  father,
Col.  John  Macdonell,  of  Scothouse,  Inverness-shire,
at  the  invitation  of  Sir  William  Johnson,  came  to
this  country  in  1773,  with  several  of  his  friends,
and  settled  at  Caughnawaga,  on  Mohawk  river,  in
New  York.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary
war,  Col.  Macdonell  migrated  with  his  family  to
Canada,  and  took  up  his  residence  at  St.  Andrews,
near  Cornwall,  where  he  died  in  1810.  The  son
Miles,  who  showed  military  tendencies  at  an  early
age,  was  appointed  ensign  in  the  king's  royal  regi
ment  of  New  York  in  1792,  lieutenant  in  the
royal  Canadian  volunteers  in  1794.  and  captain  in
the  same  corps  in  1796.  At  the  request  of  Lord
Selkirk  he  visited  London  in  1803,  and  was  in
duced  by  that  nobleman  to  assume  the  post  of  gov
ernor  of  his  projected  colony  on  Red  river,  North
west  territory.  He  arrived  there  with  the  first
body  of  colonists,  composed  principally  of  evicted
Scottish  Highlanders  from  the  Sutherland  estates,
in  1812,  and  was  at  once  met  with  opposition  from
the  agents  of  the  Northwest  company,  whose  head
quarters  were  at  Montreal.  On  11  June,  1815,  the
Northwest  company's  servants  attacked  and  fired
upon  the  colonists,  and  demanded  the  surrender  of
Gov.  Macdonell,  who,  to  save  the  effusion  of  blood,

fave  himself  up  voluntarily.  He  was  taken  to
lontreal  as  a  prisoner,  and  charges  preferred
against  him  by  his  enemies,  but  his  case  was  not
tried.  During  his  ten  or  twelve  years'  connection
with  Lord  Selkirk's  Red  river  settlement  he  was
its  leading  spirit  and  took  an  active  and  decided
part  in  the  feuds  of  the  Hudson  bay  and  North
west  trading  companies.  His  latter  years  were
spent  at  his  farm  at  Osnaburg,  Upper  Canada,  but
he  died  at  the  residence  of  his  brother,  John.

MACDONNELL,  Daniel  James,  Canadian  cler
gyman,  b.  in  Bathurst.  New  Brunswick,  15  Jan.,
1843.  His  father,  the  Rev.  George  Macdonnell,  a
native  of  Scotland,  had  for  many  years  been  pas
tor  of  the  Church  of  Scotland  congregation  at


Bathurst,  but  in  1850  resigned  his  charge  and  re
turned  with  his  family  to  Scotland,  where  the  son
received  his  preparatory  education.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Queen's  college,  Kingston,  Canada,  at  fif
teen  years  of  age,  and  studied  theology  at  Glas
gow,  Heidelberg,  and  Edinburgh,  where  he  was
graduated  in  divinity  in  1865,  and  ordained  by
the  presbytery  in  1866.  He  then  returned  to  Can
ada  and  was  minister  of  St.  Andrew's  church.
Peterborough,  until  1870,  when  he  was  appointed
pastor  of  St.  Andrew's  church,  Toronto,  where
one  of  the  finest  churches  in  the  city  was  built  for
him.  He  had  expressed  doubts  as  'to  the  correct
ness  of  some  of  the  doctrines  of  his  church,  and
was  prosecuted  for  heresy,  but  the  case  was  finally
dismissed  upon  his  promise  not  to  introduce  his
doubts  into  the  pulpit.  He  was  one  of  the  most
active  promoters  of  the  union  of  the  various
branches  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Canada,
which  was  consummated  in  1875.  He  was  ap
pointed  by  the  Ontario  government  as  one  of  its
representatives  in  the  senate  of  Toronto  univer
sity,  and  is  one  of  the  most  eloquent  and  learned
of  Canadian  clergymen.

MeDONOGH,  John,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Balti
more,  Md.,  29  Dec..  1779;  d.  in  McDonogh,  La.,
26  Oct.,  1850.  His  father,  John,  was  in  the  Brad-
dock  expedition  in  1755,  and  afterward  served  in
the  Revolution.  The  son  received  an  academic
education,  and  at  seventeen  entered  mercantile  life
in  Baltimore,  but  removed  in  1800  to  New  Orleans,
where  he  rapidly  accumulated  wealth  in  the  com
mission  and  shipping  business.  During  the  war
of  1812  he  participated  in  the  battle  of  New  Or
leans.  In  1818  he  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate
for  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  about  this  time  founded
the  town  of  McDonoghville.  In  1822  he  prepared
to  liberate  his  slaves,  but,  disapproving  of  manumis
sion,  required  each  one  to  buy  himself  at  a  moder
ate  sum.  To  enable  him  to  accumulate  this,  Mr.
McDonogh  paid  each  slave  for  his  services  at  fair
rates,  gave  an  education  to  those  that  desired  it,
and,  when  freedom  had  been  purchased,  sent  ship
loads  of  his  negroes  to  Africa  at  his  own  expense
for  a  period  of  seventeen  years.  He  became  a  vice-
president  of  the  American  colonization  society  in
1830,  and  contributed  largely  to  its  support.  At
his  death  he  left  the  bulk  of  his  fortune,  which
was  estimated  at  more  than  .$2,000,000,  to  the  cities
of  New  Orleans  and  Baltimore,  for  the  purpose  of'
establishing  free  schools.  After  many  years  of  liti
gation  and  much  loss  of  value  by  the  civil  war,  an
estate  of  800  acres  was  purchased  on  the  Western
Maryland  railroad  near  Baltimore  in  1873,  and  the
McDonogh  labor-schools  were  established,  at  which
seventy  boys  annually  are  received  to  learn  practical
and  scientific  farming,  and  the  rudiments  of  an
English  education.  In  New  Orleans  the  principal
of  the  fund  is  invested  in  the  McDonogh  schools,
which  are  conducted  in  connection  with  the  pub
lic  schools  of  that  city.  He  also  left  bequests  to
the  American  colonization  society  and  to  the  New
Orleans  boys'  orphan  asylum.  See  "  Life  and
Work  of  John  McDonogh,''  by  William  Allan
(Baltimore,  1886).

MACDONOUGH,  Thomas,  naval  officer,  b.  in
New  Castle  county,  Del.,  23  Dec.,  1783;  d.  at  sea,
16  Nov.,  1825.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midship
man  in  1800,  and  in  1803  was  attached  to  the  frig
ate  "  Philadelphia,"  which  was  one  of  the  squad
ron  employed  against  Tripoli,  under  the  command
of  Com.  Edward  H.  Preble.  On  26  Aug.,  1803,
the  "  Philadelphia  "  captured  the  Moorish  frigate
"  Meshboa,"  of  the  Cape  de  Gatte,  on  the  Spanish
coast,  and  Macdonough  escaped  the  captivity  that


MACDONOUGH


MACDOUGALL


107


subsequently  befell  the  other  officers  and  crew  by
being  left  at  Gibraltar  with  her  prize.  He  after
ward  served  in  the  schooner  "  Enterprise,"  under
Com.  Stephen  Decatur,  participating  in  the  vari
ous  attacks  that  were  made  in  1804  upon  the  city

and  batteries  of
Tripoli,  and  was
one  of  the  parry
under  Decatur
that  recaptured
and  destroyed
the  "Philadel
phia  "  on  the
night  of  16  Feb.,
1804.  He  was
promoted  lieu
tenant  in  1807,
and  mast ercom-
mander  in  1813.
In  August,1814,
a  British  army
of  about  12,-
000.  under  Sir
George  Provost,
advanced  along
the  western
shore  of  Lake

Champlain  to  Plattsburg,  which  was  held  by  Gen.
Alexander  Macomb,  with  about  1,500  men.  The
British  squadron,  under  Capt.  George  Downie,  con
sisted  of  16  vessels,  carrying  95  guns  and  about  1,000
men.  The  American  naval  force,  which  was  under
Commander  Macdonough.  was  anchored  in  Platts
burg  bay.  and  consisted  of  14  vessels  of  all  classes,
carrying  86  guns  and  about  850  men.  At  sunrise
on  11  Sept.  the  British  came  in  sight,  and  by  eight
o'clock  approached  the  American  fleet.  Fire  was
opened  by  the  Americans,  who,  as  a  matter  of  course,
were  anchored  with  springs.  But,  in  addition  to
this  arrangement,  Macdonough  had  laid  a  kedge
broad  off  on  each  bow  of  the  "  Saratoga,"  and
brought  their  hawsers  in,  upon  the  two  quarters,
letting  them  hang  in  bights  under  water.  By
this  timely  precaution  the  victory  is  said  to  have
been  gained.  The  attack  was  not  returned  by  the
British  until  the  "  Confiance  "  had  anchored  about
300  yards  from  the  American  line.  Her  first
broadside  killed  or  wounded  forty  men  on  the
"Saratoga,"  nearly  a  fifth  of  her  entire  force,  and
more  than  a  third  of  the  American  force  during
the  action.  The  engagement  then  became  general.
In  an  hour  the  whole  starboard  battery  of  the
"Saratoga"  was  disabled.  She  was  then  winded
about  by  means  of  the  kedges  that  had  been  laid
on  her  bows,  and  was  brought  to  bear  on  the
"  Confiance,"  which  had  also  suffered  severely  and
lost  her  captain,  George  Downie.  After  attempt
ing  to  perform  the  same  evolution  without  suc
cess,  and  fighting  about  two  hours  and  a  half,  the
"  Confiance "  was  forced  to  strike  her  flag.  The
remainder  of  the  British  fleet  were  either  taken  or
put  to  flight.  The  enemy's  loss  was  about  200,  ex
clusive  of  prisoners.  That  of  the  Americans  in
killed  and  wounded  was  112.  The  British  lost  all
but  20  of  the  95  guns  they  had  brought  into  ac
tion.  By  Macdonough's  precaution  of  throwing  out
kedges  from  the  bows  of  the  "  Saratoga."  her  26
guns  were  practically  twice  as  many,  since  she
could  be  turned  around  and  so  present  a  fresh
broadside  to  the  enemy.  During  most  of  the  ac
tion  Macdonough  pointed  a  favorite  gun,  and  was
twice  knocked  senseless  by  shots  that  cut  the
spanker  boom,  letting  the  spar  fall  on  his  back.
For  his  services  on  this  occasion  he  was  made  cap
tain,  received  a  gold  medal  from  congress,  numer


ous  civic  honors  from  cities  and  towns,  and  was
presented  by  the  legislature  of  Vermont  with  an
estate  upon  Cumberland  head,  which  overlooks  the
scene  of  the  engagement.  The  Mediterranean
squadron  was  his  last  command,  and  he  died  on
board  a  trading  brig  that  had  been  sent  by  the
IT.  S.  government  to  bring  him  home.

MacDOUALL,  Robert,  British  soldier,  b.  in
Stranraer,  Scotland,  about  1780;  d.  there,  15  Nov.,
1848.  He  entered  the  army  in  August,  1796,  and
became  lieutenant  in  November,  1797,  captain  in
October,  1804,  major  in  June,  1813,  lieutenant-
colonel  in  1813,  colonel  in  1830.  and  major-general,
23  Nov.,  1841.  He  served  in  this  country  during
the  war  of  1812,  and.  while  in  command  of  Fort
Mackinaw,  successfully  defended  it  when  it  was
attacked  by  a  superior  force,  4  Aug.,  1814.

Me  DOUG  A  L,  Clinton  Dugald,  soldier,  b.  in
Scotland,  14  June,  1839.  He  removed  with  his
parents  to  the  United  States  in  1842,  received  an
academic  education,  studied  law,  and  in  1856-'69
was  engaged  in  banking.  He  raised  a  company  for
the  75th  New  York  regiment  in  1861,  accompanied
|  it  to  Florida,  and  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
lllth  New  York  volunteers  in  August,  1862,  and
colonel  in  January,  1863,  commanding  it  at  Centre-
ville,  Va.  He  led  a  brigade  in  the  Army  of  the  Poto
mac  at  Gettysburg  and  in  its  subsequent  campaigns
until  the  close  of  the  war,  and  in  1864  was  brevet-
ted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  He  became
postmaster  at  Auburn  in  1869,  and  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Republican  in  1872,  serving  till  1877,
and  declining  in  June,  1876,  the  office  of  17.  S.  treas
urer,  and  in  July  that  of  commissioner  of  internal
revenue.  In  1877  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  marshal
for  the  western  judicial  district  of  New  York.

McDOUGAL,  David,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Ohio,
27  Sept.,  1809 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  7  Aug.,
1882.  He  was  appointed  midshipman  in  1828,
passed  midshipman  in  1834,  lieutenant  in  1841,
commander  in  1857,  captain  in  1864,  and  commo
dore  in  1869.  Com.  McDougal  commanded  the
'•  Wyoming,"  of  the  Asiatic  squadron,  in  1861-'4,
engaged  six  batteries  and  three  vessels  of  war  at
Simonoseki,  Japan,  16  July,  1863,  and  had  charge
of  the  navy-yard  at  Mare  island,  California,  in
1865-'6.  He  commanded  the  steam-sloop  "  Pow-
hatan  "  in  1868-'9,  and  the  south  squadron  of  the
Pacific  fleet  in  1870.  He  became  a  rear-admiral
on  the  retired  list  in  1873.

MACDOUGALL,  Alexander,  soldier,  b.  in  the
island  of  Islay,  Scotland,  in  1731 ;  d.  in  New  York
city  8  June,  1786.  His  father,  Ronald  Macdougall,
emigrated  to  the
province  of  New
York  in  1755,  and
purchased  a  farm
in  the  upper  part
of  Manhattan  isl
and.  Alexander  at
first  followed  the
sea,  and  took  part
in  the  war  of  1756
as  commander  of
the  two  privateers
"Barrington"  and
'•  Tiger."  He  sub
sequently  became
a  successful  mer
chant  in  New
York  city,  and
devoted  himself
ardently  to  the
cause  of  the  colonies.  When  the  assembly,  fal
tering  in  its  opposition  to  the  usurpations  of  the


<7


108


MAcDOUGALL


MACDOUGALL


crown,  rejected  a  proposition  that  authorized  vot
ing  by  ballot,  and  favorably  considered  a  bill  of
supplies  for  troops  that  were  quartered  in  the  city
to  overawe  its  inhabitants,  he  issued  an  address
entitled  "  A  Son  of  Liberty  to  the  Betrayed  Inhabi
tants  of  the  Colony,"  which  was  voted  by  the  as
sembly  to  be  "an  infamous  and  seditious  libel,"
and  for  which  its  author  was  arrested  and  impris
oned  for  twenty-three  weeks  in  what  is  now  the
register's  office,  thus  becoming  the  first  martyr  in
the  patriot  cause.  On  being  set  at  liberty,  he  cor
responded  with  the  leading  spirits  in  all  parts  of
the  country,  and  presided,  on  G  July,  1774,  at  the
meeting  "  in  the  fields  "  that  was  held  preparatory
to  the  election  of  delegates  to  the  1st  Continental
congress.  He  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  1st
New  York  regiment,  30  June,  1776,  brigadier-gen
eral  on  the  9th  of  the  following  August,  and  ma
jor-general  20  Oct.,  1777.  He  was  actively  engaged
at  Chatterton's  Hill,  near  White  Plains,  N.  Y.,  and
in  various  places  in  New  Jersey,  and  was  in  com
mand  at  Peekskill  in  1777,  but  was  compelled  to
retreat  before  a  superior  British  force  that  had
been  sent  up  the  river  by  Gen.  Howe.  He  took
part,  in  the  battles  of  White  Marsh  and  of  German-
town.  His  military  career  was  interrupted  by  his
being  sent  as  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  con
gress,  where  he  took  his  seat  in  September,  1780,
and  again  in  February,  1784.  He  was  elected  min
ister  of  marine  by  that  body,  but,  preferring  active
service,  he  resigned  to  take  the  field  again.  After
the  close  of  the  war  he  was  elected  to  the  New
York  senate,  of  which  body  he  was  a  member  at
the  time  of  his  death.  He  was  also  the  first  presi
dent  of  the  New  York  state  society  of  the  Cincin
nati. — His  daughter,  Elizabeth,  married  John
Laurauce,  who  presided  as  judge-advocatc-gencral
at  the  trial  of  Maj.  Andre ;  his  son,  JOHN,  died  in
the  Canada  expedition  at  the  head  of  Lake  Cham-
plain  in  1775 ;  and  his  cousin,  JOHN,  the  son  of  John
Macdougall,  was  blown  up  in  the  frigate  "  Ran
dolph,"  32  guns,  in  its  engagement  with  the  British
64-gun  frigate  "  Yarmouth  "  on  7  March,  1778.

MacDOlHxALL,  Charles,  surgeon,  b.  in  Chil-
licothe,  Ohio,  21  Sept.,  1804;  d.  in  Fairfield,  Clark
co.,  Va.,  25  July,  1885.  He  studied  medicine,  re
moved  to  Indiana,  and  was  appointed  assistant  sur
geon  in  the  U.  S.  army.  13  July,  1832.  He  was  pro
moted  major  and  surgeon,  7  July,  1838,  and  brevet
colonel,  29  Nov.,  1864.  He  was  with  the  mounted
rangers  in  the  Black  I  lawk  war  in  1833,  served  in
the  Creek  and  Seminole  wars  in  1838-'41,  and  was
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  from  1846  till  1848,
when  he  was  sent  west  and  remained  there  until
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  He  was  medical
director  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee  from  April
to  September,  1862,  when  he  was  ordered  to  New
York  city,  where  he  filled  a  similar  office.  On  13
March,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general
"  for  faithful  and  meritorious  service  during  the
war."  He  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  and  as
sistant  medical  purveyor,  28  July,  1866,  and  retired,
on  22  Feb.,  1869.

McDOUGALL,  James  Alexander,  senator,  b.
in  Bethlehem,  Albany  co.,  N.  Y.,  19  Nov.,  1817;  d.
in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  3  S'ept.,  1867.  He  was  educated
at  Albany  grammar-school,  studied  law,  and  set
tled  in  Pike  county,  111.,  in  1837.  He  was  attorney-
general  of  Illinois  in  1842,  and  was  re-elected  in
1844.  He  then  engaged  in  engineering,  and  in
1849  originated  and  accompanied  an  exploring
expedition  to  Rio  del  Norte,  Gila,  and  Colorado
rivers,  and  subsequently  settled  in  San  Francisco
in  the  practice  of  law.  He  was  elected  attorney-
general  of  California  in  1850,  served  several  terms


in  the  legislature,  and  in  1852  was  chosen  to  con
gress  as  a  Democrat,  but  declined  a  renomination
in  1853.  He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  in  1860,
served  till  1867,  and  was  chairman  of  the  commit
tee  on  the  Pacific  railroad.  Mr.  McDougall  was  a
War  Democrat,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  Chicago
convention  that  nominated  Gen.  George  B.  McClel-
lan  for  president.  On  the  expiration  of  his  sena
torial  term  he  retired  to  Albany,  N.  Y.  lie  was
an  eloquent  and  effective  speaker.

MACDOUlxALL,  John  Lorn,  Canadian  official,
b.  in  Renfrew,  Ontario.  6  Nov.,  1838.  His  father,
of  the  same  name,  a  native  of  Scotland,  was  in  the
Hudson  bay  company's  service,  and  represented
Renfrew  county  in  the  Canadian  assembly.  The
son  was  educated  at  the  High-school,  Montreal,
and  at  Toronto  university,  where  he  was  gradu
ated  in  1859.  After  serving  for  a  time  as  warden
of  Renfrew  county,  he  was  elected  to  the  Ontario
assembly  for  South  Renfrew  in  1867,  served  till
1871,  and  also  represented  that  constituency  in  the
Dominion  parliament  from  September,  1869,  till

1873,  when  he  was  defeated. He  was  again  elected
in 1873,  and  unseated  on petition  in  September,

1874,  but  was  re-elected  in  February,  1875. He  re
signed  from  his  place  in  parliament  on  being  ap
pointed  auditor-general  of  Canada,  2  Aug.,  1878,
which  office  he  still  holds  (1888).

MacDOlKMLL,  Sir  Patrick  Leonard,  British
soldier,  b.  in  Scotland  in  1819.  He  entered  the
British  army  in  1836,  and  was  employed  on  special
service  in  the  Crimea,  and  on  the  quartermaster-
general's  staff  in  the  Kertch  expedition.  He  was
appointed  general  officer  commanding  the  im
perial  forces  in  Canada,  21  Aug.,  1878,  and  acted
as  administrator  of  the  Dominion  government  of
Canada  from  19  Oct.,  1878,  when  Lord  Dufferin
departed  for  England,  till  the  arrival  of  the  new
governor-general,  the  Marquis  of  Lome.  He  again
was  administrator  during  the  absence  of  the  Mar
quis  of  Lome  in  England,  from  November,  1881.
till  January,  1882,  and  also  during  his  visit  to  the
United  States,  from  18  Dec.,  1882,  till  January,
1883.  Gen.  MacDougall  is  the  author  of  "The
Theory  of  War  "  (London,  1856);  "Campaigns  of
Hannibal  "  (1858) ;  and  "Modern  Warfare  as  in
fluenced  by  Modern  Artillery  "  (1864).

MACDOUGALL,  William,  Canadian  states
man,  b.  in  Toronto,  25  Jan.,  1822.  His  grand
father,  John  Macdougall,  a  native  of  Scotland  and
a  United  empire  loyalist,  served  in  the  British  com
missariat  during  the  American  Revolution.  Will
iam  was  educated  at  Toronto  and  at  Victoria  col
lege,  Cobourg,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  of  Upper  Canada  as  an  attorney  in  1847.  Shortly
afterward  he  engaged  in  journalism,  establishing
in  1848  the  "  Canada  Farmer,"  and  subsequently
merging  it  in  the  "  Canadian  Agriculturist,"
which  he  continued  to  publish  and  edit  until  1858.
In  1850  he  founded  the  "North  American,"  a  re
form  newspaper,  of  which  he  was  managing  editor
until  its  absorption  in  the  Toronto  "  Daily  Globe  "
in  1857,  and  he  was  the  leading  political  writer  on
the  latter  paper  from  1857  till  1859.  lie  repre
sented  North  Oxford  in  the  Canadian  assembly
from  1858  till  1863 ;  North  Ontario  from  1863  till
July,  1864;  and  North  Lanark  from  November,
1864,  till  the  union  of  1867,  when  he  was  re-elected
for  the  latter  constituency  to  the  Dominion  par
liament,  and  represented  it  till  1872,  when  he  was
defeated.  He  represented  Halton  county  in  the
Dominion  parliament  from  1878  until  the  general
election  of  1882.  He  was  elected  for  South  Simcoe
to  the  Ontario  assembly  in  May,  1875,  and  repre
sented  it  till  his  resignation  in  September,  1878.


MCDOWELL


MCDOWELL


109


He  was  a  member  of  the  executive  council,  and
commissioner  of  crown  lands  in  the  Sandfield
Macdonald-Dorion  administration  fi-om  May,  1802,
till  March,  1804 ;  and  provincial  secretary  in  the
Macdonald-Tache  administration  from  June,  1804,
until  1867.  Mr.  Macdougall  was  appointed  acting
minister  of  marine  in  July,  1800,  with  charge  of
the  eight  provincial  gun-boats  on  the  lakes,  which,
with  the  aid  of  Vice- Admiral  Sir  James  Hope,  he
had  speedily  fitted  out  for  service  against  the  Fen
ians.  He  was  appointed,  1  July,  1807.  minister  of
public  works  in  the  first  Dominion  government,
and  retained  the  office  till  he  was  commissioned
lieutenant-governor  of  Rupert's  Land  and  the
Northwest  territories  in  October,  18(39.  He  was
met  at  the  boundary-line  of  the  Red  river  settle
ment  by  an  armed  force,  acting  on  behalf  of  the
provisional  government  of  Louis  Riel,  which  com
pelled  him  to  retreat  to  Pembina,  Minn.,  and  he
did  not  enter  on  the  duties  of  his  office.  He  rep
resented  Canada  at  the  New  York  exhibition  in
185:5,  was  a  delegate  to  the  Charlottetown  union
conference  in  1804,  to  that  at  Quebec  the  same
year,  and  to  the  colonial  conference  in  London  to
complete  the  terms  of  union  of  the  British  North
American  colonies  in  1806-'7.  He  was  also  a  dele
gate  to  Great  Britain,  with  Sir  George  Etienne
Carder,  to  confer  with  the  imperial  authorities  on
the  subject  of  the  defences  of  the  Dominion,  and
for  the  acquisition  of  the  Northwest  territory  in
1808-'9.  Mr.  Macdougall  was  sent  to  Great  Brit
ain  by  the  Canadian  government  in  1873  as  a  spe
cial  commissioner  to  confer  with  the  home  govern
ment  on  the  subject  of  the  fisheries,  and  to  make
arrangements  in  Scandinavia  and  the  Baltic
provinces  for  the  promotion  of  emigration  to  Can
ada.  He  was  created  a  companion  of  the  bath
(civil  list)  in  1867,  appointed  Queen's  counsel  in
August,  1881,  and  subsequently  a  puisne  judge  in
the  province  of  Quebec.  At  the  beginning  of  his
political  career  he  was  a  Reformer,  but  afterward
was  independent,  and  did  not  pledge  himself  to
support  any  party.  He  has  introduced  and  carried
through  successfully  some  of  the  most  important
acts  of  the  Canadian  parliament.  He  is  a  fluent
and  powerful  speaker  and  an  eloquent  and  logical
advocate,  but  his  cold  and  unsympathetic  manner
has  rendered  him  less  popular  and  successful  than
he  would  be  were  his  sympathies  broader  and  his
humor  less  caustic. — His  son,  Joseph  Easton,
Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Toronto,  25  March,  1840,  was
graduated  at  Upper  Canada  college  in  1804.  He
studied  law  and  became  a  barrister  in  1870.  He
was  lecturer  on  criminal  law  for  the  Law  society
of  Ontario  from  1878  till  1883,  junior  judge  of  the
county  court  of  York  and  the  city  of  Toronto  from
1883  till  1885,  and  since  that  time  he  has  been
senior  judge  of  the  county  court.  On  18  Sept.,
1885,  he  was  also  appointed  judge  of  the  Maritime
court  of  Ontario,  which  place  he  still  (1888)  retains.
He  became  a  Queen's  counsel  in  1883,  and  is  one
of  the  commissioners  appointed  in  1886  for  re
vising  the  public  statutes  of  Ontario.  He  was
secretary  to  the  Canadian  commission  that  was
appointed  to  visit  the  West  Indies  and  British
Guiana,  to  improve  the  trade  relations  between
these  colonies  and  Canada,  in  1865-'6.  Judge  Mac
dougall  is  the  author  of  "  Lectures  on  Criminal
Law  and  Torts"  (Toronto,  1882).

McDOWELL,  Charles,  soldier,  b.  in  Winches
ter,  Va.,  in  1743;  d.  in  Burke  county,  N.  C.,  21
March,  1815.  His  father,  Joseph,  emigrated  from
Ireland  to  the  United  States  about  1730,  and  after
a  residence  of  several  years  in  Pennsylvania  set
tled  first  in  Winchester,  Va.,  and  subsequently  at


Quaker  Meadows,  on  Catawba  river,  N.  C.  His
family  is  distinguished  from  that  of  his  cousin
John  by  the  name  of  the  "  Quaker  Meadow  Mc
Dowells."  Charles  was  an  ardent  patriot,  and  at
the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  was  placed  in
command  of  an  extensive  district  in  western  North
Carolina.  On  the  British  invasion  in  1780  he  or
ganized  troops,  fortified  posts,  and  in  June  of  this
year  attacked  the  enemy  at  their  works  on  Pacolet
river,  compelled  their  surrender,  subsequently
gained  victories  at  Musgrove  Mill  and  Cave  Creek,
but,  after  the  reverses  of  the  colonists  at  Savannah,
Charleston,  and  Fishing  Creek,  his  army  was  dis
banded,  and  he  resigned  his  command  previous  to
the  battle  of  King's  Mountain.  He  was  state  sen
ator  in  1782-'8,  and  a  member  of  the  lower  house
in  1809-'!!. — His  wife,  Grace  Greenlee,  was
noted  among  the  women  of  the  Revolution  for  her
prudence  as  well  as  her  daring.  Her  first  hus
band,  Capt.  Bowman,  of  the  patriot  army,  was
killed  at  the  battle  of  Ramsom's  Mill.  After  her
marriage  with  McDowell,  she  aided  him  in  all
his  patriotic  schemes,  and  while  he  was  secretly
manufacturing  in  a  cave  the  powder  that  was  after
ward  used  at  King's  Mountain,  she  made  the
charcoal  in  small  quantities  in  her  fireplace,  carry
ing  it  to  him  at  night  to  prevent  detection.  After
this  battle  she  visited  the  field,  and  nursed  and
tended  the  soldiers.  A  party  of  marauders  having
plundered  her  house  in  the  absence  of  her  husband,
she  collected  a  few  of  her  neighbors,  pursued,  and
captured  them,  and  at  the  muzzle  of  the  musket
compelled  them  to  return  her  property.  She  was
the  mother  of  a  large  family. — Charles's  brother,
Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Winchester,  Va.,  in  1750;  d.
in  Burke  county,  N.  C.,  was  familiarly  known  as
"  Quaker  Meadows  Joe,"  to  distinguish  him  from
his  cousin  of  the  same  name,  with  whom  he  is
frequently  confounded.  He  served  in  the  cam
paigns  against  the  frontier  Indians  previous  to  the
Revolution,  and  under  his  brother  Charles  in  all
the  battles  in  western  North  Carolina  before  that
of  King's  Mountain.  In  that  engagement  he  com
manded  the  North  Carolina  militia,  with  the  rank
of  major.  He  was  in  the  state  house  of  commons
in  1787-'92,  was  a  member  of  the  North  Carolina
constitutional  convention  in  1788,  and  largely  in
strumental  in  its  rejection  of  the  U.  S.  constitu
tion.  He  was  elected  to  congress  in  1792,  served
till  1799,  and  was  active  in  opposition  to  the  Fed
eral  party.  He  was  boundary  commissioner  in
1797  for  running  the  line  between  Tennessee  and
North  Carolina,  a  general  of  militia,  and  the  recog
nized  leader  of  the  Republican  party  in  the  western
counties.  A  county  is  named  in  his  honor. — Jo
seph's  son,  Joseph  J.,  congressman,  b.  in  Burke
county,  N.  C.,  13  Nov.,  1800;  d.  in  Hillsborough,
Ohio.  17  Jan.,  1877,  was  engaged  in  agriculture
during  his  early  life,  and  removed  first  to  Virginia
and  subsequently  to  Ohio.  He  served  in  the  Ohio
legislature  in  1832,  in  1834  became  state  senator
and  general  of  militia,  and  the  next  year  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as
a  Democrat,  in  1844,  and  served  till  1847.

McDOWELL,  Irvin,  soldier,  b.  in  Columbus,
Ohio,  15  Oct.,  1818;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  4
May,  1885.  He  received  his  early  education  at  the
College  of  Troves,  in  France,  and  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1838,  becoming
3d  lieutenant  in  the  1st  artillery.  His  first  serv
ice  was  on  the  northern  frontier  during  the  Cana
da  border  disturbances,  in  Houlton,  Me.,  pending
the  disputed  territory  controversy.  He  returned
to  the  academy  in  1841,  and  was  assistant  instructor
of  infantry  tactics  and  adjutant  until  1845.  He


110


MCDOWELL


MCDOWELL


was  then  appointed  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  John  E.
Wool,  and  became  the  acting  adjutant-general  of
that  officer's  column  on  its  march  to  Chihuahua,
and  participated  in  the  battle  of  Buena  Vista,
where  for  his  services  he  was  brevetted  captain,
and  on  13  May,  1847,  received  that  rank  in  the
adjutant-general's  department.  Subsequently  he
continued  with  the  army  of  occupation,  and  was

engaged  in  mus
tering  out  and  dis
charging  troops
until  1848.  He
then  filled  the
office  of  assistant
adjutant  -  general
in  the  war  depart
ment  in  Washing
ton,  in  New  York,
and  elsewhere,  at
taining  the  rank
of  major  on  31
March.  1856.  The
year  1858-'9  he
spent  on  leave  in
Europe.and  there
after,  until  the  be
ginning  of  the

civil  war,  he  was  engaged  in  the  duties  of  the
adjutant-general's  department  in  Washington  and
as  aide-de-camp  on  Gen.  Scott's  staff,  serving  as
inspector  of  troops.  During  the  early  part  of
18(51  he  was  occupied  in  organizing  and  mus
tering  volunteers  into  service  at  the  capital ;  but
on  being  made  brigadier-general,  14  May,  1861,
he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Depart
ment  of  Northeastern  Virginia  and  of  the  de
fences  of  Washington  south  of  the  Potomac.  On
2!)  May,  1861,  he  was  given  command  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  which  consisted  of  about
30,000  men,  who,  with  the  exception  of  700  or
800  regulars,  were  almost  entirely  raw  recruits.
With  these  troops,  in  response  to  the  public  de
mand  for  some  immediate  action,  he  was  ordered,
on  16  July,  to  inarch  against  the  Confederate
army,  posted  at  Manassas  Junction  under  Gen.
Beauregard.  His  plan  of  campaign  had  been
carefully  studied  out,  and  its  principal  feature
was  to  turn  the  enemy's  left  flank  while  threaten
ing  the  front,  which  was  well  posted  behind  Bull
Run  on  an  elevation  that  commanded  the  entire
plateau.  A  preliminary  action,  without  the  au
thority  of  Gen.  McDowell,  took  place  at  Black
burn's  Ford  on  the  18th,  and  developed  the  fact
that  the  Confederates  were  strongly  intrenched.
The  National  troops,  unable  to  carry  the  masked
batteries,  fell  back  to  Centreville,  where  they  rested
during  the  two  following  days.  On  the  morning
of  the  21st  the  National  army  crossed  the  run  and
succeeded  in  throwing  the  enemy's  left  into  such
confusion  that  the  presence  of  Gens.  Beauregard
and  Johnston  was  necessary  to  rally  their  troops,
who  then  re-formed  in  line  on  the  crest  of  the  hill.
A  severe  struggle  for  this  position  ensued,  and  it
was  lost,  and  won  three  times,  and  about  three
o'clock  in  the  afternoon  it  remained  in  the  control
of  the  National  forces.  But  soon  after  that  hour
fresh  Confederate  re  -  enforcements  arrived  and
completely  turned  the  tide  of  battle.  McDowell's
men,  who  had  been  on  their  feet  since  two  o'clock
in  the  morning,  who  had  marched  twelve  miles  to
the  field  and  been  engaged  in  heavy  fighting  since
ten  o'clock,  were  now  exhausted  by  fatigue  and
want  of  food  and  water.  Unable  to  withstand  the
fierce  attack  of  fresh  troops,  they  broke  and  re
tired  in  confusion  down  the  hillside  and  made  a


disorderly  retreat  to  Washington.  Thus  the  first
great  battle  of  the  civil  war  was  fought  and  lost.
According  to  Gen.  Sherman,  "  it  was  one  of  the
best-planned  battles,  but  one  of  the  woi-st  fought."
Heavy  losses  of  artillery  and  other  war-supplies
were  experienced  as  the  soldiers  fell  back  on  the
capital.  Both  armies  were  fairly  defeated,  and
whichever  had  stood  fast  the  other  would  have
run.  Gen.  Johnston  says :  "  The  Confederate  army
was  more  disorganized  by  victory  than  that  of  the
United  States  by  defeat."  While  the  plan  was  ex
cellent  and  had  received  the  approval  of  the  com
manding  general,  still  much  difficulty  was  expe
rienced  from  the  fact  that  the  time  of  many  of  the
regiments  had  expired  and  the  men  refused  posi
tively  to  serve  any  longer.  Indeed,  4,000  men
marched  to  the  rear  to  the  sound  of  the  enemy's
guns,  and  the  defeat  of  the  National  troops  was
due  to  Confederate  re-enforcements  arriving  under
Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith,  who  were  supposed  to  be
held  in  check  by  a  force  under  Gen.  Robert  Patter
son  in  the  Shenandoah  valley.

Gen.  McDowell  was  then  given  charge  of  the  1st
corps,  Army  of  the  Potomac,  having  been  super
seded  in  the  chief  command  by  Gen.  McClellan.
This  corps  under  his  command  was  soon  afterward
detached  from  the  main  army  and  designated  as
the  Army  of  the  Rappahannock.  Meanwhile  he
was  made  major-general  of  volunteers  on  14  March,
1862.  In  the  summer  of  1862  there  were  four  in
dependent  commands  in  Virginia,  and  in  quick
succession  they  were  attacked  with  such  force  that
concentration  became  necessary,  and  the  Army  of
Virginia  was  formed  under  Gen.  John  Pope  and
the  command  of  the  3d  corps  was  given  to  Gen.
McDowell.  The  campaign  of  northern  Virginia
followed,  and  with  his  command  he  participated
in  the  battle  of  Cedar  Mountain,  the  action  of
Rappahannock  Station,  and  the  second  battle  of
Manassas.  In  the  latter  engagement  Gen.  McDow
ell  tenaciously  held  his  old  position  on  Henry  Ilill
until  forced  to  retire.  The  campaign  ended  at
this  point,  and,  beginning  with  the  retreat  from
Cedar  Mountain  on  9  Aug.,  with  scarcely  a  half
day's  intermission,  McDowell's  corps  was  either
making  forced  marches,  many  times  through  the
night  and  many  times  without  food,  or  was  en
gaged  in  battle.  Though  worn  out  with  fasting,
marching,  and  fighting,  his  men  were  neither  de
moralized  nor  disorganized,  but  preserved  their
discipline  to  the  last.  Public  opinion  persisted  in
holding  him  responsible  for  the  defeat  at  Bull
Run,  and  in  consequence  no  further  field-command
was  intrusted  to  him  during  the  civil  war.  He
was  retired  from  duty  in  the  field  on  6  Sept.,  1862,
and,  regarding  this  as  a  reflection  upon  him  as  a
soldier,  he  asked  for  a  court  of  inquiry,  which  re
ported  "  that  the  interests  of  the  public  service  do
not  require  any  further  investigation  into  the  con
duct  of  Major-General  McDowell."  During  part
of  1863  he  was  president  of  the  court  for  investi
gating  alleged  cotton -frauds,  and  later  he  was
president  of  the  board  for  retiring  disabled  officers.
On  1  July,  1864,  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the
Department  of  the  Pacific,  with  headquarters  in
San  Francisco,  and  held  that  office  until  27  July,
1865,  after  which  he  had  command  of  the  Depart
ment  of  California  until  31  March,  1868.  Mean
while  he  was  brevetted  major-general  in  the  U.  S.
army  and  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service  on
1  Sept.,  1866.  In  July,  1868,  he  was  assigned  to
the  command  of  the  Department  of  the  East,  and
on  25  Nov.,  1872,  was  promoted  to  major-general.
Soon  after  this  he  succeeded  Gen.  George  G.  Meade
as  commander  of  the  Division  of  the  South,  and  re-


MCDOWELL


MCDOWELL


ill


mained  until  30  June,  1876,  after  which  he  re
turned  to  San  Francisco  in  charge  of  the  Division
of  the  Pacific  until  his  retirement  on  15  Oct.,  1882.
Gen.  McDowell  had  great  fondness  for  landscape
gardening,  and  during  the  last  years  of  his  life  was
one  of  the  park  commissioners  of  San  Francisco,  in
which  capacity  he  constructed  a  park  out  of  the
neglected  Presidio  reservation  and  laid  out  drives
that  command  fine  views  of  the  Golden  Gate.

McDOWELL.  James,  statesman,  b.  in  Rock-
bridge  county,  Va.,  12  Oct.,  1790;  d.  near  Lexing
ton,  Va.,  24  Aug.,  1851.  His  father,  James,  was
descended  from  Ephraim  McDowell,  an  early  set
tler  in  Rockbridge  county.  His  mother,  Sarah
Preston,  was  the  sister  of  Gen.  Francis  Preston,
whose  daughter  the  younger  James  McDowell
subsequently  married.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1817,  and  engaged  in  planting  till
1831,  when  he  was  in  the  Virginia  legislature  and
took  high  rank  as  an  orator.  During  this  session
he  advocated  the  gradual  manumission  of  slaves,
and  also  supported  in  a  series  of  brilliant  speeches
measures  for  internal  improvement  and  the  public-
school  system  by  extra  legislative  appropriation.
He  was  governor  in  1842-'4,  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Princeton  in  1846.  and  in  the  latter
year  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving
till  1851.  Although  an  advocate  of  state  rights,
he  vehemently  opposed  slavery,  and  is  said  to  have
done  more  to  impress  upon  the  south  the  superior
economy  as  well  as  philanthropy  of  abolition
than  any  other  from  Jefferson  till  his  own  day.
When  the  extremists  demanded  that  California
should  not  be  admitted  as  a  free  state  without  an
equivalent  in  the  extension  of  slave  territory,  he
addressed  the  house  in  a  speech  on  that  subject,  on
3  Sept.,  1850,  that  was  unanimously  described  by
those  present,  of  whatever  party,  as  one  of  the
most  eloquent  efforts  that  had  been  heard  in  con
gress.  A  contemporary  writer  says :  "  His  tall
form,  graceful  gestures,  and  commanding  voice
revived  the  expectations  formed  of  his  fame.  His
sustained  and  splendid  appeal  confirmed  them.
The  house  repeatedly  broke  into  involuntary  ap
plause.  At  the  conclusion  of  his  hour  it  shouted
'  Go  on  ! '  a  proceeding  hitherto  unknown  in  the  his
tory  of  congress.  At  the  conclusion  all  business
was  suspended,  and  the  house  adjourned  almost  in
silence."  See  "  History  of  the  Anti-Slavery  Meas
ures  of  the  37th  and  38th  Congresses,"  by  Henry
Wilson  (New  York,  1864).

McDOWELL,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bedmin-
ster,  N.  J.,  10  Sept.,  1780;  d. 'in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
in  February,  1863.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton
in  1801,  and  ordained  in  1804  pastor  of  the  Pres
byterian  church  in  Elizabethtown,  X.  J.,  where  he
remained  till  1833.  He  then  was  in  charge  of  the
Central  church  of  Philadelphia  till  1846.  and  in
May  of  that  year  established  the  Spring  Garden
church,  of  which  he  was  pastor  till  his  death.  He
was  a  trustee  of  Princeton  for  more  than  fifty
years,  and  of  the  theological  seminary  there
from  its  foundation,  and  as  agent  of  both  institu
tions  he  collected  sums  for  their  endowment.
Union  and  the  University  of  South  Carolina  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1818.  The  first  Sunday-
school  in  Elizabethtown  was  established  during  his
pastorate  there  in  1814,  and  he  wrote  for  its  use
the  first  Bible-class  questions  that  were  ever  pub
lished  (Elizabethtown.  1814).  His  other  works  are
"  A  Bible-Class  Manual  "  (1819)  and  "  A  System  of
Theology"  (1826).  See  "Memoir,"  by  William  B.
Sprague  (New  York,  1864).

McDOWELL.  Katherine  Sherwood,  author,
b.  in  Holly  Springs,  Miss.,  26  Feb.,  1849 ;  d.  there,


22  July,  1884.  She  was  educated  in  seminaries  in
Mississippi  and  Alabama,  as  her  family  moved
from  place  to  place  in  advance  of  the  National
forces.  She  married  Edward  McDowell  at  Holly
Springs  in  1870,  and  in  1872  removed  to  Boston,
where  for  several  years  she  was  private  secretary
to  Henry  W.  Longfellow,  who  predicted  for  her
success  in  literature.  Her  first  contribution  to  the
press  that  attracted  attention  was  a  poem  entitled
"  The  Radical  Club."  The  club,  which  she  de
scribed  as  the  "den  of  the  unknowable"  and  the
"cave  of  the  unintelligible,"  is  said  to  have  been
killed  by  the  poem.  In  1878  she  returned  to  Hol
ly  Springs,  in  the  midst  of  the  yellow-fever  epi
demic,  to  nurse  her  father  and  brother.  Her  pub
lications,  which  appeared  under  the  pen-name  of
"  Sherwood  Bonner,"  include  "  Like  unto  Like "
(Boston,  1881)  and  "  Dialect  Tales  "  (1884).

McDOWELL,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Pennsyl
vania,  27  Oct.,  1735 ;  d.  near  Danville.  Ky.,  25
Oct.,  1817.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  move
ment  that  brought  about  the  war  of  independence,
which  is  proved  by  letters  addressed  to  him  by-
Peyton  Randolph,  "Richard  Henry  Lee,  Patrick
Henry,  George  Washington,  and  others.  He  served
in  Capt.  Lewis's  company  at  Braddock's  defeat,  and
with  his  eldest  son,  who  like  himself  was  an  offi
cer  in  the  Continental  line,  witnessed  Cornwallis's
surrender.  For  many  years  he  was  a  member  of
the  Virginia  legislature,  which  in  1782  appointed
him  a  commissioner  to  settle  the  land-claims  of
Kentucky.  He  settled  in  Danville  in  1783,  served
in  the  Kentucky  legislature  for  several  years,  and
was  a  circuit  judge,  organizing  the  first  court  in
Danville,  which  was  held  in  a  log  cabin  near  Dan
ville,  and  was  the  first  court  formed  in  the  terri
tory.  He  was  also  president  of  the  first  State  con
stitutional  convention  of  Kentucky,  held  in  Dan
ville,  19  April,  1792.  He  remained  upon  the  bench
until  within  a  few  years  of  his  death. — His  son,
Ephraim.  surgeon,  b.  in  Rockbridge  county,  Va.,
11  Nov.,  1771 ;  d.  in  Danville,  Ky.,  20  June',  1830,
attended  classical  schools  in  Georgetown  and  Bards-
town,  Ky.,  and  studied  medicine  in  Staunton,  Va.,
completing  his  medical  education  in  Edinburgh
in  1793-'4.  He  be
gan  to  practise  in
Danville.  Ky..  in
1785,  and  for  years
was  the  foremost
practitioner  in  the
southwest.  In  1817
he  was  made  a  mem
ber  of  the  Medical
society  of  Philadel
phia.  He  received
the  degree  of  M.  D.
from  the  University
of  Maryland  in  1825'.
In  1809  he  success
fully  performed  the
operation  for  extir
pation  of  the  ovary,
the  first  on  record,
and  acquired  in  con
sequence  European
celebrity.  A  description  of  this,  with  other  cases,
he  published  in  the  Philadelphia  "  Eclectic  Re
pertory  and  Analytic  Review  "  in  1817.  He  also
acquired  fame  as  a  lithotomist.  Dr.  McDowell's
account  of  his  operations  on  the  ovaries  were
received  with  incredulity  in  many  places,  espe
cially  abroad,  but  at  this  time  his  title  to  the
name  of  the  "  father  of  ovariotomy  "  is  generally
recognized.  He  was  a  man  of  culture  and  liberal


112


MCDOWELL


MAcEACHERN


views,  and,  had  he  lived  in  a  less  primitive  com
munity,  might  have  attained  wealth  and  world
wide  celebrity  in  his  lifetime.  In  person  he  was
stout,  nearly  six  feet  in  height,  with  a  florid  com
plexion  and"  black  eyes.  He  was  one  of  the  found
ers  and  an  original  trustee  of  Centre  college,  Dan
ville,  and  a  few  months  before  his  final  illness
began  to  build  a  large  mansion  near  that  town.
On  14  May,  1879,  a  granite  monument  with  a
medallion  of  Dr.  McDowell  was  erected  to  his
memory,  the  memorial  address  being  made  by  Dr.
Samuel'  D.  Gross,  of  Philadelphia,  before  the  Ken
tucky  medical  society.  This  is  located  near  the
centre  of  Danville,  in  a  public  square  known  as
McDowell  park. — His  grandson,  William  Adair.
physician,  b.  near  Danville,  Ky.,  21  March,  1795:
d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  10  Dec.,  1853,  was  educated
at  Washington  college,  Va.,  which  he  left  to  serve
in  the  war  of  1812.  He  studied  medicine  with  his
uncle  Ephraim,  with  whom  he  practised  after  re
ceiving  his  degree  from  the  medical  department
of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1818.  He
devoted  much  time  to  the  study  of  pulmonary
consumption,  and  the  result  of  his  clinical  observa
tions  was  published  in  a  monograph  entitled  "  A
Demonstration  of  the  Curability  of  Pulmonary
Consumption  "  (Louisville,  1843).

McDOAVELL,  Silas,  author,' b.  in  York  dis
trict,  S.  C.,  16  May,  1795;  d.  in  Macon  county,
N.  C.,  14  July,  1879.  He  was  left  an  orphan  at  an
early  age,  and  his  life  was  one  of  hardship.  For  a
short  time  he  was  a  student  at  the  Newton  acade
my,  Buncombe  co.,  S.  C.,  working  to  pay  for  his
tuition,  and  he  subsequently  apprenticed  himself
to  a  tailor.  He  worked  at  this  trade  for  ten  years
in  North  Carolina,  but  in  1830  removed  to  a  farm
in  Macon  county  and  served  as  clerk  in  the  supe
rior  court  for  sixteen  years,  and  as  clerk  and  mas
ter  in  equity  for  five  years.  He  was  a  devoted
student  of  nature,  giving  much  time  to  geology,
mineralogy,  and  botany.  His  sketch.  "  Above  the
Clouds,"  was  extensively  copied  in  journals  in  1829,
and  was  followed  by  others  that  described  North
Carolina  mountain  scenery.  He  also  wrote  articles
upon  pomology,  horticulture,  sheep-husbandry,  and
cheese-making,  and  a  paper  upon  the  "  Theory  of
the  Thermal  Zone,"  printed  in  the  "  General  Agri
cultural  Reports"  (Washington,  1861).

McDUFFIE,  George,  governor  of  South  Caro
lina,  b.  in  Columbia  county,  Ga.,  about  1788  ;  d.  in
Sumter  district,  S.  C.,  11  March,  1851.  He  was  of
humble  parentage,  and  began  life  as  a  clerk  in  a  mer
cantile  establishment  in  Augusta,  Ga.  His  talents
attracted  the  attention  of  William  Calhoun,  who
sent  him  to  Dr.  Moses  Waddell's  school  in  Wil
mington,  N.  C.,  and  subsequently  to  South  Caro
lina  college,  where  he  was  graduated  with  first
honors  in  1813.  He  then  studied  law,  was  admit
ted  to  the  bar  in  1814,  and  began  to  practise  in
Edgefield,  S.  C.  In  1818  he  was  sent  to  the  South
Carolina  legislature,  where  he  proved  himself  an
able  writer.  A  political  controversy  with  Col.  Will
iam  Gumming,  of  Georgia  (q.  ?>.),  about  this  time,
led  to  several  duels,  in  one  of  which  McDuffie
received  wounds  from  which  he  never  fully  re
covered.  In  his  earlier  writings  he  advocated
consolidation  doctrines  in  opposition  to  the  state-
rights  views  that  he  subsequently  espoused.  His
various  papers  on  this  subject  were  collected  in
a  series  of  pamphlets  entitled  "  The  Crisis."  In
1821  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,
serving  from  1821  till  1834,  when  he  resigned.  In
December,  1823,  he  advocated  the  expediency  of
changing  the  constitution  so  as  to  establish  'uni
formity  in  the  mode  of  electing  the  members  of  the


house  of  representatives,  and  also  in  the  mode  of
choosing  presidential  electors,  and  as  chairman  of
this  committee  he  made  an  elaborate  report  in
January,  1825.  He  opposed  congressional  appro
priations  for  internal  improvements,  and  also
argued  against  the
proposed  congress
of  Panama,  a  fa
vorite  measure  of
President  John
Quincy  Adams.  As
chairman  of  the
committee  of  ways
and  means  he  en
deavored  to  main
tain  the  Bank  of
the  United  States,
was  a  frequent  as
sailant  of  the  pro
tective  tariff,  and
engaged  in  impor
tant  debates.  In
December,  1830,  he
opened  the  im
peachment  trial  of
Judge  James  H.
Peck,  for  the  prosecution,  in  a  speech  of  great
power.  He  had  been  originally  a  supporter  of
President  Jackson,  but  opposed  him  on  the  state-
rights  issue,  and  was  one  of  the  most  ardent  and
eloquent  champions  of  nullification,  whicli  he  re
garded  not  as  a  constitutional  but,  as  a  justifiable
revolutionary  measure.  He  was  the  author  of  the
address  to  the  people  of  the  United  States  that
was  issued  by  the  South  Carolina  convention  of
1832.  In  1834  he  left  congress,  after  making  a
vehement  speech  against  the  administration,  and
in  the  same  year  he  was  elected  governor  of  South
Carolina,  which  office  lie  held  until  1836.  He  then
retired  to  private  life,  but  in  1842  was  elected  to
the  U.  S.  senate  in  place  of  William  C.  Preston,
who  had  resigned,  and  served  until  1846,  when  he
relinquished  his  place,  owing  to  impaired  health.
In  congress  few  men  have  treated  with  more  abil
ity  such  a  variety  of  difficult  subjects.  He  was
one  of  the  most  successful  planters  in  the  state,
and  delivered  an  oration  before  the  State  agricul
tural  society.  For  many  years  he  was  commonly
called  Gen.  McDuffie,  as  lie  had  been  a  major-gen
eral  in  the  state  militia.  He  published  a  "Eulogy
on  Robert  Y.  Hayne  "  (Charleston,  1840),  and  was
the  author  of  numerous  addresses.

MACE,  Frances  Parker  Laughton,  poet,  b.  in
Orono,  Me.,  15  Jan.,  1836.  Her  maiden  name  was
Laughton.  She  was  graduated  at  the  high-school
of  Bangor  in  1852,  and  in  1855  married  Benjamin
H.  Mace,  a  lawyer  of  that  city.  In  1885  she  re
moved  to  San  Jose,  Cal.  One  of  her  poems,  "  Only
Waiting,"  suggested  by  the  reply  of  an  old  man
who  was  asked  what  he  was  doing,  first  published
in  the  Waterville.  Me.,  "  Mail,"  in  1854,  became
very  popular.  She  has  published  "  Legends,  Lyrics,
and  Sonnets"  (Boston,  1883).  and  poems  entitled
"  Under  Pine  and  Palm  "  (1887),  besides  contribu
tions  to  magazines,  which  include  "  Israfil,"  "  Easter
Morning,"  and  "  The  Kingdom  of  the  Child."

MacEACHERN,  Bernard  Angus,  Canadian
R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Scotland  about  1780;  d.  in
Charlottetown,  Prince  Edward  island,  in  1835.
He  was  for  a  long  time  engaged  on  the  mission  of
Prince  Edward  island,  and  was  consecrated  vicar
apostolic  of  that  province  and  New  Brunswick,  in
Quebec,  17  June,  1821.  The  population  of  his  dio
cese  was  large,  and  the  number  of  priests  inconsid
erable,  and  to  insure  an  increase  in  the  latter  he


MACEDO


MCELROY


113


made  arrangements  for  having  ecclesiastical  stu
dents  educated  in  the  College  of  the  propaganda,
Rome,  and  in  the  Seminary  of  Quebec.  After  he
had  labored  zealously  for  several  years,  his  vicariate
was  erected  into  a  titular  bishopric,  and  the  new
see  was  placed  in  Charlottetown,  the  capital  of
Prince  Edward  Island,  11  Aug.,  1859.

MACEDO,  Joaquim  Maiioel  de  (mah-shay'-do),
Brazilian  poet,  b.  in  San  Joao  d'ltaborahi,  24  June,
1820.  He  studied  medicine  in  Rio  Janeiro,  and
was  graduated  there,  but  never  practised  his  pro
fession,  and  was  appointed  in  1830  professor  of
national  history  in  the  college  of  the  city.  lie  en
tered  politics  in  1854,  and  was  elected  deputy  by
the  city  of  Rio  Janeiro  several  times.  Macedo  has
acquired  a  great  reputation  as  a  lyric  poet,  but
he  has  also  written  novels,  and  composed  several
dramas  and  comedies,  which  have  been  repre
sented  with  great  success  in  the  principal  cities  of
South  America.  Macedo  is  highly  esteemed  by  the
Brazilians,  who  consider  him  the  most  elegant  of
their  national  poets.  His  works  include  "More-
ninha,"  a  novel  (Rio  Janeiro,  1844 ;  5th  ed.,  revised,
1877) ;  "  0  Moeo  loura,"  a  novel  of  the  early  stages
of  the  Portuguese  conquest  (1845) ;  "  0  Forasteiro,"
a  novel  (1855) ;  •'  A  Xebulosa,"  a  poem  (1857) ;
'•  Code,"  a  drama.  "  Fantasma  Branco,"  a  comedy
(1850) ;  "  Luxo-e-Vaidade,"  a  comedy  (1859) ;  and
"  Corographia  do  Brazil  "  (1873).

MACEDO,  Sergio  Texeira  de,  Brazilian  jour
nalist,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro  in  September,  1809;  d.  in
Lisbon,  Portugal,  in  1865.  He  was  graduated  in
law  in  Olinda  in  1831,  and  immediately  began  his
career  as  journalist,  publishing  the  paper  "  Olin-
dense."  In  1832  he  published  in  Rio  Janeiro  the
"Verdade"  and  the  "Aurora  Fluminense."  In
1833  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  the  Brazilian
legation  in  France,  and  in  1834  became  special  en
voy  to  Lisbon.  In  1838  he  was  sent  to  Rome  to
settle  some  difficulties  between  Brazil  and  the  pope,
and  by  his  good  offices  the  independence  of  Chili
was  recognized.  Macedo  was  also  minister  to
Turin  in  1842.  to  France  in  1843.  and  to  Austria  in
1847.  In  1853  he  was  called  by  the  government  to
Brazil  to  consult  on  its  financial  difficulties,  and,
although  not  a  specialist,  he  settled  the  question
satisfactorily,  and  restored  the  credit  of  the  nation.
In  1854  he  began  to  agitate  against  the  slave-trade,
and  the  same  year  was  appointed  minister  to  Lon
don,  where  he  gave  valuable  hints  to  the  abolition
ists  in  regard  to  preventing  the  trade  from  Africa.
In  1855  he  was  appointed  minister  to  the  United
States,  but  declined  and  retired  to  Brazil,  where
he  published  valuable  papers  in  the  "  Journal  do
Commercio."  He  was  elected  representative  in
1850  and  senator  in  1857,  from  1859  till  1801  was
minister  of  state,  and  in  1865  he  went  to  Europe  in
quest  of  health,  but  died  there.

McELLHiOTT,  James  Napoleon,  educator,  b.
in  Richmond,  Va.,  3  Oct..  1812;  d.  in  New  York
city,  22  Oct.,  1866.  He  came  to  New  York  at  an
early  age.  attended  a  private  school,  and  studied  in
the  Xew  York  university,  but  left  before  receiving
a  degree.  In  1837  he  became  a  candidate  for  or
ders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  but  was
not  ordained,  and  devoted  his  subsequent  life  to
teaching  and  to  the  preparation  of  text-books.  In
1845  he  was  principal  of  the  school  of  the  General
society  of  mechanics  and  tradesmen  in  New  York.
In  1849  he  opened  a  private  school,  which  he  con
tinued  until  his  death.  He  labored  actively  among
the  poor,  and  was  interested  in  Epiphany  mission
church,  raising  a  fund  for  its  future  support.  He
was  president  of  the  State  teachers'  association.
In  1849  he  received  the  degree  of  M.  A.  from  Yale.

VOL.  IV. 8


and  in  1852  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Harrodsburg  Fe
male  college,  Ky.  In  1848  he  was  editor  of  "  The
Teachers'  Advocate,"  a  journal  devoted  to  science
and  literature.  In  addition  to  Greek  and  Hebrew
text-books,  he  published  a  "  Manual,  Analytical
and  Synthetical,  of  Orthography  and  Definition  "
(New  York,  1845);  "The  Young  Analyzer"  (1849);
"The  Humorous  Speaker"  (1853);  and  "The
American  Debater"  (1855).  He  also  wrote  Sunday-
school  hymns,  and  an  unfinished  Latin  grammar!

McELRATH,  Thomas,  lawyer,  b.  in  Williams-
port,  Pa.,  1  May,  1807;  d.  in  New  York  city,  6
June,  1888.  He  became  a  printer  early  in  life,  but
subsequently  began  the  study  of  law.  Removing
later  to  New  York  city,  he  was  engaged  as  proof
reader  and  then  as  head  salesman  in  the  Methodist
book  concern,  and  in  1825  he  formed  a  partnership
with  Lemuel  Bangs  in  the  publication  of  school  and
religious  books.  On  its  dissolution  he  resumed  his
legal  studies,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began
the  practice  of  law  in  New  York.  In  1838  he  was
elected  to  the  legislature,  was  placed  on  its  judi
ciary  committee,  and  chosen  to  write  a  report  on
petitions  praying  for  the  abolition  of  capital  pun
ishment.  He  early  allied  himself  with  the  Whig
party,  and  was  an  earnest  supporter  of  Henry  Clay.
In  1840  he  was  appointed  a  master  in  chancery,
but  in  1841,  relinquishing  the  law,  he  entered  info
partnership  with  Horace  Greeley  in  the  conduct  of
the  "  New  York  Tribune  "  under  the  firm-name  of
Greeley  and  McElrath.  It  is  conceded  that  the
establishment  and  success  of  the  "  Tribune  "  were
assured  only  after  Mr.  McElrath  joined  in  its  pub
lication.  In  1857  he  was  elected  corresponding  sec
retary  of  the  American  institute,  editing  the  state
annual  reports  of  the  institute  until  1861,  when  he
resigned.  In  1861  he  was  appointed  appraiser-gen
eral  for  the  New  York  district,  but  he  resigned  in
1864  to  resume  the  publication  of  the  '•  Tribune."
In  1866  he  was  appointed  chief  appraiser  of  foreign
merchandise  at  the  port  of  New  York.  He  was  one
of  the  commissioners  to  the  Paris  exposition  in
1867,  and  to  the  Vienna  exhibition  of  1873,  and,  with
John  Jay,  special  commissioner  to  adjust  and  su
perintend  the  American  department  in  the  latter
exhibition.  In  1876  he  was  secretary  of  the  New
York  state  commission  at  the  Centennial  exhibi
tion.  At  his  death  he  was  a  banker  in  New  York.
He  published  "  Dictionary  of  Words  and  Phrases
used  in  Commerce  "  (New  York.  1872).

McELROY,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Brookebor-
ough,  County  Fermanagh,  Ireland,  11  May,  1782;
d.  in  Frederick,  Md.,  12  Sept.,  1877.  Owing  to  the
penal  laws,  he  received  a  very  limited  education  in
his  native  country,  and  about  the  beginning  of  this
century  he  emigrated  to  the  United  States  and
settled  at  Georgetown,  D.  C.,  where  he  engaged  in
mercantile  business.  He  afterward  became  book
keeper  at  Georgetown  college,  and,  wishing  to  im
prove  himself,  employed  his  leisure  hours  in  the
study  of  Latin,  assisted  by  one  of  the  students  of
the  college.  In  1806  he  entered  the  Society  of  Je
sus  as  a  lay  brother,  but  after  a  brief  experience  in
that  capacity  he  was  recommended  to  the  general
of  the  order  as  a  suitable  person  for  the  priesthood
by  one  of  his  superiors,  who  had  heard  him  ex
plain  very  logically  a  lesson  in  catechism.  He  was
ordained  in  May,  1817,  by  Archbishop  Neale,  of
Baltimore,  and  for  several  years  stationed  at
Trinity  church,  Georgetown,  but  in  1822,  at  the
request  of  Roger  B.  Taney,  was  transferred  to
Frederick,  Md.  Here  he  began  to  display  that
practical  ability  that  made  him  ever  afterward  one
of  the  most  useful  members  of  the  Society  of  Jesus
in  the  United  States.  He  built  St.  John's  church,


114


MCELROY


MACPARLANE


a  college,  an  academy,  an  orphan  asylum,  and  the
first  free  school  in  Frederick.  After  twenty-three
years  of  work  there  he  was  transferred  to  Trinity
church,  Georgetown,  but  the  following  year.  Presi
dent  Polk  having  requested  the  council  of  bishops
in  Baltimore  to  select  chaplains  for  the  Roman
Catholic  soldiers  in  the  Mexican  war,  Father  McEl
roy  was  one  of  the  two  priests  that  were  chosen  for
that  duty.  Notwithstanding  his  advanced  age,  he
accepted  the  office,  and  was  so  faithful  in  the  dis
charge  of  his  duties  that  he  was  frequently  men
tioned  in  the  highest  terms  in  the  despatches  from
the  seat  of  war.  At  the  close  of  hostilities  he  was
made  pastor  of  St.  Mary's  church,  Boston,  Mass..
where  he  paid  special  attention  to  the  subject  of
education,  building  Boston  college  and  the  Church
of  the  immaculate  conception.  Father  McElroy
continued  in  the  active  performance  of  his  priestly
duties  until  he  was  past  eighty  years  old.  When
fourscore  and  ten  he  became  blind,  and  retired  to
Frederick,  Md.,  in  his  last  years.  When  he  died
he  was  the  oldest  Jesuit  in  the  world.

McELROY,  Mary  Arthur,  b.  in  Greenwich,
Washington  co.,  N.  V.,  in  1842.  She  is  the  young
est  child  of  the
Rev.  William  Ar
thur  (q.  r.)and  the
sister  of  Chester
A.Arthur.  Her  ed
ucation  was  com
pleted  in  Troy,  at
the  seminary  of
which  Mrs.  Emma
Willard  was  prin
cipal.  In  1861  she
married  John  E.
McElroy,  of  Al
bany,  and  since
that  event  she  has
resided  in  that
city.  During  the
administration  of
her  brother  she
made  her  home
in  Washington  in
the  winter  sr,-is.>n,  and  dispensed  the  hospitalities
of  the  White  House  with  rare  social  tact,  the  place
being  one  for  which  she  was  peculiarly  fitted  by
her  personal  character  and  previous  associations.

McENTEE,  Jervis,  artist,  b.  in  Rondout,  N.  Y.,
14  July,  1828.  He  studied  in  the  winter  of  1850-'!
with  Frederic  E.  Church  in  New  York,  but  later
engaged  in  business  in  Rondout.  This  he  relin
quished  after  three  years,  and,  opening  a  studio  in
New  York,  devoted  himself  thenceforth  wholly  to
art.  He  first  exhibited  at  the  Academy  of  design
in  1853.  and  was  elected  an  associate  in  I860,  and
academician  one  year  later.  In  1869  he  visited
Europe,  sketching  in  Italy  and  Switzerland,  and
studying  in  the  principal  galleries  on  the  conti
nent.  Mr.  McEntee  usually  delineates  Nature  in
her  more  sombre  aspects,  and  there  is  in  his  paint
ings  a  latent  sentiment  not  often  found  among
landscape-painters.  He  is  especially  successful  in
autumnal  scenes.  His  more  important  works  are
"The  Melancholy  Days  have  come  "(1860);  "In
dian  Summer"  (1861);  "Late  Autumn"  (1863);
"  October  Snow  "  (1870) ;  "  Sea  from  Shore  "  (1873) ;
"  Cape  Ann  "  (1874) ;  "  A  Song  of  Summer  "  (1876) ;
"Winter  in  the  Mountains"  (1878):  "Clouds"
(1879);  "The  Edge  of  a  Wood"  (1880);  "  Kaats-
kill  River"  (1881):  "Autumn  Memory"  (1883);
"Shadows  of  Autumn"  and  "The  Kaatskills  in
Winter"  (1884);  "Christmas  Eve"  (1885);  and
"  Shadows  of  Autumn  "  (1886).


f


McFADDEN,  Ohadiah  B.,  jurist,  b.  in  Wash
ington  county.  Pa.,  in  1817;  d.  in  Olympia.  Wash
ington  territory,  25  June,  1875.  He  was  elected
to  the  legislature  of  Pennsylvania  in  1843,  and  was
prothonotary  of  Washington  county,  Pa.,  in  1845.
In  1853  he  was  appointed  associate  justice  of  the
supreme  court  of  Oregon  territory,  and  in  1854  to
the  same  office  in  Washington  territory.  In  1858
he  became  chief  justice  of  Washington  territory,
which  office  he  held  until  the  autumn  of  1861.  lie
represented  his  district  in  the  legislative  council,
and  was  also  elected  a  delegate  from  Washington
territory  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  to  serve  from
1  Dec.,  1873,  till  3  March,  1877.

McFARLANl),  Amanda  R.,  missionary,  b.  in
Brooke  county,  Va.,  about  1837.  She  was  educated
at  Steubenvilie  female  seminary,  and  in  1857  mar
ried  Rev.  David  F.  McFarland,  a  Presbyterian
clergyman.  From  1862  till  1866  her  husband  held
charge  of  Mattoon  female  seminary,  111.,  and  in
1867  removed  to  Santa  Fe  to  engage  in  mission
work  in  New  Mexico.  Here  Mrs.  McFarland  or
ganized  and  conducted  a  successful  mission-school
among  Mexican  children.  In  1873  they  removed
to  California  and  established  an  academy  at  San
Diego,  and  in  1875  they  conducted  missions  among
the  Nez  Perces  Indians.  After  Mr.  McFarland's
death  in  1876  his  wife  removed  to  Portland,  Ore
gon,  and  in  1877  took  charge  of  a  school  at  Fort
Wrangell,  Alaska.  Here  she  acted  as  clergyman,
physician,  and  lawyer  for  the  Indians,  who  brought
their  difficulties  for  her  solution.  She  was  called
to  preside  over  a  native  constitutional  convention,
and  chiefs  came  long  distances  to  enter  the  school
of  "the  woman  who  loved  their  people,"  and  to
plead  that  teachers  should  be  sent  to  their  tribes.
Her  efforts  resulted  in  the  establishment  of  a
training-school  for  Alaskan  girls  which  is  called
"  The  McFarland  Home,"  of  which  institution  she
now  (1888)  has  charge.

McFARLAM),  Francis  Patrick.  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Franklin,  Pa..  16  April.  1819;  d.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  12  Oct.,  1874.  He  was  educated  for  the
priesthood  at  Mount  St.  Mary's  college,  ordained
in  New  York  city  on  18  May,  1845,  and  alter  act
ing  for  a  year  as  professor  at  St.  John's  college,
Fordham.  and  for  several  months  as  assistant  priest
in  New  York  city,  was  appointed  to  the  mission  of
Watertown,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1851  made  pastor  of  St.
John's  church,  Utica.  On  14  March,  1858,  he  was
consecrated  bishop  of  the  see  of  Hartford,  and.  like
the  two  first  bishops,  made  Providence  his  resi
dence.  In  1872,  when  the  Roman  Catholic  popu
lation  of  the  diocese  had  grown  to  more  than
200,000,  the  new  see  of  Providence  was  erected,
and  Bishop  McFarland  removed  to  Hartford  and
there  engaged  in  the  erection  of  a  cathedral,  with
an  episcopal  palace  and  a  convent,  continuing  the
work  until  his  health  failed.

MACFARLANE,  Alexander,  lawyer,  b.  in
Wallace,  Nova  Scotia,  17  June,  1818.  After  re
ceiving  an  education  from  private  tutors  he  studied
law,  was  called  to  the  bar  of  Nova  Scotia  in  1844,
and  acquired  a  large  practice.  He  was  in  the  Nova
Scotia  legislature  from  1856  until  the  union  of
1867.  In  1865  he  became  a  member  of  the  execu
tive  council  of  the  province,  and  holds  rank  and
precedence  as  such  by  patent  from  the  queen.  He
was  one  of  the  delegates  from  Nova  Scotia  to  the
colonial  conference  in  London  to  complete  the
terms  of  union  in  1866-'7,  and  in  the  latter  year
was  appointed  queen's  counsel.  On  10  Oct.,  1870,
he  was  called  to  the  senate.  In  politics  he  is  a
Conservative,  and  his  speeches  in  the  senate  have
been  marked  by  dignity  and  breadth  of  view.


MACFARLAXE


MACGAHAN


115


MACFARLANE,  Robert,  editor,  b.  in  Ruther-

glen,  near  Glasgow,  Scotland,  23  April,  1815 ;  d.  in
rooklyn,  N.  Y.,  21  Dec.,  1883.  His  early  educa
tion  was  limited,  and.  after  learning  his  father's
trade,  that  of  a  dyer,  he  emigrated  to  the  United
States  in  1836  and  settled  in  Albany,  X.  Y.,  in
1840,  where  he  became  editor  of  a  paper  in  the  in
terests  of  the  working  classes.  In  1848  he  was  ap
pointed  editor  of  the  "  Scientific  American,"  which
post  he  held  for  seventeen  years,  but,  being  threat
ened  with  failing  eyesight,  he  relinquished  literary
work  in  18(35,  returned  to  Albany,  and  engaged  in
dyeing.  In  1874  he  retired,  and  thenceforward  re
sided  chiefly  in  Brooklyn.  Pie  revisited  his  native
land  twice  and  wrote  sketches  of  his  travels,  also
devoting  himself  to  Scottish  antiquities  and  to  the
history  of  Scottish  emigration  to  this  country.  He
was  the  author  of  "Propellers  and  Steam  Naviga
tion"  (Xew  York,  1851;  new  ed.,  Philadelphia.
1854),  and  edited  Love's  "Treatise  on  the  Art  of
Dyeing"  (Philadelphia,  1868).

'MACFEELY,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  about  1828.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1850,  served  as  lieutenant  of  infantry  in  scout
ing  against  the  Snake  Indians,  in  the  Yakima
expedition  of  1855,  and  against  the  Oregon  In
dians.  He  was  made  a  captain  on  the  staff  on  11
May,  1861,  and  was  commissary  for  the  state  of
Indiana,  and  afterward  chief  of  the  commissa
riat  of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio,  and  then  of  the
Army  of  the  Tennessee  during  the  Vicksburg  cam
paign  and  the  subsequent  operations  until  the
close  of  the  Atlanta  campaign,  after  being  com
missioned  as  major  on  9  Feb.,  1863.  He  received
two  brevets  on  15  March,  1865,  for  faithful  services
during  the  war.  After  serving  as  chief  of  com
missariat  at  Cincinnati,  Detroit,  and  Chicago,  he
was  appointed  commissary-general  of  subsistence,
with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general,  on  14  April,
1875,  which  office  he  still  (1888)  holds.

McFERRAN,  John  Courts,  soldier,  b.  in  Ken
tucky  in  1831 ;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  25  April,
1872.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1843  and  assigned  to  the  infantry.  He
served  in  the  military  occupation  of  Texas  and  the
war  with  Mexico,  being  engaged  at  Palo  Alto  and
Resaca  de  la  Palma.  He  was  with  his  regiment
on  the  frontiers  of  Texas  and  Xew  Mexico  until  he
entered  the  quartermaster's  department  and  was
made  a  captain  on  the  staff  on  20  Aug.,  1855.  Be
fore  and  during  the  civil  war  he  was  on  duty  in
Xew  Mexico,  being  promoted  major  and  appointed
chief  quartermaster  of  that  department  on  30  Nov.,
1863.  In  1864—'5  he  was  Gen.  James  H.  Carleton's
chief  of  staff,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war  was  bre-
vetted  brigadier-general.  He  was  promoted  lieu
tenant-colonel  on  29  July,  1866.  and  served  subse
quently  as  chief  quartermaster  of  the  Department
of  Washington  and  of  the  Division  of  the  South.

McFERRIN,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Washing
ton  county,  Va..  25  March,  1784;  d.  in  Tipton
county,  Tenn.,  4  Sept.,  1840.  He  was  of  Irish  Pres
byterian  extraction,  was  brought  up  as  a  farmer,
and,  after  marrying  at  the  age  of  twenty,  settled  in
Rutherford  county,  Tenn..  where  he  was  often  en
gaged  in  combats  with  the  Indians.  After  the
declaration  of  war  with  England  he  was  chosen
captain  of  a  company  of  volunteers,  and  marched
under  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson  against  the  Creeks,
was  present  at  Talladega.  and  suffered  great  priva
tions  during  the  campaign.  Capt.  McFerrin  was
elected  colonel  on  his  return,  and  for  several  years
took  pride  in  leading  the  best-trained  regiment  of
the  state  troops.  At  the  age  of  thirty-six  he  united
with  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and  on  25


Nov.,  1823,  was  received  into  the  Tennessee  con
ference  as  an  itinerant  preacher.  His  ministry,
which  was  in  Alabama  after  1828,  and  in  western
Tennessee  after  1834,  was  attended  with  great  suc
cess. — His  eldest  son,  John  Berry,  clergyman,  b.
in  Rutherford  county,  Tenn.,  15  June,  1807 ;  d.  in
Nashville,  10  May,  1887,  was  appointed  a  class-
leader  in  1823,  licensed  to  exhort  in  1824  and  to
preach  in  1825,  and  joined  the  Tennessee  confer
ence  the  same  year.  The  next  three  years  he  spent
on  circuits  in  Tennessee  and  Alabama,  and  he  was
then  missionary  to  the  Cherokee  nation  for  two
years,  six  years  in  stations,  three  years  presiding
elder,  and  in  1840  elected  editor  of  the  "  Christian
Advocate."  In  this  post  he  was  continued  till
May,  1858,  when  he  was  elected  book-agent.  This
office,  with  the  further  appointment  of  missionary
to  the  Army  of  Tennessee,  he  held  eight  years.  In
1866  he  was  elected  secretary  to  the  board  of  mis
sions,  which  office  he  filled  till  1878.  In  that  year
he  was  again  elected  book-agent,  and  he  continued
in  this  office  till  his  death.  Randolph-Maeon  col
lege  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1851.  He
represented  American  Methodism  in  the  oecumeni
cal  conference  in  London,  England,  in  1881,  and  he
was  at  the  centennial  conference  in  Baltimore  in
1884.  His  chief  work  was  a  "  History  of  Method
ism  in  Tennessee  "  (3  vols.,  Nashville,  1870-'2).  A
memorial  volume,  edited  by  Rev.  O.  P.  Fitzgerald,
is  now  (1888)  in  preparation. — Another  son,  Ander
sen  Purely,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rutherford  county,
Tenn.,  25  Feb.,  18i8,  entered  the  Methodist  minis
try  in  1854,  and  has  published  "  Sermons  for  the
Times"  (Nashville.  1884),  and  "Heavenly  Shadows
and  Hymns  "  (1887).

MacGAHAN,  Januarius  Aloysius,  journalist,
b.  near  New  Lexington,  Perry  co.,  Ohio,  12  June,
1844;  d.  in  Constantinople,  Turkey,  9  June,  1878.
His  father  died  when  the  son  was  seven  years  old,
leaving  a  farm  on  which  the  latter  worked  till  the
age  of  sixteen,  attending  school  during  the  winter
months.  He  went  to  Huntington,  111.,  in  1860,
taught  for  two  terms,  then  became  a  book-keeper,
and,  removing  to  St.  Louis  in  1864.  followed  the
same  calling  after  first  passing  through  the  course
of  instruction  in  a
business  college.  He
also  wrote  news-let
ters  to  the  Hunt
ington  "  Democrat,"
gave  public  readings
from  Charles  Dick-
ens's  works,  and  dur
ing  his  spare  hours
read  law,  which  he
intended  to  make  his
profession.  In  Janu
ary,  1869,  he  went  to
Europe,  visited  Lon
don,  Paris,  and  oth
er  places,  and  then
spent  many  months

in  Brussels,  where  he ^J  \  '

devoted himself to  M

the  study  of  civil  and  international  law.  and  per
fected  his  knowledge  of  French  and  German.  When
about  to  embark  for  home  he  was  engaged  in  the
autumn  of  1870  as  special  correspondent  of  the
New  York  "  Herald."  He  overtook  the  retreating
army  of  Gen.  Charles  D.  S.  Bourbaki.  and  then
went  to  Lyons  and  next  to  Bordeaux,  whence  he  de
spatched  a  series  of  interviews  with  the  leaders  of
the  Republican  and  the  Monarchical  and  Clerical
parties  that  attracted  much  attention,  and  on  the
removal  of  the  seat  of  the  National  government  to


116


MAcGAIIAN


McGEE


Versailles  hastened  to  Paris,  and  remained  there
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  Commune,
describing  the  events  of  the  period  in  graphic
letters.  He  was  the  only  correspondent  in  the  city,
and  established  an  intimacy  with  Dombrovsky  and
other  communist  leaders  that  was  the  cause  of  his
arrest  by  the  National  troops,  from  whose  custody
he  was  delivered  through  the  intercession  of  the
U.  S.  minister,  Klihu  B.  Washburne.  His  published
conversations  with  Leon  Gambetta,  Archbishop
Dupanloup,  and  others  introduced  into  Europe  the
practice  of  newspaper  interviewing.  After  the
Commune  he  visited  Bucharest,  Odessa,  and  then
Yalta,  where  lie  formed  many  friendships  with
members  of  the  czar's  household  and  officers  of  the
guards.  Accompanying  the  court  to  St.  Peters
burg,  he  was  appointed  regular  correspondent  of
the  "  Herald "  in  that  capital,  and  through  his
exceptional  social  relations  with  high  officials  was
able  to  obtain  interesting  political  news.  He  ac
companied  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman  to  the  Cau
casus  in  1872,  then  reported  the  proceedings  of  the
"Alabama"  conference  in  Geneva,  gathered  news
in  London,  Paris,  Lyons,  and  other  places,  and
after  marrying,  in  January,  1873,  a  Russian  lady
whose  acquaintance  he  had  first  made  at  Yalta,
was  unexpectedly  ordered  to  join  the  expedition
against  Khiva.  "After  vainly  seeking  permission
for  the  journey  from  the  Russian  government,  he
set  out  alone  on  his  adventurous  trip,  riding  un
hindered  through  the  desert,  and  overtaking  the
Russian  column  before  Khiva  just  as  the  bombard
ment  began.  While  he  was  there  a  close  intimacy
sprang  up  between  him  and  Col.  Skobeleff.

On  his  return  to  Europe  he  published  his
"Campaigning  on  the  Oxus,  and  the  Fall  of
Khiva"  (London,  1874),  which  has  passed  through
many  editions.  In  July,  1874,  he  went  to  the
Pyrenees  to  report  the  Carl  1st  war,  and  remained
with  Don  Carlos  for  the  next  ten  months,  acquiring
in  a  short  time  a  perfect  command  of  the  Spanish
tongue.  During  the  campaign  he  lived  in  the
saddle  and  was  frequently  under  fire.  In  his
letters  to  the  "Herald"  he  tried  to  gain  for  the
Carlists  the  sympathies  of  the  civilized  world.  In
June,  1875,  he  sailed  from  Southampton  on  the
"Pandora"  for  the  Polar  seas.  This  voyage  he
described  in  newspaper  letters,  and  in  a  volume
entitled  "Under  the  Northern  Lights"  (London,
1876).  In  June,  1876,  he  received  a  special  com
mission  from  the  editor  of  the  London  "  Daily
News  "to  investigate  the  truth  of  despatches  de
scribing  Turkish  barbarities  in  Bulgaria,  which
had  been  called  in  question  by  the  premier,  Ben
jamin  Disraeli,  in  the  House  of  commons.  Accom
panied  by  Eugene  Schuyler,  who  had  been  com
missioned  by  the  U.  S.  government  to  prosecute  a
similar  inquiry,  MacGahari  went  over  the  desolated
districts,  questioned  the  people  in  Russian,  of
which  language  he  had  gained  a  limited  knowledge,
and  presented  in  brilliant  descriptive  style  a  mass
of  detailed  evidence  of  the  reality  of  the  Bulgarian
horrors  that  enlisted  on  behalf  of  the  Christians  of
Turkey  the  sympathies  of  the  British  public,  and
removed  the  hindrances  to  the  armed  intervention
of  Russia.  His  letters  were  reprinted  in  a  pamphlet
entitled  "  Turkish  Atrocities  in  Bulgaria  "  (London,
1876).  In  the  following  winter  he  reported  the
conference  of  the  ambassadors  in  Constantinople,
then  went  to  St.  Petersburg  to  watch  the  war  prep
arations.  Notwithstanding  a  painful  accident,  he
accompanied  the  Russian  army,  was  present  at  the
first  battle  with  the  Turks,  and  witnessed  the  pas
sage  of  the  advanced  guard  over  the  Danube.
Though  crippled  by  a  broken  leg  and  bruised  in


the  fall  of  an  ammunition-cart,  he  accompanied
Gen.  Gourko's  column,  and  was  with  Gen.  Skobeleff
at  the  front,  where  he  often  went  without  food,
and  four  times  lay  ill  in  the  trenches  with  malarial
fever.  His  letters  described  the  course  of  opera
tions  and  vividly  pictured  the  scenes  of  battle  from
the  fight  at  Stiipka  Pass  to  the  fall  of  Plevna.
While  the  negotiations  of  San  Stefano  were  pro
ceeding  he  remained  at  Pera  during  an  epidemic
of  spotted  typhus,  and  at  last  fell  a  victim  to  the
disease.  MacGahan  combined  in  a  remarkable
degree  descriptive  powers  and  facility  of  composi
tion,  acute  military  and  political  perceptions,  and
physical  energy  and  decisiveness  in  action.  His
fearlessness  in  exposing  himself  to  fire  enabled  him
to  describe  battles  with  great  fidelity.  lie  had
planned  a  work  on  the  eastern  question,  but  left
it  in  no  form  for  publication.

McGARVEY,  John  William,  theologian,  b.  in
Hopkinsville,  Ky.,  1  March,  182!).  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Bethany  college,  Va.,  in  1850,  became  a  min
ister  of  the  Christian  denomination,  and  preached
at.  Fayette,  Mo.,  in  1851-'3,  then  at  Dover,  Mo.,  till
1862,  "and  from  1862  till  1881  at  Lexington,  Ky.
Since  1865  he  has  been  professor  of  sacred  history
in  the  College  of  the  Bible,  Kentucky  university.
From  1860  till  1876  he  edited  the  "Apostolic
Times."  He  is  the  author  of  a  "  Commentary  on
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  "  (Cincinnati,  1863) ;  "  ( 'om-
mentary  on  the  Gospels  of  Matthew  and  Mark"
(1876); '"Lands  of  the  Bible"  (Philadelphia,  1880);
and  "The  Text  and  the  Canon,"  consisting  of  the
first  two  parts  of  a  work  on  the  evidences  of  Chris
tianity  (Cincinnati,  1886).

McGEE,  Thomas  D'Arcy,  statesman,  b.  in  Car-
lingford,  Ireland,  13  April,  1825;  d.  in  Ottawa,
Canada,  7  April,  1868..  He  was  educated  at.  Wex-
ford,  where  his  father  was  employed  in  the  cus
tom-house,  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1842,
and  settled  in  Boston,  where  he  wrote  for  the
"  Pilot,"  a  Roman  Catholic  newspaper,  and  soon
became  its  editor.  On  his  return  to  Ireland  soon
afterward  he  became  parliamentary  correspondent
of  the  Dublin  "  Freeman's  Journal,"  and,  identify
ing  himself  with  the  Young  Ireland  party,  joined
the  staff  of  "The  Nation"  newspaper.  In  1847  he
made  himself  conspicuous  by  summoning  a  meet
ing  to  the  Rotunda,  Dublin,  his  object  being  to  ex
pose  the  later  policy  of  Daniel  O'Conncll.  Toward
the  end  of  1848,  having  become  compromised  by
the  part,  he  had  taken  in  the  Young  Ireland  move
ment,  he  made  good  his  escape  to  the  United  States;
and  in  New  York  he  established  a  newspaper  called
"  The  American  Celt,"  and  afterward  "  The  Nation."
advocating  the  claims  of  Ireland  to  independent
nationality.  During  the  "  Know-Nothing"  excite
ment  of  1854-'6  his  views  underwent  a  radical
change,  and  he  became  an  ardent  royalist.  lie
then  removed  to  Canada,  where  he  was  gladly  wel
comed,  established  a  paper  called  "  The  New  Era,"
and  in  1857  was  elected  to  the  Canadian  parliament
as  one  of  the  members  for  Montreal.  In  1864  he
was  made  president  of  the  executive  council,  which
office  he  continued  to  hold  till  1867.  He  took  an
active  part  in  the  movement  that  resulted  in  the
confederation  of  the  British  North  American  colo
nies,  framing  the  draft  of  the  plan  of  union  that  was
substantially  adopted.  He  was  re-elected  after  the
union  and  sent  to  the  parliament  of  Ottawa.
McGee  had  rendered  himself  obnoxious  to  the
members  of  the  Fenian  secret  society,  and  on  the
evening  of  7  April,  1868,  when  returning  from  a
night  session  of  parliament,  he  was  assassinated  at
the  door  of  his  hotel.  He  was  a  man  of  more  than
ordinary  culture,  which  was  fully  recognised.  At


McGEE


McGILL


117


the  Paris  exhibition  in  1855.  and  at  the  Dublin  ex
hibition  in  1864,  he  represented  Canada  in  the  ca
pacity  of  chief  commissioner.  His  contributions
to  literature  were  "  Historical  Sketches  of  O'Con-
nell  and  his  Friends  "  (Dublin.  1845) ;  "  Irish  Writ
ers  of  the  Seventeenth  Century  "  (1846) ;  "  Memoir
of  the  Life  and  Conquests  of  MacMnrrough,  King
of  Leinster  "  (1847) ;  "  Irish  Letters  "  (New  York,
1852) ;  '•  Life  of  Edward  McGinn,  Coadjutor  Bishop
of  Dcrry  "  (Montreal,  1857) ;  "  Canadian  Ballads  "
(1858);  "Popular  History  of  Ireland"  (Xew  York,
1862);  and  "Speeches  and  Addresses  on  the  Brit
ish  American  Union  "  (London,  1865).  A  volume
of  his  poems,  with  an  introduction  by  Mrs.  D.  J.
Sadlier,  appeared  after  his  death  (New  York,  1870).

McGEE,  W  J  [he  has  no  Christian  name],  geolo
gist,  b.  in  Dubuque  county,  Iowa,  17  April,  1853.
lie  was  self-educated,  and  in  early  life  invented
and  patented  several  improvements  on  agricultural
implements,  subsequently  he  turned  his  attention
to  geology,  and  made  important  investigations  in
that  direction,  including  researches  on  the  loess
of  the  Mississippi  valley,  the  examination  of  the
great  quaternary  lakes  of  Nevada  and  California,
and  the  study  of  a  recent  fault-movement  of  great
scientific  interest  in  the  middle  Atlantic  slope.  In
1881  he  received  the  appointment  of  geologist  on
the  U.  S.  geological  survey,  and  in  that  capacity  he
visited  in  1886  the  city  of  Charleston  for  the  pur
pose  of  studying  the  earthquake  disturbances  in
its  vicinity.  He  is  a  member  of  many  scientific
societies  in  the  LTnited  States,  and  has  published
nearly  fifty  scientific  papers  in  the  proceedings
of  the  societies  of  which  he  is  a  member,  and  in
technical  journals.

MACGEORGE,  Robert  Jackson,  Canadian
clergyman,  b.  in  Glasgow,  Scotland,  in  1811.  His
father,  Andrew,  was  a  well-known  solicitor  in  Glas
gow.  Robert  was  educated  at  the  Universities  of
Glasgow  and  Edinburgh,  in  1839  was  ordained  a
minister  of  the  Episcopal  church  of  Scotland,  and
in  1841  he  removed  to  Canada,  where  he  was  ap
pointed  incumbent  of  Trinity  church,  Streetsville.
During  his  connection  with  this  congregation  he
did  much  missionary  work  at  adjoining  stations.
While  in  Canada  he  edited  the  "  Church,"  a  weekly
newspaper,  and  the  "  Anglo-American  Magazine."
In  1858  he  returned  to  Scotland,  and  was  placed  in
charge  of  the  Episcopal  church  in  Oban.  Mr.
Macgeorge  was  for  some  time  synod  clerk,  and  in
1872  was  appointed  dean  of  Argyll  and  the  Isles.
In  1881  he  resigned  his  charge,  as  well  as  his  office
of  dean  and  canon  of  the  cathedral.  He  has  written
numerous  songs  which  have  been  set  to  music,
and  is  also  the  author  of  a  volume  of  "  Tales,  Ly
rics,  and  Sketches  "  (Toronto,  1858).

McGILL,  Alexander  Taggart,  clergyman,  b.
in  Cannonsburgh,  Pa.,  24  Jan.,  f807.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Jefferson  college  in  1826,  was  a  tutor  there
for  a  short  time,  and  then  removed  to  Georgia,
where  he  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1830.  He  was  appointed  by  the  legislature  to
survey  and  map  the  northwest  corner  of  the  state,
and  after  this  work  was  completed  in  1831  he  re
turned  to  Cannonsburgh  for  the  purpose  of  fitting
himself  for  the  ministry.  After  studying  in  the
Associate  Presbyterian  seminary,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1835,  he  was  ordained  at  Carlisle,
Pa.,  and  was  pastor  of  three  small  churches  in
Cumberland,  Perry,  and  York  counties  till  1838,
when  he  connected  himself  with  the  old-school
Presbyterian  church.  Soon  afterward  he  became
pastor  of  the  2d  Presbyterian  church  of  Carlisle,
and  in  1842  professor  of  church  history  in  West
ern  theological  seminary,  Alleghany,  Pa.  In  1848


I  he  was  moderator  of  the  general  assembly,  which
met  in  Baltimore.  In  the  winter  of  1852  he
filled  a  professorship  in  the  Presbyterian  seminary
at  Columbia,  S.  C.,  and  in  1853  returned  to  his
former  chair  in  Allegheny.  In  1854  he  was  trans
ferred  to  the  professorship  of  ecclesiastical,  homi-
letic,  and  pastoral  theology  at  Princeton  theologi
cal  seminary,  and  in  1883  he  was  retired  as  emeri
tus  professor.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Marshall  college,  Mercersburg,  Pa.,  in  1842,
and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Princeton  in  1808.  Many
of  his  sermons  and  speeches  have  been  printed.
He  has  been  a  frequent  contributor  to  reviews,
and,  besides  assisting  in  the  composition  of  other
works,  is  the  author  of  a  volume  on  "  Church  Gov
ernment,"  now  (1888)  in  press,  and  two  on  "  Church
Ordinances,"  ready  for  the  press. — His  son.  George
McCullocll,  surgeon,  b.  at  Hannah  Furnace,  Cen
tre  co.,  Pa.,  20  April,  1838;  d.  near  Fort  Lyon,
Colorado.  20  July.  1867,  was  graduated  at  Prince
ton  in  1858  and  at  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1861.  He  was  com
missioned  assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army  to
date  from  16  April,  1861,  in  June,  1863.  was  made
medical  inspector,  and  in  May,  1864,  was  acting
medical  director  of  the  cavalry  corps  of  the  Army
of  the  Potomac.  For  gallantry  at  Meadow  Brook
he  received  the  brevet  of  captain.  In  June,  1864,
he  was  made  acting  medical  inspector  of  the  Army
of  the  Potompf,  and  served  as  such  until  January,
1865.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  brevetted
major.  During  the  cholera  year  of  1866  he  at
tended  the  victims  of  the  epidemic  on  Hart's  and
David's  islands.  New  York  harbor,  receiving  the
brevet  of  lieutenant-colonel.  He  was  then  ordered
to  the  west,  and  while  he  was  on  the  march  from
Fort  Harker,  Kansas,  to  Fort  Lyon,  the  cholera
broke  out.  Incessant  labor  then,  which  earned  for
him  the  brevet  of  colonel,  with  grief  at  the  death
of  his  wife,  was  the  cause  of  his  death. — Another
son,  Alexander  Taggart.  jurist,  b.  in  Allegheny
City,  Pa.,  20  Oct.,  1843,  was  graduated  at  Princc"-
ton  in  1864,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  practised  in  Jersey  City,  N.  J.  He  was  elected
to  the  legislature  in  1874,  re-elected  the  following
year,  and  was  prosecutor  of  the  pleas  of  Hudson
county  in  1878-'83  and  then  president  of  the  county
courts  till  May,  1887.  when  he  was  chosen  chan
cellor  of  the  state  of  New  Jersey.

MeGILL,  James,  Canadian  philanthropist,  b.
in  Glasgow,  Scotland,  6  Oct..  1744;  d.  in  Montreal,
Canada,  19  Dec.,  1813.  He  received  his  early  edu
cation  in  his  native  place,  and  came  to  Canada  be
fore  the  American  Revolution.  For  some  time
after  his  arrival  he  engaged  in  the  northwest  fur-
trade,  but  afterward  settled  in  Montreal,  and,  in
partnership  with  his  brother,  Andrew  McGill,  be
came  one  of  the  chief  merchants  in  that  town.  He
was  for  many  years  a  member  of  the  Lower  Cana
dian  parliament,  for  West  Montreal,  and  after
ward  a  member  of  the  legislative  and  executive
councils.  He  was  lieutenant-colonel  and  subse
quently  colonel  of  the  Montreal  city  militia,  and
at  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  1812  became  briga
dier-general,  and  was  prepared  in  that  capacity  to
take  the  field.  In  addition  to  many  other  benefits
that  he  conferred  upon  Montreal,  he  was  mainly
instrumental  in  founding  the  university  that  bears
his  name,  and  bequeathed  to  it  property  that  was
valued  at  £30,000  and  £10.000  in  cash.  'Owing  to
the  growth  of  the  city,  the  land  has  increased
greatly  in  value,  and,  in  consequence  of  this  fact
and  other  bequests  and  donations  that  have  been
received,  it  is  now  the  most  richly  endowed  uni-
versitv  of  the  Dominion.


118


McGILL


McGILLIVRAY


McGILL,  John,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in  Auch-
land,  Wigtonshire,  Scotland,  in  March,  1752  ;  d.  in
Toronto,  31  Dec.,  1834.  After  receiving  his  pre
paratory  education,  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  mer
chant  at  Ayr.  In  1773  he  emigrated  to  Virginia,
adhered  to  the  royal  cause  in  the  Revolution,  and
in  1777  was  a  lieutenant  in  the  Loyal  Virginians.
In  1782  he  was  a  captain  in  the  Queen's  rangers,
and  in  1783,  at  the  close  of  the  war,  went  to  St.
John,  New  Brunswick,  where  he  remained  seven
years.  In  the  winter  of  1792  Mr.  McGill  removed
to  Upper  Canada,  where  he  became  a  member  of
the  executive  council  in  179(5,  and  in  1797  of  the
legislative  council,  in  which  body  he  remained  till
his  death.  He  was  also  inspector-general  of  ac
counts,  to  which  office  he  was  appointed  in  1801.
— His  nephew.  Peter,  Canadian  merchant,  b.  in
Cree  Bridge,  Wigtonshire,  Scotland,  in  August,
1789 ;  d.  in  Montreal,  28  Sept.,  1860,  was  named
McCutcheon,  but  he  afterward  changed  that  sur
name  to  McGill  at  the  request  of  his  uncle,  whose
heir  he  became.  Peter  emigrated  to  Canada  in
1809.  and,  settling  in  Montreal,  became  a  merchant,
From  June,  1834,  till  June,  1800,  he  was  president
of  the  Bank  of  Montreal.  He  became  a  legislative
councillor  in  1841,  was  also  for  a  time  an  executive
councillor,  and  in  1847  was  appointed  speaker  of
the  legislative  council,  which  office  he  held  till  his
resignation  in  the  following  year.  Mr.  McGill  was
the  first  chairman  of  the  St.  Lawrence  and  Cham-
plain  railroad  company,  the  first  that  was  estab
lished  in  Canada,  from  its  beginning  in  1834  until
the  road  was  completed  in  1838.  lie  was  mayor
of  Montreal  from  1840  till  1842.  a  governor  of  the
University  of  McGill  college,  governor  of  Montreal
general  hospital,  and  president  of  various  associ
ations.  He  was  noted  for  his  liberality,  and  prob
ably  no  other  citizen  of  Montreal  did  so  much  to
advance  its  interests.

McGILL,  John,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  4  Nov.,  1809:  d.  in  Richmond.  Va.,  14
Jan.,  1872.  His  parents,  who  had  come  from  Ire
land  when  they  were  children,  settled  in  Philadel
phia  before  their  marriage,  but  removed  to  Bards-
town,  Ky.,  in  1818.  John  was  graduated  at  the
College  of  St.  Joseph  in  1828,  studied  law,  and
practised  with  success,  but  afterward  abandoned
his  profession  and  entered  the  seminary  of  Bards-
town  as  a  candidate  for  the  priesthood.  Here  he
spent  two  years,  and  was  then  sent  to  St.  Mary's,
Baltimore,  for  the  completion  of  his  theological
studies.  He  returned  to  Bardstown  in  1835  and
was  ordained  priest  by  Bishop  David  on  13  June.
He  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  congregation  of
St.  Peter's  church,  Lexington,  and  toward  the  end
of  1836  appointed  assistant  pastor  of  the  Church
of  St.  Louis,  Louisville.  In  the  summer  of  1838
he  was  despatched  to  Europe  on  a  special  mission
by  Bishop  Chabrat.  On  his  return  to  Louisville
in  October,  in  addition  to  his  ministerial  work
he  edited  the  "  Catholic  Advocate,"  in  which  his
articles  in  defence  of  the  dogmas  of  his  church
made  his  name  known  to  all  Roman  Catholics  in
the  United  States.  He  also  gave  a  series  of  lec
tures  on  the  same  subjects,  which  were  listened  to
by  members  of  every  denomination.  In  1848  he
was  appointed  vicar-general  by  Bishop  Spalding,
and  in  October,  1850,  he  was" nominated  for  the
see  of  Richmond,  and  consecrated  bishop  on  10
Nov.  lie  devoted  himself  zealously  to  the  admin
istration  of  his  diocese.  There  were  but  ten
churches  and  eight  priests  in  it,  with  two  orphan
asylums.  Bishop  McGill  built  churches  in  Nor
folk,  Fortress  Monroe,  Richmond,  Fredericksburg,
Warrenton,  and  Fairfax  Station.  He  visited  Rome


in  1852  in  order  to  take  part  in  the  definition  of
the  immaculate  conception,  and  in  1869  to  join  in
the  deliberations  of  the  Vatican  council.  His  dio
cese  suffered  severely  during  the  civil  war.  and
several  of  his  churches  were  destroyed,  but  he
gave  himself  up  to  the  care  of  the  wounded,  and
established  an  infirmary  in  Richmond  for  their
benefit.  After  the  war  he  built  the  convent  of
Monte  Maria,  and  introduced  various  sisterhoods,
who  established  academies.  He  also  established
fourteen  parochial  schools  for  a  Roman  Catholic
population  of  about  17,000.  His  health  failed  in
1871.  While  bishop  of  Richmond,  Dr.  McGill
published  a  series  of  letters  on  controversial  sub
jects  addressed  to  Robert  Ridgway,  besides  two
compendinms  of  Catholic  doctrine,  entitled  "The
True  Church  "  and  "  Faith  the  Victory."  He  was
also  author  of  a  work  criticising:  Macaulay's  '•  His
tory  of  England,"  and  translated  Audin's  "  Life  of
John  Calvin  "  (Louisville.  1847).

McGILLIVRAY,  Alexander,  Indian  chief,  b.
in  the  Creek  nation  in  1740;  d.  in  Pensacola.  Fla.,
17  Feb.,  1793.  His  father  was  Lachland  McGilli-
vray,  of  Dunmaglas,  Scotland,  his  mother  a  half-
breed  Creek  princess  of  the  influential  Wind  fam
ily,  whose  father  had  been  a  French  officer  of
Spanish  descent,  He  had  thus  in  his  veins  the
blood  of  four  nations,  and  in  his  character  were
some  of  the  traits  of  them  all.  He  possessed  the
polished  urbanity  of  the  Frenchman,  the  duplicity
of  the  Spaniard,  the  cool  sagacity  of  the  Scotch
man,  and  the  silent  subtlety,  and  inveterate  hate
of  the  North  American  Indian.  He  received  a
classical  education  from  his  father's  brother,  a
Scotch-Presbyterian  clergyman  of  Charleston,  but
on  reaching  manhood  returned  to  his  mother's
people,  among  whom  he  was  at  once  given  the  po
sition  to  which  he  was  entitled  by  his  talents  and
the  influence  of  his  family.  He  assumed  a  kind
of  semi-barbaric  pomp,  being  constantly  attended
by  a  numerous  retinue,  from  whom  he  exacted  all
the  deference  due  to  royalty.  He  had  several
wives,  whom  he  lodged  in  as  many  different  "  pal
aces,"  at  which  he  entertained  his  guests  in  rude
magnificence.  1 1  is  influence  was  always  great
among  his  nation,  but  it  was  at  first  overshadowed
by  that  of  the  Cherokee  king,  Oconostota.  On  the
deposition  of  the  latter,  he  became  the  autocrat  of
the  Creeks,  and  their  allies  the  Seminoles  and
Chickamaugas.  Thus  he  could  bring  into  the  field
not.  less  than  10,000  warriors.  He  sided  with  the
British  in  the  Revolutionary  war,  and  in  retalia
tion  Georgia  confiscated  such  of  his  lands  as  lay
within  her  limits.  This  excited  his  bitter  enmity,
and  led  a  long  war  against  the  western  settlers.
The  treaty  of  peace  of  1783  was  no  sooner  signed
than  he  proposed  to  Arthur  O'Neil,  the  Spanish
governor  of  Pensacola,  the  treacherous  policy  by
which  Spain  sought  for  twelve  years  to  sever  the
trans-Alleghany  region  from  the  Union.  Failing
to  bring  the  other  southern  tribes  into  a  coalition
against  John  Sevier  on  Holston  and  Watauga
rivers,  he  made  constant  raids  upon  Gen.  James
Robertson,  along  Cumberland  river,  and  the  latter,
with  unexampled  heroism,  as  constantly  beat  him
back,  at  one  time  with  but  seventy  men,  and  with
never  so  many  as  a  thousand.  The  U.  S.  govern
ment  made  him  repeated  overtures  for  peace,  but
he  seriously  listened  to  none  till  he  was  invited  to
New  York  in  1790,  to  hold  a  personal  conference
with  Washington.  Seeing  in  this  an  opportunity
for  display,  he  went,  attended  by  twenty-eight  of
his  principal  chiefs  and  warriors;  but  he  was  care
ful  before  setting  out  to  write  to  the  Spanish  gov
ernor  at  New  Orleans  that,  although  he  should


McGILVKRY


McGLYNN


119


conclude  a  treaty  of  peace  with  the  U.  S.  gbvern-
ment,  he  would  ever  remain  faithful  to  his  old
friends,  the  Spaniards.  He  was  received  with
great  ceremony  by  the  United  States  officials.
who  concluded  with  him  a  treaty  by  which  they
restored  to  the  Creeks  a  large  territory,  paid  Mc-
Gillivray  $100,000  for  his  confiscated  property,  and
gave  him  the  commission  of  major-general  in  the
U.  S.  army.  He  returned  home,  and  at  once  in
stigated  a  fresh  raid  upon  the  heroic  Robertson.
He  pursued  this  treacherous  policy  till  his  death.
McGillivray  was  a  curious  compound  of  the  wild
savage  and  the  educated  white  man.  He  indulged
in  a  plurality  of  wives,  and  had  a  barbarian's  de
light  in  tinsel  splendor;  yet  he  had  scholarly
tastes,  and  an  intellect  so  keen  as  to  be  a  match
in  diplomacy  for  the  ablest  statesman.  He  was  a
skilful  speculator,  a  shrewd  merchant,  an  astute
politician,  and  an  able  writer  of  state  papers.  At
the  same  time  he  was  a  British  colonel,  and  a  Span
ish  and  an  American  general,  and  he  played  these
different  nationalities  so  skilfully  against  each
other  as  always  to  secure  his  own  interest  and  that
of  his  nation.  He  is  chiefly  remembered  for  his
savage  delight  in  blood,  his  treacherous  diplomacy,
and  the  duplicity  by  which  he  hid  the  most  fiendish
designs  under  the  guise  of  fraternal  kindness.  He
was  an  instance  of  a  powerful  intellect  absolutely
divorced  from  moral  principle.  Said  Robertson,
who  knew  him  well:  "The  Spaniards  are  devils,
and  the  biggest  devil  among  them  is  the  half
Spaniard,  half  Frenchman,  half  Scotchman,  and
altogether  Creek  scoundrel,  McGillivray."

McGILVERY,  Freeman,  soldier,  b.  in  Pros
pect,  Me..  27  Oct.,  1823;  d.  in  Virginia,  2  Sept.,
1804.  He  was  born  in  humble  circumstances,  be
came  a  sailor,  and  before  he  had  completed  his
twenty-first  year  was  master  of  a  vessel.  On
hearing  of  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  while  he
was  in  Rio  Janeiro,  he  returned,  after  completing
his  business,  to  his  native  state,  and  raised  a  bat
tery  of  artillery,  which  was  first  brought  into  ac
tion  at  Cedar  Mountain,  9  Aug.,  1862,  where  he
was  instrumental  in  preserving  the  left  flank  of
the  National  army.  He  was  subsequently  engaged
at  Sulphur  Springs,  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run,
Chantilly,  and  Antietam.  He  was  promoted  major
5  Feb.,  1863,  and  assigned  to  the  command  of  the
1st  brigade  of  the  volunteer  artillery  reserve  of
the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  On  23  June,  1863.  he
was  commissioned  lieutenant-colonel,  and  at  Get
tysburg,  by  the  rapid  and  destructive  fire  of  his
guns,  repelled  three  infantry  charges  on  Gen.
Daniel  E.  Sickles's  position,  which  would  otherwise
have  broken  the  National  line.  In  the  third  as
sault  he  was  driven  from  his  position  after  the  in
fantry  had  retreated  :  but  by  sacrificing  one  bat
tery  he  was  able  to  form  a  new  line  that,  without
infantry  supports,  filled  a  gap  of  800  yards,
through  which  the  Confederates  would  otherwise
have  passed,  cutting  the  National  army  in  twain.
Pie  was  promoted  colonel  of  the  Maine  mounted
artillery  on  1  Sept.,  1863,  and  in  June,  1864,  com
manded  the  reserve  artillery  before  Petersburg.  In
August  he  was  appointed  chief  of  artillery  of  the
10th  army  corps,  and  while  serving  in  that  capaci
ty  in  the  operations  at  Deep  Bottom  was  shot  |
in  the  finger.  The  urgency  of  his  duties  caused  |
him  to  neglect  the  wound  until  an  operation  be
came  necessary,  and,  while  undergoing  it,  he  died
from  the  effects  of  chloroform.

McGINNIS,  George  Francis,  soldier,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  19  March.  1826.  He  was  educated
in  the  common  schools  of  Maine  and  Ohio,  served
during  the  Mexican  war  as  captain  of  Ohio  volun


teers,  and  in  the  civil  war  as  lieutenant-colonel  and
colonel  of  the  llth  Indiana  infantry,  was  engaged
at  Fort  Donelson,  and  promoted  brigadier-general
of  volunteers  on  29  Nov.,  1862.  He  served  with
that  rank  during  the  remainder  of  the  war,  and
was  mustered  out  on  24  Aug.,  1865.  After  the
war  he  settled  in  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  became  audi
tor  of  Marion  county  in  1867,  and  held  that
office  till  1871.

McGIRTH,  Daniel,  scout,  b.  in  Kershaw  dis-
j  trict,  S.  C. ;  d.  in  Sumter  district,  S.  C.,  about
j  1789.  He  was  a  hunter  and  trapper,  whose  famil-
iarity  with  the  woods  of  South  Carolina  and  Geor-
i  gia  made  him  a  useful  scout  for  the  Americans,
with  whom  he  sided  in  the  early  part  of  the  Revo
lution.  While  at  St.  Ilia.  GeoVgia,  an  American
officer,  who  coveted  the  valuable  mare  that  he  rode,
provoked  McGirth  to  an  angry  act,  for  which  he
was  sentenced  to  be  flogged.  Making  his  escape,
he  joined  the  Tories,  and,  to  satisfy  his  vindict
ive  feelings,  committed  many  barbarities.  When
the  patriots  regained  possession  of  South  Carolina
he  retreated  into  Georgia,  and  thence  into  Florida,
where  he  was  arrested  by  the  Spaniards  after  the
war,  and  confined  in  the  castle  of  St.  Augustine.
He  was  not  liberated  until  the  expiration  of  five
years.  The  hardships  of  prison-life  so  undermined
his  health  that  he  soon  died.

McGLYNN,  Edward,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
York  city,  27  Sept.,  1837.  He"  was  educated  at
public  schools  in  New  York,  and  in  1851-'60  studied
theology  at  the  College  of  the  propaganda  in  Rome,
where  he  received
his  doctorate  after
public  examina
tion.  In  1860  he
was  ordained  to  thp
priesthood,  and  on
his  return  to  the
United  States  he
was  made  an  assist
ant  pastor,  and  also
became  a  hospital
chaplain.  On  the
death  of  Father
Cummings,  in  1860.
he  was  appointee
to  succeed  him  as
pastor  of  St.  Ste
phen's  church  in
New  York  city,  and
there,  by  his  elo
quence,  heartiness,  and  quick  sympathy  with  his
people,  won  their  warmest  affection.  Dr.  McGlynn's
unwillingness  to  establish  a  parochial  school  in
connection  with  his  church,  and  his  claim  that  the
public  schools  were  safe  for  the  children  of  Roman
Catholics,  brought  him  into  disfavor  with  the
authorities  of  the  church.  He  supported  Henry
George  (q.  v.)  during  the  mayoralty  canvass  of  1886,
and  his  remarks  in  favor  of  Mr.  George's  land  theo
ries  on  public  platforms  resulted  in  his  being  cen
sured  by  the  archbishop  of  the  diocese.  He  per
sisted,  and  the  matter  was  referred  to  Rome  for
action.  The  archbishop  meanwhile  removed  him
from  the  charge  of  St.  Stephen's,  and  he  was  sum
moned  to  appear  at  the  Vatican :  but  ignoring  the
papal  demands,  he  was  excommunicated.  Many  of
his  parishioners  shared  his  views,  and  in  conse
quence  the  sentiment  in  his  favor  was  very  strong,
During  the  spring  of  1887  Dr.  McGlynn  helped  to
found,  and  became  president  of,  the  Anti-poverty
society,  and  was  conspicuous  by  his  Sunday  even
ing  lectures  before  that  body  in  the  Academy  of
music  in  New  York  city.  In  behalf  of  the  eco-


"


120


McGRAW


McGUFFEY


nomic  opinions  that  he  holds,  he  has  lectured  in
many  cities  of  the  United  States,  and  has  pub
lished  articles  in  support  of  the  principles  that
he  eloquently  advocates.

MctJRAW,  John,  merchant,  b.  in  Dryden,  N.  Y.,
22  May,  1815  ;  d.  in  Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  4  'May,  1877.
He  began  in  humble  circumstances,  but  was  very
successful  in  business,  being  extensively  engaged
in  the  lumber  trade  in  Wisconsin,  Iowa,  and  Michi
gan,  and  the  head  of  a  firm  that  possessed  large
mills  at  Saginaw.  He  made  Ithaca  his  residence
in  18(51,  having  lived  for  the  previous  eleven  years
in  New  York  citv.  He  was  one  of  the  original
trustees  of  Cornell  university,  and  erected  at  his
own  expense,  at  a  cost  of  $150,000,  the  McGraw
building,  for  the  accommodation  of  the  library
and  museum  of  the  university. — His  only  daugh
ter,  Jennie,  married  Prof.  Daniel  Willard  Fiske
(ij.  v.),  and  at  her  death  bequeathed  to  Cornell
University  a  library  fund  of  nearly  $1,000.000.

Mcti READY,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  western
Pennsylvania  about  1758 ;  d.  in  Henderson,  Ky.,
in  February,  1817.  While  he  was  a  child  his
family  removed  to  Guilford  county,  N.  C.  He  was
educated  at  the  school  of  Rev.  Dr.  John  McMillan,
Cannonsburgh,  Pa.,  and  licensed  to  preach  on  13
Aug.,  1788.  After  spending  some  time  with  Rev.
Dr.  John  B.  Smith  at  Ilampden  Sidney  college,
Va.,  he  preached  in  Orange  county,  X.  C..  and  was
settled  as  a  pastor,  where  his  eloquence  influenced
many  young  men  to  follow  the  Christian  ministry.
In  1796  he  removed  to  Kentucky,  and  was  settled
over  the  Gaspar  river,  Red  river,  and  Muddy  river
churches,  in  Logan  county.  He  was  the  originator
and  director  of  the  great  revival  of  1800,  in  the
Cumberland  country,  which  forms  a  spiritual
epoch  in  the  history  of  the  states  west  of  the
Alleghany  mountains.  In  July,  1800,  he  organ
ized  an  encampment,  and  thus  originated  the  re-
ligious  camp-meeting.  The  employment  as  preach
ers  and  evangelists  of  young  men  not  regularly
educated  for  the  ministry  excited  opposition  in
the  church,  and  led  to  the  organization  in  1810  of
the  Cumberland  Presbyterians.  Two  years  after
ward  he  withdrew  from  the  new  body  and  re
turned  to  his  former  presbytery.  He  wrote  many
forcible  sermons,  which  were  collected  and  pub
lished  by  the  Rev.  James  Smith  (vol.  i.,  Louisville,
1831  ;  vol.  ii.,  Nashville,  1833).

MactrREUdcOR,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ire
land  in  1077;  d.  in  Londonderry,  N.  II.,  5  March.
1729.  He  received  a  thorough  classical  and  theo
logical  education,  and  had  charge  of  a  Presby
terian  church  in  the  north  of  Ireland.  The  op
pressions  to  which  Presbyterians  were  at  that
time  subjected  induced  him  to  emigrate  with
about  100  families.  They  landed  at  Boston  on  14
Oct.,  1718,  and  established  near  Ilaverhill  the  town
of  Londonderry,  where  they  organized  the  first
Presbyterian  church  in  New  England,  of  which  he
assumed  the  pastoral  charge  without  the  ceremony
of  installation. — His  son,  David,  b.  in  Ireland,  0
Nov.,  1710;  d.  in  Londonderry,  N.  II.,  30  May,
1777,  studied  theology  with  his  father's  successor,
and  was  ordained  pastor  of  a  new  parish  in  the
western  part  of  Londonderry  in  1737.  He  took
an  active  part  in  the  great  awakening  that  began
in  1741.  In  1755  he  declined  a  call  to  the  Presby
terian  church  in  New  York  city.  His  discourses
include  '•  Professors  warned  o'f  their  Danger "
(Boston,  1741);  "The  Spirits  of  the  Day  Tried"
(1742) ;  and  "  The  Believers  all  Secured  ""(1747).

MacGREGOR,  John,  British  political  econo
mist,  b.  in  Drynie,  near  Stornoway,  Ross-shire,  Scot
land,  in  1797 ;  d.  in  Boulogne,  France,  23  April,


1857.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  David  MacGregor,
of  Drynie,  Ross-shire.  When  quite  young,  John
was  sent  to  Canada  and  placed  in  a  commercial
house  on  Prince  Edward  island.  He  soon  became
prominent  in  the  colony,  and  finally  obtained  a
seat  in  the  colonial  legislature.  After  a  lengthened
colonial  experience  he  returned  to  the  mother-
country,  and  was  employed  on  various  commercial
missions.  He  was  made  secretary  of  the  board  of
trade  in  1840,  and  held  the  office  until  1847,  when
he  was  elected  by  the  citizens  of  Glasgow  as  one
of  their  representatives  in  parliament.  He  took  an
active  part  in  the  free-trade  controversy,  and  with
Joseph  Hume  and  others  was  instrumental  in  in
ducing  the  house  of  commons  to  appoint  a  select
committee  on  the  import  duties.  His  published
works  are  numerous.  Among  them  arc  "Histori
cal  and  Descriptive  Sketches  of  the  Maritime  Colo
nies  of  British  North  America''  (1828):  "  Emigra
tion  to  British  America  "(1829) :  "  My  Note-Book  "
(1835);  "  Commercial  and  Financial  Legislation  of
Europe  and  America  "  (1841);  "  American  Discov
ery  from  the  Times  of  Columbus  "  (184(i) ;  "  Ger
many  and  her  Resources  "  (1848) ;  and  an  uncom
pleted  "  History  of  the  British  Empire  from  the
Accession  of  James  I."  (1852).

MctiROARTY,  Stephen  Josenh,  soldier,  b.  in
Mount  Charles  county,  Donegal,  Ireland,  in  1830;
d.  in  College  Hill,  Ohio,  2  Jan.,  1870.  He  was
brought  to  the  United  States  when  three  years  of
age.  His  parents  settled  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  where
he  was  educated  in  St.  Francis  Xavier  college.
After  graduation  he  engaged  in  the  dry-goods  busi
ness  in  partnership  with  an  uncle,  but  left  it  at
the  end  of  five  years  to  study  law.  He  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  and  began  practice  in  Toledo,
but  subsequently  returned  to  Cincinnati,  where  he
achieved  a  reputation  as  a  criminal  lawyer.  When
the  civil  war  began  he  raised  a  company  of  Irish-
Americans  for  three  months,  with  which  he  re-en
listed  for  three  years.  At  Carnitex  Ferry  he  re
ceived  a  gunshot  wound  through  the  right  lung.
As  soon  as  he  had  recovered  he  returned  to  the
field  as  colonel  of  the  50th  Ohio  infantry,  which
was  afterward  merged  in  the  (ilst,  and  he  com
manded  the  latter  till  the  end  of  the  war.  At
Peach  Tree  Creek  his  left  arm  was  shattered  at  the
elbow  in  the  beginning  of  the  engagement,  yet  he
remained  with  his  men  through  the  fight,  lie  \vas
accustomed  to  expose  his  life  with  the  utmost
hardihood,  and  during  the  war  received  twenty-
three  wounds.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general
of  volunteers  on  1  May,  1805.  He  was  for  two  years
collector  of  internal  revenue,  and  just  before  his
death,  which  resulted  from  injuries  received  in  bat
tle,  was  elected  clerk  of  the  Hamilton  county  courts.

MctrUFFEY,  William  Holmes,  educator,  b.  in
Washington  county,  Pa.,  23  Sept.,  1800 ;  d.  at  the
University  of  Virginia,  Charlottesville.  Va.,  4  May,
1873.  He  was  graduated  at  Washington  college,
Pa.,  in  1820,  and  immediately  appointed  professor
of  ancient  languages  in  Miami  university.  He
was  licensed  as  a  Presbyterian  minister  in  1829,
and  preached  frequently  during  the  remainder  of
his  life.  In  1832  he  was  transferred  to  the  chair
of  moral  philosophy.  He  became  president  of
Cincinnati  college  in  1836,  and  in  1839  of  Ohio
university.  In  1843-'5  he  was  a  professor  in  Wood
ward  college,  Cincinnati.  From  1845  till  his  death
he  occupied  the  chair  of  moral  philosophy  and
political  economy  in  the  University  of  Virginia.
While  in  Cincinnati  he  began  the  preparation  of
an  "  Eclectic  "  series  of  readers  and  spellers,  which
became  popular,  and  have  been  many  times  re
vised  and  reissued.


McGUIRB


McHENBY


121


McGUIRE,  Hunter  Holmes,  physician,  b  in
Winchester,  Va.,  11  Oct..  1835.  He  is  the  son  of
a  physician,  and  was  educated  at  Winchester
academy,  and  studied  medicine  at  the  Medical  col
lege  of  Virginia,  the  medical  schools  in  Philadel
phia  and  New  Orleans,  and  Winchester  medical
college,  from  which  he  received  his  diploma  in
1855.  He  practised  first  in  Winchester,  holding
the  chair  of  anatomy  in  the  Medical  college  from
1856  till  1858,  when  he  removed  to  Philadelphia.
In  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  enlisted  in  the
Confederate  army,  was  soon  promoted  to  the  post
of  medical  director  of  the  Army  of  the  Shenandoah
Valley,  and  was  afterward  medical  director  of  the
2d  army  corps.  In  1865  he  was  elected  professor
of  surgery  in  Virginia  medical  college,  Richmond,
which  chair  he  held  till  1880.  In  1885  he  was
made  professor  emeritus  in  that  institution.  Dr.
McGuire  organized,  in  connection  with  his  large
general  surgical  practice,  St.  Luke's  home  for  the
sick  in  Richmond,  with  a  training-school  for
nurses.  He  was  president  of  the  Association  of
Confederate  medical  officers  in  18(59,  and  of  the
Virginia  medical  society  in  1873,  vice-president  of
the  International  medical  congress  in  1876,  and  of
the  American  medical  association  in  1881,  and
president  of  the  American  surgical  association  in
1887.  The  University  of  North  Carolina  in  1887
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  He  lias  published
in  medical  journals  various  papers,  an  account  of
the  circumstances  of  the  wounding  and  death  of
Gen.  Stonewall  Jackson,  whom  he  attended.  lie
has  contributed  to  John  Ashhurst's  "  International
Cyclopaedia  of  Surgery  "  (1884) ;  William  Pepper's
"System  of  Medicine"  (Philadelphia,  1885-7);
and  the  American  edition  of  Holmes's  "Surgery."

MA€HEB(EUF,  Joseph,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Riom,  France,  11  Aug.,  1812.  He  received  his  early
education  in  the  schools  of  the  Christian  brothers
and  in  the  College  of  Riom,  studied  philosophy  and
theology  in  the  Sulpitian  seminary  of  Montferran,
and  was  ordained  in  1836.  He  then  spent  three
years  in  missionary  labor  in  France,  and  in  1839,
at  the  request  of  Archbishop  Purcell,  came  to  the
United  States,  where  he  labored  ten  years  in  the
diocese  of  Cincinnati,  and  then  in  New  Mexico  until
1860,  part  of  the  time  serving  as  vicar-general.
He  was  next  sent  to  Colorado,  where  he  was  thrown
from  his  carriage  while  descending  a  spur  of  the
Rocky  mountains,  and  lamed  for  life.  He  was
appointed  vicar-general  of  the  territory,  built  the
first  church  in  Denver,  and  gradually  formed
parishes,  erecting  other  churches  and  obtaining
priests  for  them.  In  1868  he  had  built  eighteen
churches  in  the  territory,  besides  founding  a  con
vent  of  the  Sisters  of  Loretto,  and  an  academy  and
a  school  for  boys  in  Denver.  He  was  consecrated
bishop  of  p]piphania  in  partibus  inftdelium,  and
vicar-apostolic  of  Colorado  on  16  Aug.,  1868.  His
vicariate  embraces  Colorado  and  Utah.  The  Roman
Catholic  population,  which  originally  consisted  of
a  few  thousand  half-civilized  Mexicans  and  miners,
now  exceeds  50,000.

MACHEN,  Willis  Benson,  senator,  b.  in  Cald-
well  county,  Ky.,  5  April,  1810.  He  received  a
common-school  education,  became  a  farmer,  and  in
1849  was  sent  to  the  State  constitutional  conven
tion.  In  1853  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate,
and  in  1856  and  1860  of  the  state  house  of  repre
sentatives.  He  was  sent  to  the  1st  Confederate
congress  from  Kentucky,  being  re-elected  to  the
2d  congress,  and  serving  from  22  Feb.,  1862,  till
April,  1864.  On  the  death  of  Garrett  Davis  he  was
appointed  United  States  senator  from  Kentucky,
and  served  from  2  Dec.,  1872,  till  3  March,  1873.


McHENRY,  James,  statesman,  b.  in  Ireland,  16
Nov.,  1753;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  3  May,  1816.
He  received  a  classical  education  in  Dublin,  subse
quently,  on  account  of  delicate  health,  made  a  voy
age  to  this  country,  and  came  to  Philadelphia
about  1771.  He  induced  his  father  to  emigrate,
and  after  following
his  studies  in  New
ark,  Del.,  he  studied
medicine  under  Dr.
Benjamin  Rush  in
Philadelphia,  and
subsequently  accom
panied  Washington
to  the  camp  at  Cam
bridge.  He  joined
the  army  as  assistant
surgeon  in  January,
1776,  in  a  short  time
he  was  appointed
medical  director,  and
subsequently  surgeon
to  the  5th  Pennsyl
vania  battalion.  He
was  made  prisoner  at
Fort  Washington,
and  was  not  exchanged  until  the  spring  of  1778.
On  15  May  of  that  year  he  became  secretary  to
Washington,  and  his  relations  with  the  latter,
continued  through  life  to  be  those  of  a  trusted
friend  and  adviser.  Dr.  McIIenry  held  this  office
until  1780,  and  then  was  transferred  to  the  staff  of
Lafayette,  where  he  remained  till  the  close  of  the
war.  He  was  in  the  Maryland  senate  in  1781-'6,
in  1783  was  appointed  to  congress  in  place  of  Ed
ward  Giles,  and  held  office  until  1786.  double  duty
in  the  state  and  continental  legislatures  being  cus
tomary  at  that  time.  He  became  a  member  of  the
U.  S.  constitutional  convention  the  next  year,  was
the  first  of  the  delegates  from  Maryland  to  take
his  seat,  and  was  a  regular  attendant,  although  he
took  little  part  in  debate.  He  afterward  labored
to  secure  the  ratification  of  the  constitution,  and
was  successful,  notwithstanding  the  powerful  op
position  of  Luther  Martin  and  Samuel  Chase.  He
was  repeatedly  re-elected  to  the  Maryland  legisla
ture  until  he  became  a  member  of  Washington's
cabinet  as  secretary  of  war  in  January,  1796.  in
place  of  Timothy  Pickering,  who  was  promoted  to
secretary  of  state,  holding  office  throughout  his
administration  and  under  President  Adams  until
1801.  After  that  service  he  retired  from  public
life.  Fort  McIIenry  was  named  in  his  honor.

McHENRY,  James,  physician,  b.  in  Larne,
County  Antrim,  Ireland,  20  Dec.,  1785;  d.  there,
21  July,  1845.  He  was  the  son  of  a  cloth-mer
chant,  who  died  when  the  son  was  bnt  a  lad.  He
was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  college  in  Dub
lin,  and  also  received  a  diploma  from  the  college  -
at  Glasgow.  He  began  practice  at  Larne,  then  re
moved  to  Belfast,  where  he  also  carried  on  a  drug
business  until  he  came  to  the  United  States  in  1817.
After  living  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  and  Pittsburgh  Pa.,
he  came  in  1824  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  prac
tised  medicine  and  carried  oh  a  mercantile  busi
ness.  From  1842  till  his  death  he  was  U.  S.  con
sul  at  Londonderry.  He  was  of  a  romantic  dis
position,  early  developed  considerable  poetic  ge
nius,  and  became  noted  for  his  rural  stanzas  in
Ireland,  and.  on  coming  to  this  country,  took
deeper  interest  in  literary  works  than  in  the  busi
ness  of  his  profession.  His  house  in  Philadelphia
was  much  frequented  by  literary  men.  His  ear
liest  publication  in  the  United  States  was  "  The
Pleasures  of  Friendship  "  (1822),  which  poem,  with


122


MACHIN


McILVAINE


others,  was  reprinted  (Philadelphia,  1836).  In  1824
he  edited  at  Philadelphia  the  "  American  Monthly
Magazine,"  for  which  he  wrote  "  O'Halloran,  or
the  Insurgent,  a  Romance  of  the  Irish  Rebel
lion,"  afterward  reprinted  at  Glasgow.  He  was
also  the  author  of  "  The  Wilderness,  or  Brad-
dock's  Times,  a  Tale  of  the  West "  (2  vols.,  New
York,  1823) ;  "  A  Spectre  of  the  Forest,  or  Annals
of  the  Housatonic  "  (2  vols.,  1823) ;  "  The  Hearts  of
Steel,  an  Irish  Historical  Tale  of  the  Last  Cen
tury  "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1825) ;  "  The  Betrothed
of  Wyoming"  (2d  ed.,  1830);  and  "Meredith,  or
the  Mystery  of  the  Meschianza,  a  Tale  of  the
Revolution  "  (1831).  Among  his  poetical  works  are
"  Waltham,  an  American  Revolutionary  Tale,  in
Three  Cantos  "  (New  York,  1823) ;  "  The  Usurper,
an  Historical  Tragedy,  in  Five  Acts,"  which  was
played  with  great  success  at  the  old  Chestnut  street
theatre  (Philadelphia,  1829);  and  "The  Antedi
luvians,  or  the  World  Destroyed,  a  Narrative
Poem  in  Ten  Books  "  (1840).  Dr.  McIIenry  took
an  active  interest  in  politics,  was  the  personal
friend  and  ardent  admirer  of  Andrew  Jackson,  and
as  a  tribute  to  him  published  "  Jackson's  Wreath,"
a  poem  (1829). — His  son,  James,  merchant,  b.  in
Larne,  Ireland,  3  May,  1817,  came  to  this  country
in  infancy,  was  educated  in  Philadelphia,  where
he  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits,  and  afterward
•went  to  England,  where  he  engaged  extensively  in
business  at  Liverpool.  He  is  said  to  have  been  the
first  to  import  into  England  American  butter
and  cheese.  Mr.  McIIenry  has  been  interested  in
American  railway  enterprises.  Since  1861  he  has
resided  in  Kensington,  London,  in  one  of  the  most
famous  private  houses  in  England — Oats  Lodge —
formerly  called  Little  Holland  House,  where,  for
nearly  a  quarter  of  a  century,  the  most  noted  of
Americans  visiting  London  have  enjoyed  Mr.  Mc-
Henry's  hospitalities.  During  the  civil  war  his
sympathies  were  with  the  National  government,
and  he  contributed  $500  to  the  equipment  of  the
Corn  Exchange  regiment  of  Philadelphia,  and
presented  to  that  city  a  Whitworth-gun  battery.
—The  first  James's  daughter.  Mary,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  married  J.  Bellargee  Cox,  and  is  widely
known  for  her  philanthropic  work  in  that  city.
She  aided  in  founding  the  Church  home  in  1856:
the  Soldiers'  reading-room  in  1862.  which  she  aided
in  maintaining  until  the  close  of  the  civil  war  ;  the
Lincoln  institution  in  1865 ;  and  the  Educational
home  in  1871,  with  all  of  which,  except  the  second
named,  she  is  still  (1887)  connected,  and  has  been
active  in  fostering.  Since  1873  she  has  been  presi
dent  of  the  board  of  lady  visitors  of  the  Soldiers'
home,  Philadelphia.  She  was  appointed  in  1876
by  the  Centennial  commission  one  of  the  thirteen
women  to  represent  the  thirteen  original  states.
For  some  years  Mrs.  Cox  has  been  active  in  the
movement  for  the  education  of  Indian  children.

MACHIN,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Staffordshire,
England.  20  March,  1744 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  Mont
gomery  co.,  N.  Y.,  3  April,  1816.  He  was  educated
as  an  engineer,  and  employed  in  the  construction
of  the  Duke  of  Bridgewater's  canal  between  Man
chester  and  Worsley.  In  1772  he  was  sent  to  New
Jersey  to  examine  a  copper-mine,  and  remained  in
this  country,  settling  in  Boston,  Mass.  He  em
braced  with  ardor  the  cause  of  independence,  was
one  of  the  party  that  threw  the  tea  overboard  in
Boston  harbor,  and  fought  as  an  officer  of  artillery
at  Bunker  Hill,  where  ho  was  wounded.  He  was
commissioned  as  a  lieutenant  in  the  New  York  ar
tillery  on  18  Jan,  1776,  and  during  that  year  was
employed  in  placing  chains  across  the  Hudson
river  at  the  Highlands.  He  was  wounded  at  Fort


Montgomery  in  October,  1777,  where  he  held  a
commission  as  1st  lieutenant,  and  was  attached  to
Col.  John  Lamb's  artillery  regiment ;  he  served  as
an  engineer  in  the  expedition  of  Col.  Goosen  Van
Schaick,  which  destroyed  the  settlements  of  the
Onondaga  Indians  in  the  spring  of  1779,  and  later
in  the  year  accompanied  Gen.  James  Clinton's  expe
dition  into  the  Genesee  country.  He  was  promoted
captain  of  artillery  on  21  Aug.,  1780,  employed  on
the  siege- works  at  Yorktown,  and  in  1783  settled
in  Ulster  county,  N.  Y.  Subsequently  he  estab
lished  a  mill  west  of  Newburg,  N.  Y.,  and  coined
copper  pieces  for  some  of  the  states  prior  to  the
institution  of  a  national  coinage.  He  obtained
patents  for  a  large  tract  of  land  in  the  northern
part  of  Oncida  county,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1797  removed
to  Mohawk,  N.  Y.,  where  he  was  engaged  for  some
time  in  surveying. — His  son,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.
in  New  Grange,  Ulster  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1796;  d.  in
Albany,  N.  Y.,  in  May,  1875,  served  as  a  captain
during  the  war  of  1812-'15,  and  became  a  brigadier-
general  in  the  New  York  militia.

MACHRAY,  Robert,  Canadian  Anglican  bishop,
b.  in  Aberdeen,  Scotland,  in  1832.  He"  is  the  son  of
an  advocate,  and  was  educated  at  King's  college  in
his  native  city  and  at  Cambridge,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1851.  He  was  ordained  priest  in  1856,
became  vicar  of  Medingley  the  same  year,  and  in
1858  was  appointed  dean  of  Sydney  college.  Cam
bridge.  In  I860-'!  he  was  university  examiner,
and  in  1865  Ramsden  university  preacher.  In  1865
he  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Rupert's  Land,  at
Lambeth,  by  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and
the  bishops  of  London.  Ely,  and  Aberdeen.  The
diocese  at  the  time  of  Bishop  Machray's  appoint
ment  included  the  present  province  of  Manitoba
and  the  northwest  territories.  In  visiting  the  mis
sion  stations  that  were  scattered  over  this  exten
sive  tract  of  country,  he  encountered  many  priva
tions  aitd  dangers,  and  travelled  thousands  of  miles
by  canoe  and  dog-sleigh.  In  1874  his  diocese  was
subdivided,  and  the  see  of  Rupert's  Land  now  com
prises  the  province  of  Manitoba,  part  of  the  district
of  Cumberland,  and  the  districts  of  Swan  River,
Norwayhouse,  and  Lac  La  Pluie.  In  the  same
year  Bishop  Machray  was  appointed  metropolitan
of  the  whole  northwest  country.  In  1881  he  be
came  chancellor  of  the  University  of  Manitoba,  and
is  now  (1888)  professor  of  ecclesiastical  history  in
the  theological  college  there.

McILHENNEY,  Charles  Morgan,  artist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa,,  4  April,  1858.  He  studied  paint
ing  under  Frank  Briscoe,  and  anatomy  in  the
Philadelphia  academy  of  fine  arts  in  1877.  He
first  exhibited  in  New  York  in  1882,  and  has  since
continued  to  show  pictures  in  the  National  acade-
my  and  at  the  New  York  water-color  society,  of
which  he  is  a  member.  In  1878-'81  he  was  on  a
sketching-tour  in  the  south  Pacific.  His  studio  is
now  (1888)  in  New  York  city.  Among  his  pictures
are  "  Good  Bye  "  (1883) ;  "  A  Gray  Summer  Noon  "
(1884) :  "The  Shadow  of  Twilight  falls  Silent  and
Gray  "  (1885) ;  "  The  Old,  Old  Story  "  (1886) ;  and
"  The  Passing  Storm  "  (1887).

McILVAINE,  Joseph,  senator,  b.  in  Bristol,
Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  in  1768;  d.  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  19
Aug.,  1826.  He  received  an  academic  education,
was  admitted  to  the  Burlington,  N.  J.,  bar  in  1791,
was  clei'k  of  the  Burlington  county  court  in  1800-
'23,  and  U.  S.  attorney  for  the  district  of  New
Jersey  in  1801 -'20.  lie  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.
senate  from  New  Jersey  in  1823,  in  place  of  Samuel
L.  Southard,  who  had"  resigned,  and  served  from
December  of  that  year  till  the  time  of  his  death  in
1826.— His  son,  Charles  Pettit,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.


McILYAIXE


McINTOSH


123


o.  s. SL£  JL&.


in  Burlington,  X.  J.,  18  Jan.,  1799 ;  d.  in  Florence,
Italy,  13  March,  1873,  was  graduated  at  Prince
ton  in  1810,  studied  for  the  ministry,  and  was
made  deacon,  28  June,  1820,  and  priest,  20  March,
1821.  His  first  charge  was  Christ  church,  George
town.  D.  C.,  where  he  labored  zealously  for  five
years.  In  1825  he  was  appointed  professor  of  ethics,
and  chaplain  in  the
U.  S.  military  acade
my.  He  accepted  a
call  to  St.  Ann's
church,  Brooklyn,  X.
Y..  in  1827,  and  in
1831  was  chosen  to  be
professor  of  the  evi
dences  of  revealed  re
ligion  and  sacred  an
tiquities  in  the  Uni
versity  of  the  city  of
Xew  York.  During
his  connection  with
the  university  he  de
livered  a  valuable
course  of  lectures,
which  were  subse
quently  published.  He  was  next  elected  bishop  of
Ohio,  and  was  consecrated  in  St.  Paul's  chapel.
Xew  York  city,  31  Oct.,  1832.  On  removing  to  his
diocese  he  became  president  of  Kenyon  college,
and  also  of  the  theological  seminary,  at  Gambier.
lie  received  the  degree  of  I).  D.  from  Princeton
and  from  Brown  in  1832,  that  of  D.  C.  L.  from
Oxford  in  1853,  and  LL.  D.  from  Cambridge  in
1858.  Bishop  Mcllvaine  was  a  member  of  the
sanitary  commission  during  the  civil  war,  and  did
good  service  to  his  native  land,  when  on  a  visit
to  Europe,  in  setting  forth  right  views  on  the
questions  at  issue  in  the  United  States.  He  was
present  at  the  Pan-Anglican  council  in  London
in  1807.  As  age  drew  on,  he  yielded  to  the  neces
sity  of  having  an  assistant,  and  Dr.  Gregory  T.
Bedell  was  elected  to  that  office  in  1859.  Infirm
health  led  to  his  making  another  visit  to  Europe  in
1872-'3,  but  he  died  before  he  could  reach  home.
Bishop  Mcllvaine  was  an  able  and  voluminous
writer.  His  chief  publications  were  "  Lectures  on
the  Evidences  of  Christianity"  (Xew  York,  1832),
which  have  passed  through  thirty  editions :  "Ox
ford  Divinity  compared  with  that  of  the  Roman
and  Anglican  Churches,  with  a  Special  View  of  the
Doctrine  of  Justification  by  Faith"  (Philadelphia,
1841):  "The  Holy  Catholic  Church  "  (1844):  "Xo
Priest,  no  Altar,  no  Sacrifice,  but  Christ,"  and
'•  Reasons  for  Refusing  to  Consecrate  a  Church
having  an  Altar"  (1840);  "Valedictory  Offering.
Five  Sermons  "  (London.  1853) :  ••  The  Truth  and
the  Life,  Twenty-two  Discourses,"  published  at  the
request  of  the  convention  of  Ohio  (Xew  York,  1855),
together  with  numerous  occasional  sermons,  ad
dresses,  pastoral  letters,  etc.  He  also  edited  "  Select
Family  and  Parish  Sermons,''  from  English  sources
(2  vols..  Philadelphia,  1839).

MclLVAIXE,  Joshua  Hall,  clergyman,  b.  in
Lewis.  Del.,  4  March,  1815.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1837,  and  at  the  theological  seminary
there  in  1840,  was  pastor  successively  of  Presby
terian  churches  at  Little  Falls.  Utica,  and  Roches
ter,  X.  Y..  professor  of  belles-lettres  at  Princeton
in  1800-'70.  and  pastor  of  the  High  street  church
in  Newark,  X.  J.,  in  1870-'4.  He  introduced  the
name  "  Westminster  "  for  churches  in  founding  the
church  of  that  title  in  Utica,  In  1859  he  delivered
a  course  of  six  lectures  before  the  Smithsonian  in
stitution  on  comparative  philology  in  relation  to
ethnology,  including  an  analysis  of  the  structure  of


the  Sanskrit  language,  and  the  process  of  decipher
ing  cuneiform  inscriptions.  In  1809  he  delivered
a  similar  course  on  social  science  in  Philadelphia
under  the  auspices  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl
vania.  He  has  been  a  member  for  many  years  of
the  American  oriental  society,  and  in  1854  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of  Roches
ter,  X.  Y.  In  1887  he  founded  at  Princeton,  X.  J.,
Evelyn  college  for  girls.  His  publications  include
"  The  Tree  of  the  Knowledge  of  Good  and  Evil "
(Xew  York,  1854) ;  "  Elocution,  the  Sources  and
Elements  of  its  Power"  (1870);  "The  Wisdom  of
Holy  Scripture,  with  Reference  to  Sceptical  Objec
tions"  (1883) :  "The  Wisdom  of  the  Apocalypse"
(1880),  and  religious  and  scientific  articles.

McILWAIXE,  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pe
tersburg,  Va.,  20  May,  1834.  He  was  graduated  at
Hampden  Sidney  in  1853,  studied  at  the  University
of  Virginia,  and  received  his  theological  education
at  the  Virginia  union  theological  seminary  and  at
the  college  of  the  Free  church  of  Scotland.  He
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1857,  was  pastor  of  the
Presbyterian  church  at  Amelia  Court-House,  Va.,
in  1857-'00,  of  churches  in  Farmville  and  Lynch-
burg,  Va.,  in  18G2-'72,  and  at  the  latter  date  be
came  co-ordinate  secretary  and  treasurer  of  home
and  foreign  missions  in  the  southern  Presbyterian
church.  He  was  secretary  of  home  missions  in
1882-'3,  and  since  June,  1883,  has  been  president
of  Hampden  Sidney  college,  Va.  He  was  a  dele
gate  to  the  Pan-Presbyterian  council  that  was  held
in  Belfast,  Ireland,  in' 1884.

MacIXNES.  Donald,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in
Oban,  Argyleshire,  Scotland,  20  May,  1824.  He
came  to  Canada  in  1840,  engaged  in  business  in
Dundas,  and  subsequently  removed  to  Hamilton,
and  has  been  for  years  one  of  the  foremost  mer
chants  and  manufacturers  of  Canada.  He  was
chairman  of  the  royal  commission  that  was  ap
pointed  10  June,  1880,  to  inquire  into  the  organi
zation  of  the  civil  service  of  Canada,  and  became
a  member  of  the  Dominion  senate.  24  Dec.,  1881.
Mr.  Maclnnes  is  president  of  the  Bank  of  Hamil
ton,  of  the  Canada  cotton  company  of  Cornwall,
and  of  the  South  Saskatchewan  valley  railway
company.  He  is  a  Liberal  Conservative.

McIXNES,  Thomas  Robert,  Canadian  senator,
b.  at  Lake  Ainslie,  Xova  Scotia,  5  Xov.,  1840. He
was  educated  at  the  normal  school  of  Truro,  and
at  Harvard,  became  a  physician,  and  practised  for
some  time  at  Dresden,  Ont. In  1874  he  removed
to  British  Columbia,  and  was  mayor  of  the  city
|  of  Xew  Westminster  in  187G-'8. In  May.  1874,  he
j  was  appointed  physician  and  surgeon  to'the  Royal
|  Columbia hospital, and in July, 1878, medical
I  superintendent of the  British Columbia  lunatic
asylum. Dr.  Mclnnes  was  elected  to  the  Dominion
parliament  for  Xew  Westminster,  and  was  its  rep
resentative  from  20  March.  1878,  until  he  was  ap
pointed  to  the  senate,  24  Dec.,  1881. He  is  inde
pendent  in  politics.

McIXTOSH,  James  McKay,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Mclntosh  county,  Ga.,  in  1792;  d.  in  Warring-
ton.  Fla.,  1  Sept.,  1800,  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  in
1811,  became  lieutenant  in 1818,  commander  in
1838,  captain  in  1849,  and  flag-officer  in  1857. He
served  with  credit  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  partici
pated  in  the  fight  between  the  U.  S.  brig  "  Enter
prise  "  and  the  British  "  Boxer "  off  the  coast  of
Maine  in  December, 1813. In  1820  he  was  at
tached  to  an  expedition  for  the  extermination  of
I  the  West  Indian  coast  pirates,  was  captured  by
j  Lafitte,  their  chief,  and.  although  threatened  with
!  burning  at  the  stake  if  he  refused  to  be  the  bearer
!  of  an  insolent  message  to  his  commander,  defied


124


McINTOSH


the  assembly  of  more  than  forty  pirates,  and  so
excited  their  admiration  by  his  courage  that  they
released  him.  He  commanded  the  U.  S.  frigate
"Congress,"  of  the  Brazil  squadron,  in  1851-'2,and
became  flag-officer  of  the  home  squadron  in  1857.
During  this  period,  under  the  declared  purpose  of
suppressing  the  slave-trade,  the  British  fleet  in  the
Gulf  of  Mexico  boarded  and  searched  forty  Ameri
can  vessels.  Mclntosh,  however,  denied  their  right
to  do  so,  and  for  his  prompt  and  vigorous  action  in
the  matter  received  in  1858  the  thanks  of  congress.
—His  sister,  Maria  Jane,  author,  b.  in  Sunbury,
Ga.,  1803 :  d.  in  Morristown,  N.  J.,  25  Feb.,  1878.
was  educated  in  the  Academy  of  Sunbury,  removed
to  New  York  in  1835.  and,  having  lost  her  fortune
in  the  financial  crisis  of  1837,  adopted  authorship
as  a  means  of  support.  Under  the  pen-name  of
"  Aunt  Kitty  "  she  published  a  juvenile  story  en
titled  "  Blind  Alice  "  that  at  once  became  popular
(1841),  and  was  followed  by  others  (New  York,
1843),  the  whole  series  being  issued  in  one  volume
as  "  Aunt  Kitty's  Tales "  (1847).  On  the  recom
mendation  of  the  tragedian  Macready,  these  and
many  of  her  subsequent  tales  were  reprinted  in
London.  Her  writings  are  each  illustrative  of  a
moral  sentiment,  and  include  "Conquest  and  Self-
Conquest"  (1844);  "Praise  and  Principle"  (1845):
"Two  Lives,  to  Seem  and  to  Be"  (1846);  "Charms
and  Counter  Charms"  (1848);  "Woman  in  Ameri
ca:  Her  Work  and  Reward"  (1850):  "The  Lofty
and  the  Lowly "  (1852) ;  "Evenings  at  Donaldson
Manor"  (1852);  "  Emily  Herbert "  (1855) ;  "Violet,
or  the  Cross  and  Crown  "  (1856) ;  "  Mcta  Gray  "
(1858);  and  "Two  Pictures"  (1863).

McINTOSH,  Lachlan,  soldier,  b.  near  Raits,  in
Badenoch,  Scotland,  17  March,  1725;  d.  in  Savan
nah,  Ga.,  20  Feb.,  1806.  His  father,  John  "Mor"
Mclntosh,  with  100  Highlanders,  came  to  Georgia
in  1736  under  Gov.  James  E.  Oglethorpe,  and  set
tled  in  the  lower  part  of  the  state  at  the  town  that

is  now  known
as  Darien,  but
which  was  called
by  them  Inver
ness.  When  Ogle
thorpe  invaded
Florida  in  1740,
John  Mor  fol
lowed  him,  and
was  taken  pris
oner  by  the  Span
iards  and  sent  to
Spain,  where  he
was  confined  two
years.  He  died
of  the  results  of
this  imprison
ment  a  few  years
after  his  return
to  this  country.
Mor  originated

the  protest  that  was  made  by  the  colonists  to  the
board  of  trustees  in  England  against  the  introduc
tion  of  African  slaves  into  Georgia.  The  "  Mor  "  of
his  title  signified  "  big."  Lachlan  had  little  early
education,  and  at  seventeen  years  of  age  became  a
clerk  in  a  counting-house  at  'Charleston,  S.  C.,  and
lived  in  the  family  of  Henry  Laurens.  After  several
years  he  returned  to  Inverness,  became  a  land-sur
veyor,  and,  having  received  much  assistance  in  the
study  of  mathematics  from  Oglethorpe,  interested
himself  in  civil  engineering  and  military  tactics.  In
September,  1776,  he  was  appointed  brigadier-general.
In  1777,  in  a  duel,  he  mortally  wounded  his  political
opponent,  Button  Gwinett,  who  had  used  his  offi-


McINTOSH

cial  authority  while  governor  to  persecute  Mcln
tosh  and  several  members  of  his  family.  Mclntosh
then  accepted  a  command  in  the  Central  army
under  Gen.  Washington,  who  selected  him  to  com
mand  in  a  campaign  against  the  western  Indians
in  1778.  In  a  letter  to  the  president  of  congress,
dated  12  May,  Washington  said :  "  1  part  with  this
gentleman  with  much  reluctance,  as  I  esteem  him
an  officer  of  great  merit  and  worth.  His  firm  dis
position  and  equal  justice,  his  assiduity  and  good
understanding,  point  him  out  as  a  proper  person
to  go,  but  I  know  his  services  here  are  and  will  be
materially  wanted."  Mclntosh  marched  with  a
force  of  500  men  to  Fort  Pitt,  assumed  command,
and  in  a  short  time  restored  peace  on  the  frontier
of  Pennsylvania  and  Virginia.  He  completed  ar
rangements  for  an  expedition  against  Detroit  in
the  spring  of  1779,  but  was  recalled  by  Washing
ton,  joined  Gen.  Benjamin  Lincoln  in  Charleston,
marched  to  Augusta  in  command  of  the  Georgia
troops,  and  then  proceeded  to  Savannah,  where  he
commanded  the  1st  and  5th  South  Carolina  regi
ments,  and,  after  driving  the  British  from  their
outposts,  took  an  active  part  in  the  siege.  When
the  city  surrendered  he  retreated  to  Charleston,
was  present  at  its  surrender  to  Sir  Henry  Clinton,
and  for  a  long  period  was  held  a  prisoner  of  war.
On  his  return  to  Georgia  he  found  his  property
wasted  and  his  household  dispersed.  He  was  a
member  of  congress  in  1784  and  the  next  year  a
commissioner  to  treat  with  the  southern  Indians.
His  later  life  was  passed  in  comparative  poverty
and  in  retirement. — His  nephew,  John,  soldier,  b.
in  Mclntosh  county,  Ga.,  in  1755  ;  d.  there,  12  Nov.,
1826,  was  an  officer  in  the  Georgia  line  in  1775,
and  as  lieutenant -colonel  defended  the  fort  at
Sunbury.  in  Liberty  county,  when  it  w;is  besieged
by  Lieut.-Col.  Eraser  at  the  head  of  a  considerable
body  of  British  troops.  At  the  battle  of  Brier
Creek,  3  March,  1779.  he  displayed  great  bravery,
only  surrendering  when  further  resistance  was  im
possible.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  removed  to
Florida  and  settled  on  St.  John's  river,  but  was
suddenly  arrested  by  a  band  of  Spanish  troops
and  imprisoned  in  the  fortress  at  St.  Augustine  on
suspicion  of  having  designs  against  the  Spanish
government.  He  was  finally  sent  to  the  captain-
general  of  Cuba  and  imprisoned  in  Morro  Castle
at  Havana.  At  the  end  of  a  year  he  was  released
and  returned  to  Georgia,  but  not  until  he  had
aided  in  destroying  a  fort  on  the  St.  John's  river
opposite  Jacksonville  and  done  the  Spanish  gov
ernment  other  injuries.  During  the  last  months
of  the  war  of  1812-'14,  he  served  under  Jackson  at
Mobile  as  major-general  of  militia. — John's  son,
James  Simmons,  soldier,  b.  in  Liberty  county,  Ga.,
19  June,  1787;  d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  26  Sept.,
1847,  entered  the  U.  S.  army  as  lieutenant  in  1812,
was  severely  wounded  in  the  affair  near  Black
Rock  in  1814,  and  served  throughout  the  Creek
war.  He  was  commissioned  captain  in  1817,  major
in  1836.  and  lieutenant-colonel  in  1839.  During
the  Mexican  war  he  participated  in  the  battles  of
Palo  Alto  and  Resaca  de  la  Palma,  where  he  was
dangerously  wounded,  and  was  subsequently  bre-
vetted  colonel.  He  commanded  a  brigade  in  the
valley  of  Mexico,  and  was  mortally  wounded  at  the
head  of  his  column  in  the  assault  on  Molino  del
Rev. — His  son,  James  McQueen,  soldier,  b.  on
Tampa  bay,  Fla.,  in  1828;  d.  near  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,
7  Nov.,  1862,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1849,  became  captain  of  the  1st  U.  S.
cavalry  in  1857,  and.  resigning  from  the  army  in
1860,  was  commissioned  brigadier-general  in  the
Confederate  army,  and  killed  at  the  battle  of  Pea


McIXTOSH


MACK


125


Ridge,  Ark.— Another  son,  John  Baillie,  soldier,
b.  on  Tampa  bay,  Fla.,  6  June,  1829 ;  d.  in  New
Brunswick,  X.  J.,  29  June,  1888,  was  educated  at
Lawrenceville,  X.  J.,  and  Sing  Sing,  X.  Y.,  entered  \
the  navy  in  1848,  resigned  in  1850,  and  in  1861  en-  '
tered  the  U.  S.  army  as  2d  lieutenant  of  cavalry.  He  ;
became  1st  lieutenant  in  1862,  served  in  the  penin-  j
sular  campaign,  was  made  colonel  of  the  3d  Penn-  j
sylvania  volunteers  in  X'ovember,  1862,  and  com
manded  a  brigade  in  many  important  battles,
including  Chancellorsville  and  Gettysburg.  He
was  commissioned  captain  in  the  5th  cavalry  in
1863,  engaged  in  the  Wilderness  campaign,  and
the  battles  around  Petersburg,  became  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  in  July,  1864,  commanded  a
cavalry  brigade  at  Winchester,  and  lost  a  leg  at
Opequan.  He  was  brevetted  major  in  the  U.  S.
army  for  his  gallantry  at  White  Oak  Swamp,  lieu
tenant-colonel  for  Gettysburg,  colonel  for  Ash
land,  brigadier-general  for  Winchester,  major-gen
eral  of  volunteers  for  distinguished  gallantry  and
good  management  in  the  battle  of  Opequan,  Va.,
and,  in  1865,  major-general  for  meritorious  service
during  the  war.  He  was  commissioned  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  42d  infantry  in  1866,  and  in  1870
was  retired  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.

McIXTOSH,  William,  Creek  chief,  b.  in  Cowe-
ta.  Ga..  in  1775  ;  d.  near  there,  29  April,  1825.  His
father,  William,  was  a  British  officer,  and  his  mother
was  a  Creek  Indian.  The  son  was  carefully  edu
cated  and  became  a  principal  chief  of  his  nation.
During  the  war  of  1812  he  commanded  the  friendly
Creeks  who  were  in  alliance  with  the  U.  S.  govern
ment,  did  efficient  service  at  the  battles  of  Autos-
see  and  Horseshoe  Bend,  was  promoted  major,  and
was  in  the  Florida  campaign.  In  1825  U.  S.  com
missioners  were  appointed  to  meet  Indian  delega
tions  to  treat  for  the  sale  of  their  lands  within  the
limits  of  the  state  of  Georgia.  Mclntosh  agreed
to  sell,  sustaining  his  position  with  statesmanlike
reasons.  He  said :  "  The  white  man  is  growing.
He  wants  our  lands  ;  he  will  buy  them  now.  By
ftnd  by  he  will  take  them,  and  the  little  band  of
our  people  will  be  left  to  wander  without  homes,
poor  and  despised,  and  be  beaten  like  dogs.  We
will  go  to  a  new  home  and  learn  like  the  white
man  to  till  the  earth,  grow  cattle,  and  depend  on
these  for  food  and  life.  This  knowledge  makes  the
white  men  like  leaves;  the  want  of  it  makes  the
red  men  few  and  weak.  Let  us  learn  to  make
books  as  the  white  man  does,  and  we  shall  grow
again  and  become  again  a  great  nation."  Mcln-
tosh's  proposition  was  accepted  by  the  greater  part
of  the  Creeks ;  but  Tuscahaehees,  headed  by  the
chief  Hopothlayohola,  who  had  been  his  opponent
during  the  war  of  1812,  refused  to  agree.  Their
hostility  to  Mclntosh  culminated  in  a  conspiracy
for  his  assassination.  Fifty  warriors  and  Hopoth
layohola  were  selected  for  this  purpose.  One  night
they  knocked  at  his  door,  but,  knowing  their  pur
pose,  he  declared  to  his  son  that  he  would  meet
his  doom  like  a  warrior,  and,  taking  his  rifle,  he
opened  the  door,  fired  on  them  as  he  gave  the  war-
whoop,  and  fell  dead,  pierced  by  twenty  balls.

McIXTYRE,  Daniel  Eugene,  Canadian  phy
sician,  b.  in  Oban,  Argyleshire.  Scotland,  in  1812.
After  completing  his  education,  he  was  for  a  time
employed  in  a  mercantile  establishment  in  Glas
gow,  but  he  studied  medicine  in  the  universities  of
that  city  and  Edinburgh,  and  was  graduated  in
the  former  in  1834.  In  1835  he  removed  to  Canada
and  settled  in  Williamstown,  Out.  During  the  re
bellion  of  1837,  while  acting  as  surgeon  of  militia,
he  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  insurgents.  He  re
mained  on  active  military  service  at  Lancaster  till


1842,  was  gazetted  major  of  the  Stprmont  battalion
in  1854,  and  on  his  subsequent  retirement  from  the
service  was  granted  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.
On  the  suppression  of  the  rebellion  he  resumed
practice  at  Williamstown. In  1849  he  was  elected
warden  of  the  united  counties  of  Stormont,  Dun-
das,  and  Glengarry,  re-elected  in  1850,  and  in  that
year  was  appointed  sheriff  of  the  united  counties,
which  office  he  has  held  ever  since. He  was  an
ardent  reformer,  and  the  friend  and  ally  of  John
Sandfield  Macdonald. — His  son,  Alexander  Fra-
ser,  Canadian  lawyer,  b.  in  Williamstown,  Ont.,  25
Dec.,  1847,  was  educated at  Cornwall  grammar-
school  and  McGill  university. He  then  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1872,  and  practised
at  Cornwall  and  Ottawa. From  1875  till  1878  he
was intrusted by  the Mackenzie  administration
with  the  conduct  of  important  suits  against  the
government  in  the  exchequer  court. He  has  been
engaged  probably  more  than  any  other  lawyer  in
prosecuting  the  claims  of  government  contractors
before  the  exchequer  and  supreme  courts. In  1875
he  was  elected  to  the  Ontario  assembly  for  Corn
wall,  and  in  1882  %vas  an  unsuccessful  candidate
in  the  Liberal  interests  for  the  Dominion  parlia
ment. In  September,  1885,  he  was  elected  presi
dent  of the  Ontario Young  Liberal association,
and  he  has  been  president  of  the  Liberal  associa
tion  of  Ottawa. He  is  widely  known  as  a  success
ful  lawyer  and  Liberal  politician.

McIXTYRE,  Peter,  Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
in  Cable  Head,  St.  Peter's  bay,  Prince  Edward
island,  29  June,  1818.  His  father,  a  native  of  In
verness-shire,  Scotland, emigrated  to  Prince  Edward
island  in  1788.  The  son  received  his  preparatory
education  in  St.  Andrew's  academy,  Prince  Edward
island,  was  afterward  sent  to  the  College  of  St.
Hyacinth,  and  followed  a  theological  course  in  the
Seminary  of  Quebec.  He  was  ordained  priest  in

1843,  and  then  appointed  assistant  at  the  Quebec
parish  church. After  several  months  he  was  as
signed  to  the  Tignish  mission  in  Prince  Edward
island,  where  he  continued for  seventeen  years,
during  which  he  built  one  of  the  finest  churches  in
Canada. He  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Charlotte-
town  in  August,  1860. Lender  the  administration
of  Bishop  Mclntyre,  the  Roman  Catholic  church
has  made  marked  progress  in  his  diocese. He  has
founded  the  College  of  St.  Dunstan's.  a  convent
on  one  of  the  Magdalen  islands,  and  about  twenty
churches  and  parochial  schools. He  went  to  Eu
rope  in  1869  to  attend  the  General  council  of  the
Vatican,  and  travelled  through  a  part  of  Europe
and Asia. In 1878 he founded a hospital in
Charlottetown,  which  is  considered  one  of  the  best
managed  in  the  Dominion  and  is  open  to  all  classes
and  creeds.— His  nephew.  Peter  Adolplnis,  phy
sician,  b.  in  Peterville,  Prince  Edward  island,  in
1840.  was  educated  at  St. Dunstan's  college,  the
Quebec  seminary,  and  Laval  university,  and  gradu
ated  as  a  physician  at  McGill  university  in  1867.
He  was  a  railway  commissioner  for  Prince  Edward
island  from  May.  1872,  till  August.  1873.  elected  to
the  Dominion  parliament  in  1874,  defeated  in  1878,
re-elected  in  1882.  and  again  at  general  election  in
February,  1887. He  is  a  Liberal.

MACK,  John  Martin,  Moravian  bishop,  b.  in
Wiirternberg.  Germany.  13  April,  1715;  d.  on  the
island  of  St.  Thomas.  W.  I..  9  J  une,  1784.  He  came
to  this  country  in  1735,  and  joined  the  Moravian
colony  in  Georgia.  Thence  he  went  to  Pennsyl
vania,  and  assisted  at  the  founding  of  Bethlehem.
Soon  afterward  he  was  appointed  missionary  among
the  Indians,  and  labored  with  great  success  for
twenty  years  in  Xew  York,  Pennsylvania,  and  Xew


126


MACKALL


McKAY


England.  Both  in  New  York  and  New  England
the  Moravians  were  accused  of  being  spies  of  the
French,  and  in  consequence  thuir  missionaries  were
made  to  suffer.  Mack  was  arrested  and  imprisoned
at  Milt'ord,  Conn.,  and 'banished  from  the  province
of  New  York.  But  such  persecutions  speedily
came  to  an  end  when,  in  1?4(J,  the  parliament  of
Great  Britain  acknowledged  the  Moravians  to  be
an  ancient  episcopal  church,  and  invited  them  to
settle  in  this  country.  Meanwhile  Mack  had  found
ed  Gnadenhuettcn,  a  nourishing  Christian  Indian
settlement  in  the  Lehigh  valley.  Pa,  At  a  later
time  he  founded  Nain,  another  Christian  Indian
town,  near  Bethlehem.  He  was  in  the  full  tide  of
successful  work  when  he  was  unexpectedly  called
to  the  West  Indies  as  superintendent  of  the  mis
sions  in  the  Danish  islands.  Although  it  cost  him
a  hard  struggle  to  give  up  his  labors  among  the
aborigines  and  leave  America,  he  accepted  the  call,
and  for  twenty-two  years  devoted  himself  to  the
interests  of  the  negro  slaves  in  St.  Croix,  St.  Jan,
and  St.  Thomas,  where  he  resided.  In  1770  he  vis
ited  Bethlehem,  where  he  was  consecrated  to  the
episcopacy  on  18  Oct.  On  returning  to  the  West
Indies  he  continued  his  work,  and  in  the  midst  of
that  war  between  England  and  France  that  grew
out  of  the  American  Revolution  he  visited  all  the
missions  on  the  British  islands,  and  twice  narrowly
escaped  capture.  The  negroes  loved  and  revered
him  as  a  father.  A  great  throng  of  them,  dressed
in  white,  followed  his  remains  to  the  grave.

MACKALL,  William  Wliann,  soldier,  b.  in
the  District  of  Columbia  in  1818.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1837,  became
1st  lieutenant  in  1838, and  adjutant  in  1840,  assistant
adjutant-general  with  the  rank  of  captain  in  1840,
serving  throughout  the  Mexican  war,  and  receiving
the  brevets  of  captain,  for  gallantry  at  Monterey,
and  major,  for  Contrcras  and  Churubusco.  lie
was  wounded  at  Chapultepec.  He  was  treasurer
and  secretary  of  the  military  asylum  in  the  District
of  Columbia  in  1851-'3,  became  assistant  adjutant-
general  with  the  rank  of  major  at  the  latter  date,
declined  promotion  to  a  lieutenant-colonelcy  in
May,  1861,  and  resigned  to  join  the  Confederate
army.  He  served  in  Kentucky  as  assistant  adju
tant-general  to  Gen.  Simon  Buckner,  with  the  rank
of  colonel,  until  after  the  surrender  of  Fort  Henry
and  Fort  Donelson,  was  subsequently  appointed
brigadier-general,  commanded  at  Island  No.  10  at
the  time  of  its  surrender,  and  was  confined  in  Fort
Warren  until  exchanged.

MACKAIJ,  Ange  Ren6  Arm  and.  Baron  de
(mack-o'),  French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Paris,  1(J  Feb.,
1788;  d.  there,  13  May,  1855.  He  belonged  to  an
Irish  family  that  had  settled  in  France,  was  edu
cated  at  the  College  of  Juilly  with  Prince  Jerome
Bonaparte,  and  on  entering  the  navy  was  assigned
to  the  same  ship  with  the  prince.  His  promotion
was  rapid,  and  was  not  interrupted  by  the  Resto
ration.  In  1818  the  "  Golo  "  was  placed  under  his
orders,  and  he  was  directed  to  study  the  political
condition  of  Colombia  and  Santo  Domingo,  which
mission  he  performed  successfully.  In  1821  he
was  made  commander  of  the  "  Clorinde  "  and  sent
to  South  America  to  establish  political  and  com
mercial  relations  with  the  Spanish  colonies,  which
had  just  become  independent.  During  the  expe
dition  he  sailed  for  about  eighteen  months  along  the
coasts  of  Chili  and  Peru,  and  executed  some  im
portant  hydrographic  works.  In  1823  he  was  com
mander  of  the  "Circe,"  and  instructed  to  open
negotiations  with  Hayti,  with  a  view  to  its  recog
nition  by  France,  and  to  demand  an  indemnity  of
150,000,000  francs  in  favor  of  the  French  colonists,


whose  property  had  been  confiscated.  He  suc
ceeded  in  both  objects,  and  was  made  rear-admiral
after  reaching  France.  In  1832  he  was  sent  to  the
station  of  the  Antilles  and  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and
compelled  the  government  of  New  Granada  to  give
satisfaction  for  an  outrage,  and  in  1835  for  a  re
newed  outrage  he  bombarded  the  city  of  Cartha-
gena  and  destroyed  Fort  Boea-Chica.  In  1836  he
was  named  governor  of  Martinique,  but  during
his  administration  he  was  more  occupied  in  set
tling  differences  between  the  United  States  and
France  than  in  attending  to  the  wants  of  that
colony.  In  1840  he  was  appointed  to  the  com
mand  of  a  fleet  of  forty-two  vessels,  and  sent,  to
Buenos  Ayres  to  exact  reparation  for  out  rages  that
had  been  committed  by  Rosas  on  French  subjects.
In  the  successful  operations  that  ensued,  which
were  more  diplomatic  than  military,  he  displayed
much  ability.  On  the  return  of  Mackau  he  was
made  vice-admiral,  a  peer  of  France,  and  in  1843
minister  of  the  navy  and  colonies.  He  published
a  report  on  his  cruise  of  1810-'18  (Paris,  1818)  and
"  Rapport  an  Roi  sur  la  situation  veritable  des
nouveaux  etats  de  rAmcrique  du  Sud.  et  en  par-
ticulier  sur  File  de  Saint  Domingo''  (1821).

MACKAY,  Alexander,  journalist,  b.  in  Scot
land  in  1808;  d.  at  sea  in  184!).  He  was  a  member
of  the  London  press,  and  in  the  interest  of  the
"  Morning  Chronicle"  visited  the  United  States  in
1840  to  report  the  debates  in  congress  on  the  Ore
gon  question.  He  subsequently  was  sent  as  com
missioner  to  India  by  the  merchants  of  Manchester
to  investigate  the  capabilities  of  that  country  for
an  increased  cultivation  of  cotton,  but  died  on  the
voyage  home.  lie.  published  "The  Western  World,
or  Travels  through  the  United  States  in  1840-'7"
(London,  1840),  which  the  London  "Spectator"
described  as  the  "  most  complete  work  published
on  the  United  States,"  and  a  posthumous  work
entitled  "Western  India,''  which  was  edited  by
James  Robertson  (1853).

MACKAY,  Charles,  author,  b.  in  Perth.  Scot
land,  in  1814.  He  was  educated  in  London  and*
Brussels,  was  on  the  staff  of  the  London  "  Morning
Chronicle"  in  1834-'44,  and  from  the  hitler  date
till  1847  was  editor  of  the  "  Glasgow  Argus,''  after
which  he  returned  to  London,  where  he  has  since
resided.  He  lectured  in  the  United  States  in  1857
on  "Songs.  National,  Historical,  and  Popular,"  in
1860  established  the  "  London  Review,"  and  in
1862-'5  was  in  the  United  States  as  war  correspond
ent  of  the  London  "Times."  The  University  of
Glasgow  gave  him  the  title  of  LL.  I),  in  1847.
Among  his  numerous  works  are  ''Songs  and
Poems"  (London.  1834);  "Legends  of  the  Isles,
and  other  Poems"  (1845);  "Town  Lyrics"  (1848);
"  Under  Green  Leaves"  (1857) ;  "  Life  and  Liberty
in  America"  (1859) ;  "  Under  the  Blue  Sky  "  (1871) ;
and  "Gaelic  Etymology  of  the  English  Language"
(1878).  See  Wilson's  "  The  Poets  and  Poetry  of
Scotland  "  (New  York,  1876).

MeKAY,  Donald,  ship-builder,  b.  in  Shelburne,
Nova  Scotia,  4  Sept.,  1810;  d.  in  Hamilton,  Mass.,
20  Sept.,  1880  lie  learned  ship-building  in  New
York,  began  business  in  Newburyport,  Mass.,  and
in  1845  established  a  ship-yard  in  East  Boston,
where  he  constructed  many  fast,  clippers  for  the
Diamond  line,  and  subsequently  for  the  California
and  Australian  trade.  In  October,  1853,  he  launched
the  "  Great  Republic,"  of  4,500  tons.  During  the
civil  war  he  built  the  light  -  draught  monitor
"Nauset"  and  the  double-end  gun-boat  "  Ashue-
lot."  His  last  work  was  the  sloop-of-war  "  Adams  "
(1874).  At  this  date  he  retired  from  ship-building
I  and  engaged  in  farming.


McKAY


McKEAN


127


McKAY,  James,  Canadian  legislator,  b.  in  Sas
katchewan,  Canada,  about  1815 ;  d.  there,  3  Dec.,
1879.  He  was  educated  at  the  Red  Rive*  settle
ment,  was  in  the  employ  of  the  Hudson  bay  com
pany  for  a  time,  and  afterward  became  a  contractor
and  superintended  the  construction  of  part  of  the
Dawsou  route.  When  the  province  of  Manitoba
was  formed  Mr.  McKay  became  a  member  of  its
legislative  council,  and  was  speaker  for  several
years,  tie  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  first
provincial  administration  in  January,  1871,  with
the  office  of  president  of  the  executive  council,
which  he  held  till  December,  1874.  Soon  after
ward  he  became  minister  of  agriculture,  but  re
signed  in  1878,  owing  to  illness.  His  intimate  ac
quaintance  with  the  Indians  and  half-breeds,  and
the  great  influence  he  possessed  over  them,  enabled
him  to  render  the  government  valuable  aid  in  con
nection  with  the  various  treaties  by  which  Indian
land-titles  were  extinguished.

MACKAY,  John  William,  capitalist,  b.  in  Dub
lin,  Ireland,  28  Nov.,  1831.  He  is  of  Scotch-Irish
descent,  and  came  with  his  parents  in  1840  to  New
York,  where  his  father  died  soon  after  their  arrival.
Young  Mackay  obtained  a  public-school  education,
and  was  apprenticed  to  the  trade  of  ship-building.
On  the  discovery  of  gold  in  California  he  went  with
the  crowd  that  was  then  thronging  to  the  Pacific,
and  lived  a  miner's  life  for  several  years,  with  vary
ing  fortunes,  acquiring  a  perfect  command  of  the
technical  and  practical  knowledge  of  mining.  Be
fore  he  was  thirty  years  old  he  had  made  and  lost
a  small  fortune.  In  1860  Mackay  left  California
for  Nevada,  where  he  has  since  made  his  home.
In  Nevada  his  fortunes  slowly  and  steadily  im
proved,  and  he  became  a  leader  of  men  among  the
rough  spirits  that  formed  the  mining  community.
He  was  a  man  of  rigidly  temperate  habits,  which
saved  him  from  the  misfortunes  that  attended  so
many  in  the  early  mining  days.  In  1872  he  was
among  the  discoverers  of  the  Bonanza  mines,  on  a
ledge  of  rock  in  the  Sierra  Nevadas,  under  what  is
now  Virginia  City.  The  discovery  of  their  vast
deposits  of  silver  and  gold  is  the  most  noted  and
perhaps  the  most  romantic  incident  in  mining
history.  It  changed  the  face  of  the  silver  markets
of  the  world,  and  to  nations  like  India  and  China
became  an  important  and  embarrassing  factor  in
modern  political  economy.  The  mines  that  came
within  the  Bonanza  designation  were  owned  by  John
W.  Mackay,  James  C.  Flood,  James  G.  Fair,  after
ward  senator  from  Nevada,  and  William  O'Brien.
Of  this  interest  Mr.  Mackay  owned  two  fifths —
double  that  of  any  of  his  partners.  In  1873  the
great  silver  vein  was  opened,  and  from  one  mine
alone  Mr.  Mackay  and  Mr.  Fair,  the  practical  min
ing  members  of  the  Bonanza  firm,  took  out  $150,-
000,000  in  silver  and  gold.  In  1875  the  working
of  the  mines  was  interrupted  by  a  fire,  but  the  own
ers  continued  to  pay  dividends  in  order  that  the
share-holders,  many  of  whom  were  their  working-
men,  should  not  lose  their  income.  During  the
active  yield  of  the  mines  Mr.  Mackay  devoted  him
self  personally  to  their  superintendence,  working
in  the  lower  levels  as  an  ordinary  miner.  In  1878,
with  Mr.  Flood  and  Mr.  Fair,  he  'founded  the  Bank
of  Nevada,  with  its  headquarters  in  San  Francisco.
Mr.  Mackay  has  spent  some  time  in  Europe  for  the
education  of  his  children,  and,  although  he  has  a
special  interest  in  the  study  of  art,  he  has  main
tained  his  active  and  personal  interest  in  mining.
His  firm  are  understood  to  control  the  principal
mines  on  the  Comstock  lode.  In  1884  Mr.  Mackay,
in  partnership  with  James  Gordon  Bennett,  laid  two
cables  across  the  Atlantic  from  the  United  States


to  England  and  France.  These  cables  are  under  a
system  known  as  the  Commercial  cable  company,
although  the  private  property  of  Mr.  Mackay  and
Mr.  Bennett.  In  1885  Mr.  Mackay  was  offered  the
nomination  as  U.  S.  senator  from  Nevada,  under
circumstances  that  would  have  made  his  election
virtually  unanimous,  but  he  refused,  as  his  private
business  rendered,  in  his  opinion,  a  useful  public-
life  impossible.  He  has  been  liberal  in  his  dona
tions  to  charities,  and  among  other  gifts  to  the
Roman  Catholic  church,  of  which  he  is  a  member,
has  founded  an  orphan  asylum  in  Nevada  City.

MACKAY,  Robert,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Mon
treal  in  1816 ;  d.  there,  23  Feb.,  1888.  His  father
was  an  army  officer  in  the  East  Indian  depart
ment.  The  son  was  called  to  the  bar  in  1837,  and
became  Queen's  counsel  in  1807.  He  was  appoint
ed  a  commissioner  for  consolidating  the  statutes  in
1856,  and  worked  upon  the  Lower  Canada  and
general  statutes.  He  became  puisne  judge  of  the
supreme  court  in  1868,  was  a  judge  of  the  court  of
Queen's  bench  from  1868  till  1883,  and  was  presi
dent  of  the  Montreal  bar  association  and  of  the
Art  association  of  that  city.

MACKAY-SMITH,  Alexander,  clergyman,  b.
in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  2  June,  1850.  He  is  a  grand
son  of  Nathan  Smith,  U.  S.  senator  from  Connec
ticut,  and  a  younger  brother  of  the  Rev.  Cornelius
B.  Smith,  D.  D.,  of  St.  James's  church,  New  York
city.  He  was  graduated  at  Trinity  in  1872,  studied
divinity  at  the  General  theological  seminary  and
in  England  and  Germany,  and  took  orders  in  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church.  He  was  rector  of
Grace  church,  South  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1877-'80,
and  in  the  latter  year  became  assistant  rector  of
St.  Thomas's  church,  New  York  city.  In  1886  he
declined  the  post  of  assistant  bishop  of  Kansas,  and
in  1887  he  became  first  archdeacon  of  New  York.
He  has  taken  an  active  part  in  the  civil-service  re
form  movement,  and  has  published  occasional
poems  in  periodicals.

McKEAN,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ipswich,
Mass.,  19  April,  1776;  d.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  17
March,  1818.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1794,  and  taught  in  Ipswich  and  Berwick  till  1797,
when  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Congregational
church  in  Milton,  Mass.  The  failure  of  his  health
compelled  his  resignation  in  1804,  and  he  resumed
teaching.  He  declined  the  chair  of  mathematics
at  Harvard  in  1806,  but  two  years  afterward  ac
cepted  the  Boylston  professorship  of  rhetoric  and
oratory,  succeeding  John  Quincy  Adams,  continu
ing  in  office  until  a  few  months  before  his  death,
which  was  the  result  of  pulmonary  disease.  Prince
ton  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1818,  and
Allegheny  college  that  of  D.  I),  a  few  months  later.
He  published  occasional  sermons,  and  a  "  Memoir
of  the  Rev.  John  Eliot."  printed  in  the  Massachu
setts  historical  collections.

McKEAN,  Samuel,  senator,  b.  in  Huntingdon
county,  Pa.,  in  1790;  d.  in  McKean  county,  Pa.,
23  June,  1840.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Democrat  in  1822,  served  in  1823-'9,  and  from
March,  1833,  till  March,  1839,  was  United  States
senator  from  Pennsylvania.

McKEAN,  Thomas,  signer  of  the  Declaration
of  Independence,  b.  in  New  London,  Chester  co.,
Pa.,  19  March,  1734;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  24
June,  1817.  His  parents  were  both  natives  of  Ire
land.  The  son  was  educated  by  the  Rev.  Francis
Allison,  who  was  at  that  time  a  celebrated  teacher
of  New  Castle,  Del.,  and  after  studying  law  a  few
months  became  register  of  probate  of  New  Castle
county,  Del.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  before
he  was  twenty-one,  appointed  deputy  attorney-


128


McKEAN


McKEAN


general  of  Sussex  county  a  year  later,  and  in
1757-9  was  clerk  of  the  assembly.  With  Cffisar
Rodney  he  became  in  1702  reviser  of  laws  that  had
been  passed  previous  to  1752,  and  in  October  of
this  year  was  elected  to  the  general  assembly,  hold
ing  office  for  seventeen
successive  years,  during
the  last  of  which  he  re
sided  in  Philadelphia.
lie  was  a  trustee  of  the
loan-office  of  New  Cas
tle  county  for  twelve
years,  and  in  1705  was
elected  to  the  Stamp-
act  congress.  Had  the
votes  in  this  body  been
taken  according  to  the
population  of  the  states
that  were  represented,
that  of  Delaware  would
have  been  insignificant,
but,  through  the  influ
ence  of  McKcan,  each
state  was  given  an  equal
voice.  He  was  one  of
the  most  influential  members  of  this  congress,
was  one  of  the  committee  that  drew  the  memo
rial  to  the  lords  and  commons,  and,  with  John
Rutledge  and  Philip  Livingston,  revised  its  pro
ceedings.  On  the  last  day  of  its  session,  when
business  was  concluded,  after  Timothy  Ruggles,
the  president  of  the  body,  and  a  few  other  timid
members,  had  refused  to  sign  the  memorial  of
rights  and  grievances,  McKean  arose,  and,  address
ing  the  chair,  insisted  that  the  president  give  his
reasons  for  his  refusal.  After  a  pause  Ruggles  re
marked  that  "  it  was  against  his  conscience."
McKean  then  rung  the  changes  on  the  word  "  con
science  "  so  loudly  and  so  long  that  a  challenge  was
given  and  accepted  between  himself  and  Ruggles
in  the  presence  of  the  congress,  but  Ruggles  left
the  next  morning  at  daybreak,  so  that  the  duel  did
not  take  place.  In  July  of  this  year  McKean  was
appointed  sole  notary  of  the  lower  counties  of
Delaware  and  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,
and  of  the  orphans'  court  of  New  Castle.  In  the
November  term  of  this  year  he  ordered  that  all  the
proceedings  of  this  court  be  recorded  on  un
stamped  paper,  and  this  was  the  first  court  in  the
colonies  that  established  such  a  rule.  He  was  col
lector  of  the  port  of  New  Castle  in  1771,  speaker  of
the  house  of  representatives  in  1772,  and  from
1774  till  1783  was  a  member  of  the  Continental
congress.  He  was  the  only  member  that  served  in
•congress  from  its  opening  till  the  peace,  and  while
he  represented  Delaware  till  1783,  and  was  its
president  in  1781,  he  was  chief  justice  of  Penn
sylvania  from  July,  1777,  till  1799,  each  state  claim
ing  him  as  its  own.  and  until  1779  he  also  occupied
a  seat  in  the  Delaware  legislature.  During  the
session  of  congress  in  1770  he  was  one  of  the  com
mittee  to  state  the  rights  of  the  colonies,  one  of  the
secret  committee  to  contract  for  the  importation
of  arms,  and  of  that  to  prepare  and  digest  the  form
of  the  Articles  of  Confederation  to  be  entered  into
between  the  colonies,  which  he  signed  on  the  part
of  Delaware,  and  he  superintended  the  finances
and  a  variety  of  important  measures.  Although
particularly  active  in  procuring  the  Declaration,  to
which  his  name  is  subscribed  in  the  original  in
strument,  he  does  not,  through  a  mistake  on  the
part  of  the  printer,  appear  as  a  subscriber  in  the
copy  published  in  the  journal  of  congress.  In
July,  1770,  he  was  chairman  of  the  delegates  from
NeV  York,  New  Jersey,  and  Pennsylvania,  and  in


the  same  year  chairman  of  the  Pennsylvania  com
mittees  of  safety  and  inspection  and  the  Phila
delphia  committee  of  observation.  A  few  days
after  signing  the  Declaration  of  Independence  he
marched  at  the  head  of  a  battalion  to  Perth  Am-
boy,  N.  J.,  to  re-enforce  Gen.  Washington  until
the  arrival  of  the  flying  camp.  On  his  return  to
Dover  he  found  a  committee  awaiting  him  to
urge  him  to  prepare  the  constitution  of  the  state,
which  he  drew  up  on  the  night  of  his  arrival,  and
which  was  unanimously  adopted  by  the  assembly
the  next  day.  While  acting  in  1777  in  the  double
capacity  of  president  of  Delaware  and  chief  justice
of  Pennsylvania,  he  describes  himself  in  a  letter  to
his  intimate  friend,  John  Adams,  as  "  hunted  like  a
fox  by  the  enemy,  compelled  to  remove  my  family
five  times  in  three  months,  and  at  last  fixed  them
in  a  little  log-house  on  the  banks  of  the  Susque-
hanna,  but  they  were  soon  obliged  to  move  again
on  account  of  the  incursions  of  the  Indians."  He
was  president  of  congress  in  1781,  and  in  that  ca
pacity  received  Washington's  despatches  announc
ing  the  surrender  of  Cornwallis,  a  member  of  the
Pennsylvania  constitutional  convention  of  1790,
and  in  1799-1808  was  governor  of  that  state.  His
policy  as  a  leader  of  the  Republican  party  paved
the  way  for  the  accession  of  Thomas  Jefferson  to
the  presidency.  He  became  a  member  of  the  Penn
sylvania  Society  of  the  Cincinnati  in  1785,  and  was
subsequently  its  vice-president.  Princeton  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1781,  Dartmouth  the
same  honor  the  next  year,  and  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  A.  M,  in  1703,  and  LL.  D.  in  1785.
With  Prof.  John  Wilson  he  published  "Commen
taries  on  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States"
(London,  1790). — His  son,  Jose  pit  Uonlcn,  jurist,
b.  in  Pennsylvania,  28  July,  1704;  d.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  3  Sept.,  1826,  was  graduated  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1782,  studied  law,  and
in  1785  was  admitted  to  the  Philadelphia  bar.  Ho
was  appointed  attorney-general  by  his  father  in
1800,  and  served  through  the  hitter's  term  as  gov
ernor.  For  this  appointment  the  elder  McKean
was  bitterly  assailed  by  his  opponents,  as  the  son
was  regarded  as  inferior  to  many  other  members
of  the  Philadelphia  bar.  He  was  subsequently  com
missioned  associate  judge  of  the  district  of  Penn
sylvania,  and  at  his  death  was  president  judge  of
the  court. — Joseph  Borden's  son,  William  Wis-
ter,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Huntingdon  county,  Pa.,
19  Sept.,  1800;  d.  near  Binghamton.  N.  Y.,  22  April,
1805,  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman  in  1814,
and  became  lieutenant  in  1825,  commander  in
1841,  and  captain  in  1855.  He  was  retired  in  1801
and  became  commodore  on  the  retired  list  in  1802.
In  1823-'4  he  commanded  a  schooner  in  Com.
David  D.  Porter's  squadron,  and  was  active  in  sup
pressing  piracy  along  the  coast  of  Cuba  and  among
the  West  Indies.  He  conveyed  the  Japanese  em
bassy  home  in  1800,  and  in  1801  was  the  first  com
mander  of  the  Western  Gulf  blockading  squadron.
McKEAN,  Thomas  Jefferson,  soldier,  b.  in
Burlington,  Bradford  co.,  Pa.,  21  Aug.,  1810;  d.  in
Marion,  Iowa.  19  April,  1870.  He  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1831,  and  assigned
to  the  4th  infantry,  but  resigned  in  1834  and  en
gaged  in  civil  engineering.  During  the  Florida
war  he  was  adjutant  of  the  1st  regiment  of  Penn
sylvania  volunteers,  and,  failing  to  obtain  a  com
mission,  he  served  as  a  private  of  Iowa  volunteers
during  the  Mexican  war,  where  he  was  wounded  at
Churubusco,  and  in  June,  1848.  brevetted  2d  lieu
tenant  of  dragoons,  but  declined  and  returned  to
civil  engineering.  He  became  paymaster  in  the
U.  S.  army  in  June,  1801,  in  November  of  this


McKEE


MACKELLAR


129


year  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,
served  in  the  Mississippi  campaign  in  April  and
May,  1862,  and  participated  in  the  battle  of  Cor
inth.  He  was  in  command  of  the  northeast  dis
trict  of  Missouri  in  1863,  and  of  the  district  d'
Kansas  from  March  to  August,  1864,  was  chief  of  j
cavalry  on  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  from  September  till  i
October,  and  in  December  was  in  command  of  the  j
western  district  of  Florida.  He  was  brevetted
major-general  of  volunteers  in  March,  1865,  and  in
August  mustered  out  of  volunteer  service.  He
then  settled  near  Marion,  Iowa,  engaged  in  farm
ing,  and  in  1869  was  appointed  pension-agent  for
the  eastern  district  of  the  state,  but  declined.  In
1868  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Chicago  National
Republican  convention.

McKEE,  George  Colin,  legislator,  b.  in  Joliet,
111.,  2  Oct.,  1836.  He  was  educated  at  Knox  col
lege  and  Lombard  university,  111.,  and  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1858.  After  practising  law  at  Centralia,
111.,  he  volunteered  as  a  private  in  April.  1861,  in
the  llth  Illinois  regiment,  became  captain  on  its
reorganization,  and  served  throughout  the  war  in
various  capacities.  He  was  wounded  at  Fort  Don-
elson,  Shiloh,  and  Vicksburg,  commanding  a  picked
corps  during  the  siege  of  the  latter  town.  When
at  the  head  of  his  own  regiment  and  other  detach
ments,  on  the  second  Yazoo  expedition,  he  defeat
ed  the  Confederate  assault  at  Yazoo  City,  5  March,
1864,  after  which  he  was  ordered,  as  brigadier-gen
eral,  to  enroll  and  equip  four  regiments  of  colored
militia.  He  was  appointed  register  in  bankruptcy
in  1867.  and  was  a  member  of  the  Constitutional
convention  of  Mississippi.  He  was  elected  to  the
40th  congress,  but  his  state  was  refused  representa
tion,  and,  being  re-elected,  he  served  from  23  Feb.,
1870,  till  4  March,  1875.  Since  the  close  of  the  war
he  has  been  postmaster,  and  practised  his  profes
sion,  at  Jackson,  Miss.  He  has  invented  a  cotton-
press,  which  he  patented  3  April,  1877.

McKEEN,  Joseph,  educator,  b.  in  London
derry,  N.  H..  15  Oct.,  1757;  d.  in  Brunswick,  Me..
15  July,  1807.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth
in  1774,  and  during  the  eight  years  of  the  Revolu
tion  engaged  in  teaching  in  his  native  town,  ex
cept  for  a  short  period  of  service  as  a  volunteer
under  Gen.  John  Sullivan.  He  then  went  to  Cam
bridge.  Mass.,  and  after  spending  some  time  in
studying  mathematics,  astronomy,  and  theology,
was  licensed  and  began  to  preach.  In  May,  1785,
he  was  ordained  pastor  of  Beverly,  Mass.,  where  he
remained  until  he  was  elected  the  first  president  of
Bowdoin  college  in  1802.  In  1803  he  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Dartmouth.  Dr.  McKeen
possessed  a  strong  and  discriminating  mind,  while
his  manners  were  conciliatory  though  dignified.
His  proficiency  in  mathematics  was  once  the  means
of  saving  a  human  life.  A  man  was  on  trial  in  Es
sex  county,  Mass.,  for  housebreaking.  The  ques
tion  to  be  decided  was  whether  the  crime  was  per
petrated  by  night  or  by  day,  and  the  man's  life
hung  in  the  balance.  A  nice  calculation  by  Dr.
Me  keen  as  to  the  precise  moment  of  dawn  saved
the  culprit  from  the  gallows.  Dr.  McKeen's  pub
lications  consisted  chiefly  of  papers  in  the  "  Trans
actions  of  the  American  Academy  of  Arts  and
Sciences  "  and  a  few  occasional  sermons.

McKEEVER,  Harriet  Burn,  educator,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa..  28  Aug..  1807:  d.  in  Chester,  Pa.,
7  Feb.,  1886.  She  was  educated  in  her  native  city,
and  taught  there  for  more  than  thirty-six  years.
Necessity  compelled  her  to  engage  in  literary  work
late  in  "life,  and  in  thirteen  years  she  produced
forty  volumes  of  Sunday-school  books.  She  is
also'  the  author  of  "  Twilight  Musings,  and  other
VOL.  iv. — 9


Poems  "  (Philadelphia,  1857),  with  a  commendatory
preface  by  Rev.  William  B.  Stevens,  D.  D.

McKEEVER,  Isaac,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Penn
sylvania  in  April,  1793 ;  d.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  1
April,  1856.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  mid
shipman  in  1809,  was  made  lieutenant  in"  1814,  and
commanded  one  of  a  flotilla  of  five  gun-boats  under
Lieut.  Thomas  ap  Catesby  Jones,  that  was  cap
tured  by  a  British  expedition  on  Lake  Borgne,  La.,
in  December,  1814.  The  gun-boats  mounted  collec
tively  23  guns,  and  were  manned  by  182  men.
The  British  expedition  consisted  of  42  large  barges
and  other  boats,  manned  by  more  than  1,000  sea
men  and  marines.  The  engagement,  which  was
very  severe,  lasted  three  hours,  and  200  of  the  Brit
ish  were  killed  and  wounded.  Lieut.  McKeever's
vessel  was  the  last  one  to  be  attacked,  and  he  was
severely  wounded,  together  with  most  of  his  offi
cers,  before  he  surrendered.  He  was  commissioned
commander  in  1830.  and  captain  in  1838,  perform
ing  much  active  service  in  both  grades.  In  1855
he  had  charge  of  the  navy-yard  at  Norfolk,  Va.,
when  a  pestilence  broke  out  in  that  city  and  the
adjacent  towns.  He  was  authorized  by  the  navy
department  to  suspend  operations  in  the  yard  and
leave  for  a  time,  should  he  see  fit,  but  he  decided  to
remain,  that  work  might  be  given  those  who  de
pended  upon  it  for  support  of  their  families. — His
son,  Channcej",  soldier,  b.  in  Maryland,  about  1828,
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1849,  and  assigned  to  the  artillery.  He  was  pro
moted  1st  lieutenant,  24  Dec.,  1853,  and  captain  of
staff  and  assistant  adjutant-general,  3  Aug.,  1861.
During  the  civil  war  he  took  part  in  the  battles  of
Bull  Run  and  other  engagements.  After  being
promoted  staff  major  and  lieutenant-colonel,  he
was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  in  1864,  and  colo
nel  and  brigadier-general,  13  March,  1865,  for
"  diligent,  faithful,  and  meritorious  services  in  the
adjutant-general's  department."  On  9  March,
1875,  he  was  commissioned  lieutenant-colonel  and
assistant  adjutant-general,  and  he  is  now  (1888)  on
duty  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.

McKELLAR,  Archibald,  Canadian  member  of
parliament,  b.  in  Glenshire.  Argyleshire,  Scotland.
3  Feb.,  1816.  His  parents  came  to  Upper  Canada
in  1817,  and  settled  in  Aldborough.  Archibald
was  educated  at  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  and  at  the  high-
school  in  Niagara,  and  afterward  engaged  in  farm
ing  and  lumbering.  He  had  been  a  member  of
the  Kent  county  council  for  fifteen  years,  when,
in  1857,  he  was  elected  to  parliament  for  that  con
stituency,  and  he  continued  its  representative  till
1867,  when  he  was  elected  to  the  provincial  par
liament  for  Bothwell,  which  he  represented  in
1867-'75.  During  the  last  four  years  of  his  politi
cal  life  he  was  commissioner  of  public  works,  min
ister  of  agriculture  and  emigration,  and  provin
cial  secretary.  He  carried  through  parliament  the
charters  for  the  Southern  and  the  Erie  and  Huron
railways,  and  aided  in  establishing  Ontario  college
of  agriculture.  In  1875  he  became  sheriff  of  Went-
worth  county,  which  office  he  still  holds.

MACKELLAR,  Thomas,  type-founder,  b.  in
New  York  city.  12  Aug.,  1812.  His  father  an  offi
cer  in  the  British  navy,  emigrated  to  New  York  and
resided  there  till  his  death.  The  son  at  the  age  of
fourteen  began  to  learn  the  printer's  trade,  and  in
his  seventeenth  year  became  proof-reader  in  the
publishing  house  of  J.  and  J.  Harper.  In  1833  he
went  to  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  and  entered  the  type-
foundry  of  Johnson  and  Smith  as  proof-reader,
and  he"  has  since  come  to  be  the  head  of  the  house
which  is  now  known  as  the  Johnson  type-foundry,
and  one  of  the  most  important  establishments  of


130


McKENDREE


MACKENNA


the  kind  in  the  world.  In  1856  he  established  the
"Typographic  Advertiser."  In  1883  the  Univer
sity  of  Wooster,  Ohio,  conferred  on  him  the  degree
of  Ph.  D.  He  published  •'  The  American  Printer"
(1866),  the  fifteenth  edition  of  which  has  been  is
sued,  and  in  his  maturer  years  lie  has  become
known  for  his  poetical  productions,  of  which  he
has  written  and  published  several  volumes.  All  of
them  were  revised  and  issued,  with  other  of  his
writings,  under  the  title  of  "  Rhymes  Atween
Times  "  (Philadelphia,  1873).

McKENDREE,  William,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
King  William  county,  Va.,  6  July,  1757 :  d.  in
Sumner  county,  Tenn.,  5  March,  1835.  Shortly
after  his  birth  the  family  residence  was  changed  to
Greenville  county.  His  father  was  a  planter,  and
the  son  was  trained
for  the  same  calling.
In  1810  the  family
removed  to  Sumner
county,  Tenn.  At  the
beginning  of  the  Rev
olution,  William,  then
twenty  years  of  age,
joined  a  company  of
volunteers,  was  for
some  time  an  adjutant
in  the  service,  and  was
at  Yorktown  at  the
surrender  of  Corn-
wallis.  At  the  end  of
the  war  he  returned
to  private  life,  and
would  never  accept  a
pension.  His  opportunities  for  gaining  an  educa
tion  were  very  small,  yet  after  leaving  the  army  he
served  for  a  time  as  a  school-teacher,  and  in  his  pub
lic  life,  in  both  his  preaching  and  writings,  he  dis
played  a  good  understanding  of  the  English  lan
guage,  as  well  as  much  sound  learning  and  breadth
of  thought.  Before  leaving  home  he  had  become
connected  with  the  Methodist  church,  but  it  was
not  till  1787,  when  he  was  residing  in  Brunswick
county,  Va.,  that  he  became  thoroughly  awakened
in  the  religious  life. .  Soon  after  this  he  was  li
censed  to  preach,  and  in  1788  Bishop  Asbury  ap
pointed  him  as  junior  preacher  to  Mecklenburg  cir
cuit.  After  this  he  served  successively  for  several
years  upon  neighboring  circuits,  and  in  1793  he
was  sent  to  South  Carolina,  but  returned  the  next
year,  and  for  three  years  had  charge  of  a  vast  dis
trict  that  extended  from  Chesapeake  bay  to  the
Blue  Ridge  and  Alleghany  mountains,  "in  1798
his  appointment  was  in  the  Baltimore  conference,
and  in  1800  he  went  with  Bishop  Asbury  and
Bishop  Whatcoat  to  the  western  conference,  which
met  that  year  at  Bethel,  Ky.  He  was  appointed
to  superintend  a  district  that  embraced  a  large  part
of  the  partially  settled  territory  beyond  the  Alle
ghany  mountains.  In  this  pioneer  work  he  passed
the  next  eight  years — a  kind  of  evangelistic  Daniel
Boone,  but  without  any  of  his  savagery — with  a
yearly  pittance  for  his  support  of  from  twenty  to
less  than  fifty  dollars.  In  the  wonderful  revival  of
those  years,  in  all  that  region,  out  of  which  grew
the  Cumberland  Presbyterian  church,  he  was  at  once
an  inspiring  and  directing  spirit,  and  it  is  claimed
that  he,  more  than  any  other  man,  saved  that  great
work  from  degenerating  into  a  wild  and  ruinous
fanaticism.  Some  have  believed  that  his  ministry
during  these  years  contributed  largely  to  save  the
great  west  from  falling  into  a  condition  of  godless
barbarism.  He  continued  to  preside  over  this
work  till  the  spring  of  1808,  when  he  came  to
the  general  conference  at  Baltimore,  and  was  there


elected  and  ordained  bishop.  His  first  episcopal
tour  of  1,500  miles  extended  through  Virginia,
Tennessee,  Missouri,  and  Illinois.  In  October  he
was  at  the  conference  in  middle  Tennessee,  and  by
his  wonderful  preaching  and  his  administrative
ability  inspired  both  the  zeal  and  the  confidence
of  the  preachers.  He  continued  to  travel  at  large
through  the  whole  country,  sometimes  prostrated
by  rheumatism  and  fevers,  but  presently  again  in
the  saddle,  pushing  forward  to  new  labors  ;  and  at
the  general  conference  of  1816  he  found  himself
left,  by  the  death  of  Bishop  Asbury,  the  only  bish
op  of  his  church.  Two  additional  bishops  were
then  chosen,  and  so  the  work  proceeded,  with  a
less  severe  strain  upon  himself.  lie  continued  to
labor  till  1835,  when  his  health  failed  utterly.  He
was  never  married,  never  received  a  collegiate  di
ploma,  nor  left  even  a  brief  record  of  his  eventful
life.  See  his  ''Life  and  Times,"  by  Bishop  Robert
Paine  (2  vols..  185!)).

McKENimy,  William,  soldier,  d.  in  Canton,
Mass.,  in  1798.  He  was  quartermaster  of  Ichnbod
Alden's  Massachusetts  regiment,  holding  the  rank
of  lieutenant,  and  was  at  Cherry  Valley,  but  es
caped  the  massacre.  He  was  with  Gen.  James
Clinton's  force  that  joined  Sullivan's  expedition
against  the  Six  Nations,  and  his  journal  is  pub
lished  in  the  "Proceedings  of  the  Massachusetts
Historical  Society"  (2d  series,  vol.  ii.,  1886).

MACKENNA,"  Juan,  Chilian  soldier,  b.  in  Clog-
her,  Ireland,  26  Oct.,  1771  :  d.  in  Buenos  Avres,  21
Nov.,  1814.  At  the  age  of  thirteen  he  left  Ireland
by  order  of  his  uncle,  Count  O'Reilly,  who  des
tined  him  for  the  Spanish  military  service,  entered
the  Royal  academy  of  mathematics  in  Barcelona,
and  in  1787  was  appointed  cadet  in  the  corps  of
military  engineers.  He  served  during  the  African
campaign  in  1787-'8  in  the  garrison  of  Ceuta,  and
later  in  the  campaign  of  Roussillon  against  the
French  republic,  and  at  first  rose  rapidly  in  rank,
but  afterward,  remaining  for  a  long  time  without
promotion  as  brevet  lieutenant-colonel,  he  thought
himself  neglected,  and  determined  to  seek  his  for
tune  in  the  New  World.  He  obtained  leave,  and
left  in  1796  for  Peru  with  warm  recommendations
from  his  uncle  to  the  Viceroy  Ambrosio  O'Higgins,
an  Irishman,  like  himself.  He  was  favorably  re
ceived,  and  in  1797  appointed  civil  and  military
governor  of  the  colony  of  Osorno,  Chili,  which
place  he  filled  till  1808.  In  1809,  when  an  Eng
lish  invasion  was  threatened,  Mackenna,  as  the
most  experienced  military  otlicer  in  the  country,
was  commissioned  to  erect  fortifications  along  the
coast,  and  take  the  necessary  measures  of  dei'ence,
but  in  1810,  dissatisfied  with  the  Spanish  govern
ment,  he  joined  the  revolutionists,  and  became  an
ardent  defender  of  the  cause  of  independence.
Early  in  1811  he  was  appointed  provisional  gover
nor  of  Valparaiso,  and  in  September  of  the  same
year  became  a  member  of  the  governing  junta,
under  the  auspices  of  Jose  M.  Carrera,  and  at  the
same  time  commander-in-chief  of  artillery  and  en
gineers,  with  the  rank  of  colonel.  By  a  mutiny
that  was  headed  by  the  brothers  Carrera,  he  lost
his  place  in  the  government,  but  retained  the  com
mand  of  the  artillery,  till,  as  he  continued  his  op
position  to  Carrera,  he  was  banished  to  the  prov
ince  of  Rioja.  In  1813  he  was  recalled,  commis
sioned  to  make  a  strategical  map  of  the  republic,
and  appointed  chief  of  staff  for  the  army  of  the
south,  to  repel  the  invasion  of  Pareja.  He  as
sisted  in  the  campaign  and  was  promoted  briga
dier.  On  his  return  to  Santiago  he  was  appointed
military  commander  of  the  city,  but  when  Jose  M.
Carrera  returned  to  power  he  was  arrested  in  his


McKENNAN


MACKENZIE


131


bed,  thrown  into  prison,  and  banished  to  Mendoza,
14  July,  1814.  He  then  went  to  Buenos  Ayres,  and,
meeting  Carrera's  brother  Luis,  was  killed  in  the
duel  that  resulted  from  their  quarrel.

McKENNAN,  Thomas  McKean  Thompson,
lawyer,  b.  in  New  Castle  county,  Pa.,  31  March,
1794:  d.  in  Reading,  Pa.,  9  July,  1852.  He  was
graduated  at  Washington  college  Pa.,  in  1810,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1814,  and
was  deputy  attorney-general  for  the  county  in
1815-'17.  He  soon  won  a  place  in  the  front  rank
of  his  profession,  and  received  from  Jefferson  col
lege  the  degree  of  doctor  of  laws.  He  was  elected
as  a  Whig  to  congress,  serving  from  5  Dec.,  1831,
till  3  March,  1839.  and  again  from  31  May,  1841,
till  3  March,  1843,  was  a  presidential  elector  in
1840,  president  of  the  electoral  college  in  1848,
and  in  1850  was  offered  the  secretaryship  of  the
interior  in  the  cabinet  of  President  Fillmore.  Re
luctantly  accepting,  he  went  to  Washington,  but
soon  became  disgusted  with  official  routine  and  the
importunities  of  place-hunters,  and  resigned  after
scarcely  a  month's  tenure  of  office.

MeKENNEY,  Thomas  Lorraine,  author,  b.  in
Hopewell,  Somerset  co.,  Md.,  21  March.  1785;  d.
in  New  York  city,  19  Feb.,  1859.  He  was  edu
cated  at  Chestertown,  Md.,  and  engaged  in  busi
ness  at  Georgetown,  D.  C.  In  1816  he  was  ap
pointed  superintendent  of  the  United  States  trade
with  the  Indian  tribes.  In  1824,  the  bureau  of  In
dian  affairs  having  been  organized  in  connection
with  the  war  department,  Mr.  McKenney  was
placed  in  charge  of  it.  In  1826  he  was  made  a
special  commissioner  with  Lewis  Cass  to  negotiate
an  important  treaty  with  the  Chippewa  Indians  at
Fond  du  Lac,  in  the  territory  of  Michigan.  In
1823,  an  effort  having  been  made  by  interested  par
ties  to  injure  his  fair  fame,  a  speech  that  he  deliv
ered  in  his  own  defence  before  a  committee  of  con
gress,  greatly  increased  his  reputation  as  an  honest
and  capable  superintendent  of  Indian  affairs.  He
published  "  Sketches  of  a  Tour  to  the  Lakes,  etc."
(Baltimore.  1827),  with  many  illustrations  of  Michi
gan  life  and  scenery,  and  was  also  the  author,  in
connection  with  James  Hall,  of  "  A  History  of  the
Indian  Tribes,"  illustrated  with  120  colored  Indian
portraits  (3  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1838-'44).  The
high  price  of  the  volume  ($120)  has  restricted  it  to
the  public  libraries  and  to  private  collections.  He
also  wrote  "  Essays  on  the  Spirit  of  Jacksonianisrn
as  Exemplified  iii  its  Deadly  Hostility  to  the  Bank
of  the  United  States,  etc."  (Philadelphia,  1835),
and  "  Memoirs,  Official  and  Personal,  with  Sketches
of  Travels  among  the  Northern  and  Southern  In
dians,  etc."  (2d  ed.,  New  York,  1846).

MACKENZIE,  Sir  Alexander,  explorer,  b.  in
Inverness,  Scotland,  about  1755;  d.  in  Dalhousie,
Scotland,  12  March,  1820.  In  his  youth  he  emi
grated  to  Canada  and  became  a  clerk  of  one
of  the  partners  in  the  Northwest  fur  company.
His  employer  determined  to  send  him  on  an  ex
ploring  expedition,  but,  before  going,  Mackenzie
spent  a  year  in  England,  studying  astronomy  and
navigation.  He  then  returned  to  Fort  Chippewyan,
on  Lake  Athabasca,  where  he  had  already  spent
eight  years  in  trading  with  the  Indians,  and  on  3
June,  '1789,  set  out  on  his  expedition,  with  four
canoes  and  a  party  of  twelve  persons.  At  the
western  end  of  Great  Slave  lake  he  entered  a  river
to  which  he  gave  his  name,  and  explored  it  until
12  July,  when  he  reached  the  Arctic  ocean.  Far
ther  northward  progress  was  stopped  by  ice.  The
farthest  point  that  he  reached  was  69°  north  lati
tude.  He  then  returned  to  the  fort,  where  he  ar
rived  on  27  Sept.  In  October,  1792,  he  undertook


a  more  hazardous  expedition  to  the  western  coast
of  North  America  and  succeeded,  in  July,  1793,
in  reaching  Cape  Menzies,  on  the  Pacific  ocean,  in
latitude  52°  21'  north,  and  longitude  128°  12'  west,
being  the  first  white  man  to  cross  the  Rocky
mountains  and  reach  the  Pacific  ocean.  He  re
turned  to  England  in  1801  and  was  knighted
the  following  year.  He  published  a  detailed  ac
count  of  his  explorations,  entitled  "Voyages  from
Montreal,  on  the  River  St.  Lawrence,  through  the
Continent  of  North  America  to  the  Frozen  and
Pacific  Oceans"  (London.  1801).

McKENZIE,  Alexander,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
Bedford,  Mass.,  14  Dec.,  1830.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1859,  and  at  Andover  theological
seminary  in  1861,  and  ordained  pastor  of  a  Con
gregational  church  in  Augusta,  Me.,  in  the  latter
year,  remaining  there  until  1867.  Since  that  date
he  has  had  charge  of  the  First  church  at  Cambridge,
Mass.,  and  in  1886  was  appointed  one  of  the
preachers  to  Harvard  university.  In  1882  he  was
lecturer  on  the  theology  of  the  New  Testament  in
Andover  seminary,  of  which  institution  he  became
trustee  in  1876.  'He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Amherst  in  1879.  He  is  also  a  lecturer  in
Harvard  divinity-school,  and  a  member  and  secre
tary  of  the  board  of  overseers  of  Harvard.  He
has  published  "The  Two  Boys"  (Boston,  1870);
"  History  of  the  First  Church,  Cambridge  "  (1873) ;
and  "  Cambridge  Sermons  "  (1883).

MACKENZIE,  Alexander,  Canadian  states
man,  b.  in  Logierait,  Perthshire,  Scotland.  28  Jan.,
1822.  He  was  educated  at  the  public  schools  of
Maulin,  Dunkeld,  and
Perth,  and,  after  fol
lowing  for  a  time  the
trade  of  a  mason,  be
came,  like  his  father,
an  architect  and  build
er.  In  1842  he  emi
grated  to  Kingston,
Canada,  where  he
worked  as  a  journey
man,  and  he  soon  af
terward  began  business
on  his  own  account  as
a  builder  and  contract
or  at  Sarnia,  in  western
Canada.  He  had  been
a  Whig  in  Scotland,
and  naturally,  soon
after  his  arrival  in
Canada,  allied  himself  with  the  Liberal  party.
In  1852  the  "  Lambton  Shield,"  a  reform  news
paper,  was  established,  with  Mr.  Mackenzie  as
editor.  In  1861  he  was  elected  to  parliament  for
Lambton,  and  represented  it  till  1867.  He  sup
ported  John  Sandfield  Macdonald,  favored  the
project  of  confederation,  was  opposed  to  the  coali
tion  of  1864,  and  declined  a  seat  in  the  Canadian
cabinet  on  the  retirement  of  George  Brown  in
1865.  In  1867  he  was  elected  for  Lambton  to  the
Canadian  parliament,  and  again  in  1872,  1874,  and
1878.  He  was  chosen  for  East  York  in  1882,  and
re-elected  for  that  place  in  February,  1887.  In
1867,  on  the  defeat  of  George  Brown,  Mr.  Macken
zie  succeeded  to  the  leadership  of  the  Reform  op
position  in  parliament,  and  in  1873  he  was  desig
nated  as  leader  of  the  entire  Liberal  party  in
Canada.  On  5  Nov.,  1873,  upon  the  resignation  of
Sir  John  A.  Macdonald,  Mr.  Mackenzie  was  called
upon  by  Lord  Dufferin  to  form  an  administration,
which  he  succeeded  in  doing  a  few  days  afterward,
taking  the  office  of  minister  of  public  works,
which  he  held  till  he  resigned  with  the  members  of


/


132


MACKENZIE


MACKENZIE


his  cabinet  in  October,  1878.  He  represented  West
Middlesex  in  the  Ontario  assembly  from  1871  till
October,  1872,  when  he  resigned,  and  was  a  member
of  the  executive  council  and  treasurer  of  the  prov
ince  from  21  Dec.,  1871,  till  the  date  of  his  retire
ment.  His  administration  was  productive  of  the
most  important  legislation,  and  as  premier  he
moulded  and  directed  to  a  great  extent  all  the
principal  measures  that  were  enacted  by  the  Do
minion  government.  Among  these  were  a  strin
gent  election  law.  with  the  trial  of  election  peti
tions  by  judges  and  vote  by  ballot ;  the  abolition
of  the  real-estate  qualification  for  members  of
parliament ;  the  enactment  of  the  marine  telegraph
law,  which  virtually  abolished  the  monopoly  of  the
cable  company :  the  establishment  of  a  Dominion
military  college;  the  improvement  of  the  militia
system ;  the  permanent  organization  of  the  civil
service ;  the  establishment  of  a  supreme  court  for
the  Dominion ;  the  reduction  of  postage  to  and
from  the  United  States  ;  the  opening  of  direct  mail
communication  with  the  West  Indies ;  the  con
struction  of  a  trans-continental  telegraph-line  ;  the
adoption  of  a  final  route  for  the  Pacific  railway;
the  opening  of  negotiations  for  a  reciprocity  treaty
between  the  United  States  and  Canada ;  the  estab
lishment  of  a  territorial  government  for  the  North
west;  and  the  satisfactory  adjustment  of  the  Mani
toba  amnesty  and  the  New  Brunswick  school
questions,  which  at  one  time  threatened  the  grav
est,  complications.  Mr.  Mackenzie,  though  pos
sessed  of  no  gifts  of  oratory,  is  still  an  effective
speaker,  and  his  plain,  honest,  and  earnest  state
ments  of  opinion  have  proved  often  more  con
vincing  than  the  elaborate  and  eloquent  speeches
of  Edward  Blake,  his  successor  in  the  leader
ship  of  the  Liberals.  In  June,  1872,  Mr.  Mac
kenzie  visited  Scotland,  and  while  there  was  pre
sented  with  the  freedom  of  Irvine,  Dundee,  and
Perth,  and  also  visited  the  Queen  at  Windsor  Castle.
In  1881,  during  a  second  visit  to  his  native  land,
he  was  granted  the  freedom  of  the  city  of  In
verness.  Mr.  Mackenzie  is  president  of  several
important  financial  associations.  He  was  thrice
offered  the  honor  of  knighthood  by  the  Queen,
but  declined  it.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Life  and
Speeches  of  Hon.  George  Brown  "  (Toronto,  1882).
MACKENZIE,  Alexander  Slidell,  naval  offi
cer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  6  April,  1803 ;  d.  in
Tarrytown,  N.  Y.,  13  Sept.,  1848.  He  was  the  son
of  John  Slidell,  and  the  brother  of  the  U.  S.  sena
tor  of  that  name.  The  name  of  Mackenzie,  that
of  his  mother,  was  added  to  his  own  in  1837,  at  the
request  of  a  maternal  uncle.  He  entered  the  navy
as  midshipman  in  1815,  and  in  1822  he  took  com
mand  of  a  merchant-vessel  to  improve  himself  in
seamanship.  He  was  made  lieutenant  in  1825,  and
commander  in  1841,  and  in  both  grades  was  in  ac
tive  duty  in  the  Mediterranean,  the  West  Indies,  the
Brazilian  waters,  and  the  Pacific.  He  was  at  Bahia
in  command  of  the  "  Dolphin  "  during  the  siege  of
that  place,  and  at  its  surrender,  and  was  an  eye
witness  of  many  of  the  political  events  on  the  Ilio
de  la  Plata  at  that  period,  an  account  of  some  of
which  he  published  in  a  pamphlet  at  the  time.
He  also  enjoyed  the  intimacy  of  Gen.  Rosas,  with
whom  he  subsequently  corresponded  for  many
years.  In  1842  he  had  charge  of  the  brig  "  Som-
ers,"  manned  chiefly  by  naval  apprentices;  and  on
his  passage  from  the  coast  of  Africa,  in  the  autumn
of  that  year,  the  existence  of  a  mutinous  plot  on
board  was  discovered,  the  principals  of  which  were
immediately  placed  in  close  confinement.  A  coun
cil  of  officers  was  called,  which,  after  a  careful  in
vestigation,  recommended  the  immediate  execu


tion  of  the  three  persons  that  were  principally
implicated.  This  recommendation  was  carried
into  eifect  at  sea,  1  Dec.,  1842.  The  "  Somers "
soon  afterward  arrived  in  New  York,  when  a  court
of  inquiry  was  immediately  ordered  to  investigate
the  affair.  The  result  was  a  full  approval  of  the
conduct  of  Mackenzie.  Subsequently  a  court-
martial  was  held  upon  him  at  his  own  request,  and
the  trial  again  resulted  in  his  acquittal.  As  the
young  men  that  had  been  executed  were  all  of
good  social  standing,  one  of  them  being  a  son  of
the  secretary  of  war,  John  C.  Spencer,  of  New
York,  the  event  created  a  great  sensation,  and
Mackenzie's  conduct  was  as  severely  criticised  by
some  as  it  was  warmly  defended  by  others.  The
decisions  of  the  courts-martial  did  not  succeed  in
quieting  these  differences  of  opinion,  and  the  affair
more  or  less  embittered  the  remainder  of  Macken
zie's  life.  In  May,  1840,  he  was  sent  by  President
Polk  on  a  private  mission  to  Cuba,  and  thence
sailed  to  Mexico.  He  was  ordnance-officer  at  the
siege  of  Vera  Cruz,  and  commanded  a  detached
division  of  artillery  at  the  storming  of  Tabasco  in
1847.  Mackenzie  also  attained  note  as  an  author.
His  first  book  was  "A  Year  in  Spain,  by  a  Young
American  "  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1829  ;  London,  1831  ;
enlarged  ed.,  3  vols.,  New  York,  1830),  which  gained
immediate  popularity  both  in  this  country  and  in
England.  "  Here,''  wrote  Washington  Irving  from
London  on  its  appearance,  "  it  is  quite  the  fashion
able  book  of  the  day,  and  spoken  of  in  the  highest
terms  in  the  highest  circles."  It  has  also  been
translated  into  Swedish.  His  other  works  are
"  Popular  Essays  on  Naval  Subjects  "  (2  vols.,
1833) ;  "  The  American  in  England "  (2  vols.,
1835) ;  "  Spain  Kevisited  "  (2  vols.,  1830) ;  "  Life  of
John  Paul  Jones "(2  vols.,  Boston,  1841);  "Life
of  Commodore  Oliver  II.  Perry "  (2  vols.,  New
York.  1841);  and  "Life  of  Commodore  Stephen  De-
catur,"  being  vol.  xxi.  in  Jared  Sparks's  "  Library
of  American  Biography  "  (Boston,  1840).  He  also
left  in  manuscript  "  A  Journal  of  a  Tour  in  Ire
land."  See  "The  Case  of  the  'Somers';  Defence
of  A.  S.  Mackenzie"  (New  York,  1843). — His  son,
Ranald  Slidell,  soldier,  b.  in  Westchester  county,
N.  Y.,  27  July,  1840,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1802,  and  assigned  to  the  en-

fineers.  In  August  he  was  brevetted  1st  lieutenant
>r  "gallant  and  meritorious  services"  at  the  bat
tle  of  Manassas,  where  he  was  wounded.  He  was
commissioned  1st  lieutenant,  3  March.  1803.  brevet
captain  for  gallantry  at  Chancellorsville,  and  bre
vet  major  for  the  same  cause  at  the  battle  of  Get
tysburg.  He  was  promoted  captain,  0  Nov.,  1803,
brevetted  lieutenant -colonel  for  his  services  be
fore  Petersburg,  Va.,  18  June,  1804,  and  became
colonel  of  the  2d  Connecticut  heavy  artillery,  10
June,  1804,  being  brevetted  colonel  in  the  regular
army  in  the  following  October  for  gallantry  at
Cedar  Creek,  and  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
for  meritorious  services  at  the  battles  of  Opcquan,
Fisher's  Hill,  and  Middletown,  Va.  He  was  brev
etted  brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army  for
bravery  and  also  major-general  of  volunteers  in
March,  1805.  Besides  taking  part  in  other  engage
ments,  Gen.  Mackenzie  was  engaged  in  build
ing  bridges,  constructing  rifle-trenches,  repairing
roads,  erecting  forts,  and  other  engineering  work
throughout  the  war.  He  was  promoted  colonel,  0
March,  1807,  and  brigadier-general,  20  Oct.,  1882.
On  24  March,  1884,  he  was  placed  on  the  retired
list,  having  been  disabled  "  in  the  line  of  duty."—
Another  son,  Alexander  Slidell,  naval  officer,  b.
in  New  York  city,  24  Jan.,  1842 ;  d.  in  the  island
of  Formosa,  China,  13  June,  1807,  was  appointed


MACKENZIE


MACKENZIE


133


acting  midshipman,  29  Sept.,  1855,  and  promoted
midshipman,  9  June,  1859,  lieutenant,  81  Aug.,
1801,  and  lieutenant-commander,  29  July,  1805.
He  served  in  the  "  Kineo  "  at  the  passage  of  Fort
Jackson  and  Fort  St.  Philip  in  1802,  and  in  the
"  Ironsides  "  at  the  first  attack  upon  Fort  Sumter
in  1803.  He  commanded  the  boats  of  the  squadron
off  Charleston  in  the  joint  army  and  navy  expedi
tion  of  10  July  of  the  same  year,  which  resulted  in
the  capture  of  the  greater  part  of  Morris  island.
Lieut.-Commander  Mackenzie  lost  his  life  while
leading  a  charge  against  the  savages  in  the  island
of  Formosa.  A  tablet  to  his  memory  has  been
placed  in  the  chapel  of  the  naval  academy  at  An
napolis,  and  his  fellow-officers  cordially  approved
the  opinion  of  Kear-Admiral  Bell,  that  "  the  navy
could  boast  no  braver  spirit,  no  man  of  higher
promise,"  than  young  Mackenzie.

MACKENZIE,  Charles  Kenneth,  diplomatist,
b.  in  Scotland  in  1788 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  6
July,  1802.  He  was  given  a  classical  education  and
received  the  degree  of  doctor  in  both  law  and  medi
cine.  He  entered  the  army,  became  aide-de-camp
to  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  and  in  1823  accom
panied  the  British  commission  to  Mexico  on  the
recognition  of  that  country's  independence,  being
appointed  consul  for  Vera  Cruz.  In  1825  he  was
sent  as  consul-general  to  Hayti,  and  in  1830  he
was  commissioner  of  arbitration  to  the  mixed  com
mission  at  Havana.  A  dispute  with  the  foreign
office  in  November,  1834,  ended  his  official  connec
tion  with  the  British  government.  He  then  re
turned  to  England  and  engaged  in  literature.  He
was  a  contributor  to  reviews,  and  to  the  "  P]ncyclo-
paxiia  Britannica,"  and  was  also  the  leader-writer
on  a  London  Conservative  journal.  Mr.  Mackenzie
lost  his  life  by  the  burning  of  a  hotel.

MACKENZIE,  Donald,  fur-trader,  b.  in  Scot
land  in  1783;  d.  in  Mayville,  Chautauqua  co.,
N.  Y.,  20  Jan.,  1851.  He  emigrated  to  Canada  in
1800,  and,  after  being  employed  for  several  years
in  the  service  of  the  Northwest  company,  he  be
came  in  1809  a  partner  of  John  Jacob  Astor  in  his
project  for  establishing  a  trade  in  furs  west  of  the
Rocky  mountains.  He  travelled  across  the  conti
nent  to  the  mouth  of  Columbia  river,  a  journey
that  was  then  attended  with  considerable  danger,
and  remained  at  Astoria  until  its  surrender  to  a
British  force  in  1814.  He  then  converted  as  much
of  his  property  as  possible  into  available  funds,
again  traversed  the  wilderness  to  the  Mississippi,
and  reached  New  York  in  safety.  He  was  after
ward  unsuccessfully  employed  in  negotiations  to
secure  to  the  United  States  the  exclusive  trade
with  Oregon.  In  March,  1821,  Mr.  Mackenzie  en
tered  the  service  of" the  Hudson  bay  company,  and
was  at  once  commissioned  one  of  the  council  and
chief  factor.  In  1825,  while  residing  at  Fort  Gar
ry,  Red  river  settlement,  he  was  appointed  gov
ernor  of  that  corporation.  After  amassing  a  for
tune,  he  returned  to  the  United  States  in  1832,
and  settled  in  Mayville.  Several  of  his  adventures
are  recorded  by  Washington  Irving.

MACKENZIE,  Georgre  Henry,  chess-player,  b.
in  Bellefield,  Ross-shire,  Scotland,  24  March,  1837.
He  entered  the  British  army  when  he  was  nine
teen  years  of  age,  and  saw  service  during  the  con
cluding  months  of  the  Indian  mutiny,  but  sold  his
commission  in  1801,  and  came  to  the  United  States
in  1803,  enlisted  in  the  National  army,  and  before
the  end  of  the  war  had  been  promoted  captain.
Having  been  a  chess-player  from  his  youth,  and
the  game  steadily  gaining  in  fascination  for  him,
he  determined  to  devote  himself  to  it  professional
ly.  Since  that  time  he  has  played  in  all  the  tour


naments  both  at  home  and  abroad,  including  those
held  in  Paris  in  1878,  Berlin  in  1881,  Vienna  in
1882,  London  in  1883,  and  Hamburg  in  1885.  In
1887  the  contest  was  held  at  Frankfort-on-the-
Main,  and  proved
the  most  interest
ing  of  the  series.
Twenty  -  one  of
the  chief  players
of  Europe,  in
cluding  two  ex-
champions,  Zuk-
ertort  and  Black-
burne,  took  part.
During  the  pre
vious  meetings
Cant.  Macken
zie  s  play  had
constantly  im
proved.  In  the
Berlin  tourna
ment  he  led  in
the  first  round,
in  the  London
event  he  was
ahead  in  the  sec
ond  round,  and  in  match  play  on  both  sides  of  the
Atlantic  he  had  more  than  held  his  own.  and  his
scores  had  grown  steadily  better,  until  at  Frankfort
he  attained  the  extraordinary  result  of  fifteen  wins
out  of  twenty  games,  in  a  contest  where  nearly  every
chess-player  of  mark  except  Stein itz  was  engaged.
As  a  result  he  carried  off  the  first  prize,  which
made  him  the  champion  chess-player  of  the  world.

MACKENZIE,  Hettie,  actress,  b.  about  1810;
d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  in  February.  1845.  She
was  a  daughter  of  Joseph  Jefferson,  the  second  of
that  name,  but  was  not  educated  by  her  father  for
the  stage,  and  in  1829  married  Alexander  Macken
zie,  of  Pottsville,  Pa.  In  1831  Mr.  Jefferson  per
suaded  his  son-in-law  to  unite  with  him  in  taking
a  lease  of  certain  theatres  in  Lancaster  and  Harris-
burg,  Pa.,  and  Washington,  D.  C.  In  consequence
of  this  arrangement  Mrs.  Mackenzie  made  her  first
appearance  in  the  "  Mountaineers."  She  then
turned  her  attention  to  the  portrayal  of  old  wom
en,  and  in  Washington  and  Baltimore  was  unusu
ally  successful  in  such  characters  as  Mrs.  Mala-
prop,  Lady  Priory,  and  Lady  Brumbach.  Being
able  to  learn  new  parts  quickly  she  was  often  called
upon  to  play  the  Queen  in  "Hamlet,"  Lady  All-
worth,  or  Lady  Rachel,  to  accommodate  the  man
agement.  On  10  Sept.,  1837,  Mrs.  Mackenzie  en
acted  Helen  in  the  "  Hunchback "  in  Chicago,
and  this  was  the  first  theatrical  exhibition  there.
In  1841  she  played  in  Natchez,  Vicksburg,  and
Mobile,  and  in  1843  in  New  Orleans.

MACKENZIE,  Kenneth,  Canadian  judge,  b.  in
Ross-shire,  Scotland,  in  1804 ;  d.  in  Toronto,  7
Feb.,  1883.  He  came  to  Canada  in  1831,  settled
in  Montreal,  where  he  served  as  a  merchant's  clerk,
and  subsequently  began  business  in  Cobourg  on
his  own  account.  He  afterward  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1843,  and  became  a  Queen's
counsel  in  1853,  and  a  bencher  of  the  Law  society
in  1871.  He  first  practised  at  Kingston  in  1853,
was  appointed  county  court  judge  of  Frontenac
and  allied  counties,  and  in  1805  resigned  and  re
moved  to  Toronto.  In  1800  Mr.  Mackenzie  was
retained  as  counsel  by  the  U.  S.  government  for
the  Fenians,  that  were  concerned  in  the  raid  at
Fort  Erie,  and  succeeded  in  securing  the  acquittal
of  about  one  half  of  the  number  that  were  cap
tured.  He  was  employed  as  crown  prosecutor  by
the  government  of  Ontario,  appointed  judge  of  the


134


MACKENZIE


MACKENZIE


county  court  of  York  in  October,  1876,  find  in  1877
judge'of  the  Ontario  maritime  court.  Judge  Mac
kenzie  also  presided  at  criminal  sessions,  at  the
surrogate  court,  and  the  court  of  assessment  ap
peals,  and  also  conducted  ten  division  courts.

MACKENZIE,  Robert  Shelton,  author,  b.  at
Drew's  Court,  Limerick  co.,  Ireland,  22  June,  1809 ;
d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  30  Nov.,  1880.  He  was  the
second  son  of  Capt.  Kenneth  Mackenzie,  author  of
a  volume  of  Gaelic  poetry.  After  his  education
at  Fermoy,  he  studied  medicine  at  Cork,  and  was
graduated  at  Dublin,  but  never  practised  his  pro
fession.  After  passing  his  medical  examination
in  1825,  he  opened  a  school  in  Fermoy,  and  in
1829,  having  had  experience  in  the  mean  time  as  a
newspaper  reporter,  he  became  editor  of  a  county
journal  in  Staffordshire,  England.  In  1830-'!  he
was  employed  in  London  in  writing  biographies
for  a  work  called  "  The  Georgian  Era,"  and  in  re
vising  the  contributions  of  others.  Subsequently
he  acted  as  editor  of  various  newspapers,  among
them  the  "  Liverpool  Journal."  From  1834  till
1851  he  was  the  English  correspondent  of  the
"  New  York  Evening  Star,"  besides  contributing
extensively  to  various  periodicals  in  the  United
States.  In  1845  he  became  editor  and  part  propri
etor  of  a  railway  journal  in  London,  and  in'  1847
was  an  active  member  of  Lord  Brougham's  Law
amendment  society.  In  1852  Dr.  Mackenzie  came
to  the  United  States,  and  at  first  resided  in  New
York  city,  where  he  engaged  in  various  literary
undertakings.  In  1857  he  became  book  and  for
eign  editor  of  the  "Philadelphia  Press,"  with  which
publication  he  was  afterward  identified.  He  re
ceived  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Glasgow  univer
sity  in  1834,  and  in  1844  that  of  D.  C.  L.  from  Ox
ford.  He  published  in  England  "  Lays  of  Pales
tine  "  (London,  1828) ;  "  Titian,  a  Venetian  Art-
Novel  "  (3  vols.,  1843) :  "  Life  of  Guizot,"  prefixed
to  a  translation  of  "  Democracy  and  its  Mission  "
(1846);  " Partnership  en  Commandite"  a  work  on
commercial  law  (1847) ;  and  "  Mornings  at  Mat-
lock,"  a  collection  of  stories  (3  vols.,  1850).  After
his  arrival  in  this  country  he  issued  "  Shell's
Sketches  of  the  Irish  Bar  "  (2  vols.,  New  York) ;
and  the  "  Noctes  Ambrosianae "  (5  vols.,  1854) ;
"  De  Quincy's  "  Klosterheim,' "  and  "  Life  of  Cur-
ran  "  (1855) ;  "  Lady  Morgan's  '  O'Brien's  and
O'Flahertys'  "  (2  vols.,  1857);  "Dr.  Maginn's  Mis
cellaneous  Works"  (5  vols.,  1855-'7) ;  "Bits  of
Blarney,"  a  collection  of  stories  (1855) ;  "  Tressilian
and  his  Friends "  (Philadelphia),  and  "  Memoirs
of  Robert  Houdin  "  (185!)) ;  "  Life  of  Charles  Dick
ens  "  (1870) ;  and  "  Sir  Walter  Scott :  the  Story  of
his  Life  "  (Boston,  1871).

MACKENZIE,  William,  book-collector,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1  Aug.,  1758;  d.  there,  23  July,
1828.  He  received  his  education  at  the  academy
and  college  of  Philadelphia,  and  then  entered  the
counting-room  of  John  Ross,  in  that  city.  Being
in  easy  circumstances  and  fond  of  reading  arid  re
tirement,  although  for  some  time  engaged  in  ac
tive  business  pursuits,  he  withdrew  from  them  at
an  early  period  in  his  career,  and  for  forty  years
devoted  himself  to  the  collection  of  rare  books,
which  he  bequeathed  to  the  Philadelphia  and
Loganian  libraries.  His  collection  at  the  time  of
his  death  was  considered  the  most  valuable  in
Philadelphia  in  private  hands.  Among  the  works
given  to  the  last-named  institution  were  copies  of
Voragine's  "  Golden  Legend,"  printed  by  Caxton
in  1483 ;  the  first  edition  of  the  Bible  printed  in
Rome  in  1471,  being  the  second  published  in  Latin  ;
the  first  Bible  printed  in  Venice  in  1485 ;  the  first
printed  at  Nuremberg,  and  a  copy  of  the  first


edition  of  the  New  Testament  printed  in  French-
All  of  the  foregoing  are  very  valuable,  the  "  Golden
Legend  "  being  to-day  (1888)  worth  $10,000,  accord
ing  to  the  testimony  of  an  expert.  "  Mr.  Macken
zie."  says  his  intimate  friend,  Rev.  Dr.  James  Ab-
ercrombie,  "  I  believe  never  had  an  enemy  ;  at  least,
from  the  purity  of  his  principles  and  the  correct
ness  of  his  conduct,  he  never  deserved  one."  He
left  considerable  amounts  to  various  chanties.

MACKENZIE,  William  Lyon,  Canadian  jour
nalist,  b.  in  Dundee,  Forfarshire,  Scotland,  12
March,  1795:  d.  in  Toronto.  28  Aug.,  1861.  He
was  educated  imperfectly,  owing  to  the  death  of
his  father,  Daniel,  when  the  son  was  an  infant,
and  was  obliged  to  work  at  an  early  age  for  his
own  support.  When  a  mere  lad,  he  entered  a
shop  in  Dundee,  went  thence  into  the  counting-
house  of  a  wool-merchant,  and  when  seventeen
years  of  age  engaged  in  business  himself  by  open
ing  a  small  general  store  and  circulating  library  at
Alyth.  He  was  unsuccessful  in  business,  and  going
to  England  in  1817  became  managing  clerk  to  a
canal  company  in  Wiltshire,  and  subsequently  was
for  a  short  period  in  London.  After  visiting
France,  in  the  spring  of  1820,  Mr.  Mackenzie  emi
grated  to  Canada,  where  he  was  made  superin
tendent  of  the  works  of  the  Lachine  canal,  and
afterward  opened  a  drug  and  book  store  at  Little
York  (now  Toronto),  in  partnership  witli  John
Lesslie.  This  partnership  was  dissolved  in  1823,
and  Mackenzie  removed  to  Queen stown,  where  he
opened  a  store,  but  abandoned  it  soon  afterward
to  enter  politics.  In  May,  1824,  he  issued  the  first
number  of  the  "Colonial  Advocate,"  which  he  con-
tinned  to  publish  until  1833.  In  June,  1826,  the
office  of  the  "  Advocate,"  which  had  been  removed
to  Toronto,  was  forcibly  entered,  its  contents  de
stroyed,  and  most  of  the  type  thrown  into  Toronto
bay.  This  act,  which  was  doubtless  prompted  by
persons  that  had  been  attacked  by  Mr.  Mackenzie
in  his  paper,  made  him  more  popular  than  before,
and  the  large  damages  he  received  as  a  compensa
tion  for  the  outrage  enabled  him  to  continue  more
successfully  than  ever  his  appeals  for  reform  in
the  government,  and  his  denunciations  of  the  offi
cial  classes.  In  1827  he  was  an  unsuccessful  can
didate  for  the  provincial  parliament  from  York,
and  was  elected  in  1828;  but,  for  alleged  libel  on
the  assembly,  was  expelled  five  times,  only  to  be
as  often  re-elected,  until  the  government  finally
refused  to  issue  another  writ  of  election.  In  April.
1832,  he  went  to  London  to  present  to  the  home
government  a  petition  of  grievances  from  the  Re
formers  of  Canada,  and  while  there  secured  from
the  Whig  ministry  the  dismissal  from  office  of  the
attorney-general,  and  the  solicitor-general  of  Up
per  Canada,  and  a  veto  of  the  Upper  Canada  bank
bill.  In  March,  1834,  the  name  of  York  was
changed  to  Toronto,  and  Mr.  Mackenzie  was
chosen  its  first  mayor,  thus  being  the  first  mayor
in  Upper  Canada.  In  July,  1836,  he  issued  the
first  number  of  "  The  Constitution,"  in  which  he
attacked  Sir  Francis  Bond  Head,  the  lieutenant-
governor  of  Upper  Canada,  for  his  arbitrary  acts
and  interference  with  the  freedom  of  election.  In
August,  1837.  a  manifesto  appeared  in  "  The  Con
stitution,"  which  was  virtually  a  declaration  of
independence,  and  in  December  of  that  year  he
crowned  his  defiance  of  the  government  by  instigat
ing  rebellion.  He  and  Van  Egmond,  a  retired  sol
dier  of  the  first  Napoleon,  who  had  been  appointed
general  of  the  insurgents,  appeared  on  Yonge  street,
near  Toronto,  at  the  head  of  an  armed  force,  and
demanded  of  the  lieutenant-governor  a  settlement
of  all  provincial  difficulties  by  a  convention,  which


McKEON


MACKIE


135


demand  was  not  acceded  to.  He  now  determined
to  march  on  the  city,  secure  a  quantity  of  arms
that  were  stored  there,  arrest  the  governor  and  the
members  of  his  cabinet,  and  declare  Canada  a  re
public  ;  but  the  government  was  soon  in  the  field
with  a  superior  force.  An  encounter  took  place
at  Montgomery's  hill,  about  four  miles  from  the
city,  7  Dec.,  1837.  when,  after  some  skirmishing,  in
which  several  lives  were  lost,  the  insurgents  fled,
and  took  up  a  position  on  Navy  island,  in  Niagara
river.  Here  they  were  re-enforced  by  500  Ameri
can  sympathizers,  and  Mackenzie  established  a
provisional  government,  offering  by  proclamation,
in  the  name  of  the  new  government,  300  acres  of
land  and  $100  to  all  volunteers  to  the  army  on
Navy  island,  and  a  reward  of  £500  for  the  appre
hension  of  Sir  Francis  Head,  the  governor-general.
Navy  island  was  now  cannonaded  by  a  force  of
royalists,  and  this  and  the  opposition  of  Gen.  Win-
field  Scott,  of  the  U.  S.  army,  forced  the  insurgents
to  break  up  their  camp.  Mackenzie  was  taken
prisoner,  and  sentenced  to  twelve  months'  confine
ment  in  Rochester  jail.  On  being  set  at  liberty,  he
found  employment  on  the  press  of  the  United
States,  and  was  for  five  or  six  years  a  contributor
to  the  "  New  York  Tribune."  During  that  period
he  published  some  political  pamphlets,  one  of
which,  "  Sketches  of  William  L.  Marcy,  Jacob  Bar
ker,  and  Others  "  (1845),  was  compiled  from  papers
that  he  found  in  the  custom-house,  where  he  held
a  clerkship  for  a  short  time.  On  the  proclamation
of  amnesty  in  1849,  he  returned  to  Canada,  and
in  1850,  as  an  opponent  of  George  Brown,  was
again  elected  to  parliament,  where  he  sat  till  1858.
From  his  retirement  almost  up  to  the  time  of  his
death  he  published  in  Toronto  "  Mackenzie's  Mes
sage,"  a  weekly  journal.  Toward  the  close  of  his
life  his  friends  raised  a  sum  to  purchase  for  him
an  annuity  and  a  homestead  near  the  city,  but,  not
withstanding  their  liberality,  he  died  in  compara
tive  poverty.  All  the  reforms  for  which  he  con
tended  so  persistently  for  years,  and  for  which  he
finally  headed  an  armed  insurrection,  have  been
since  granted.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Sketches  of
Canada  and  the  United  States "  (London,  1833).
See  "  Life  of  William  Lyon  Mackenzie,"  by  Charles
Lindsey  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1802).

McKEON,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  in
1808;  d.  in  New  York  city,  22  Nov.,  1888.  He
was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1825,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  to  practise  in
New  York  city.  He  was  a  member  of  the  lower
house  of  the  legislature  from  1832  till  1834,  and
subsequently  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo
crat,  serving  from  7  Dec.,  1835,  till  3  March,  1837,
and  from  3~1  May,  1841,  till  3  March,  1843.  He
was  appointed  district  attorney  of  the  county  of
New  York  early  in  1846,  and  the  following  year,
the  office  having  become  elective,  he  was  chosen
for  the  full  term  of  three  years.  He  was  resolute
in  the  discharge  of  his  duties,  notably  in  securing
the  conviction  of  the  notorious  malpractitioner,
Madame  Restell,  and  in  his  determined  hostility
to  criminals  of  all  classes.  After  serving  during
the  unexpired  term  of  Charles  O'Conor  as  U.  S.
district  attorney  for  the  southern  district  of  New
York,  he  resumed  the  practice  of  law  in  1858.
While  holding  the  latter  office  he  was  engaged  in
prosecuting  a  number  of  important  cases.  Among
them  were  the  attempt  to  enlist  men  to  serve  in
the  British  army  during  the  Crimean  war ;  the
seizure  of  the  filibustering  ship  "  Northern  Light,"
and  the  trial  of  Officer  Westervelt,  who  had  been
captured  on  board  the  "  Nightingale  "  by  govern
ment  cruisers,  that  vessel  having  in  her  hold  9GO


slaves.  Although  well  advanced  in  years,  he  was
nominated  for  district  attorney  in  the  autumn  of
1881,  and  was  elected  to  the  same  office  that  he
had  held  more  than  thirty  years  before.

MACKEY,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Charleston
S.  C.,  in  1765:  d.  there,  14  Dec.,  1831.  He  was
educated  as  a  physician  and  practised  many  years
in  his  native  city.  In  1812  he  established  there  a
morning  paper  called  "  The  Investigator,"  which
he  edited  until  1817,  when  it  changed  hands  and
became  "  The  Southern  Patriot  and  Advertiser."
During  the  remainder  of  his  life  he  devoted  him
self  to  teaching  and  published  "  The  American
Teacher's  Assistant  and  Self-Instructor's  Guide,
containing  all  the  Rules  of  Arithmetic  properly
Explained,  etc."  (Charleston,  1826).  This  was  the
most  comprehensive  work  on  arithmetic  that  had
then  been  published  in  this  country. — His  son,
Albert  Gallatin,  writer  on  Freemasonry,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C.,  12  March,  1807;  d.  in  Fortress
Monroe,  Va.,  20  June.  1881,  obtained  by  teaching
the  means  of  studying  medicine,  and  was  gradu
ated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  College  of
South  Carolina  in  1832.  He  settled  in  Charleston,
and  was  in  1838  elected  demonstrator  of  anatomy
in  that  institution,  but  in  1844  he  abandoned  the
practice  of  his  profession,  and  divided  his  time
between  miscellaneous  writing  and  the  study  of
Freemasonry.  After  being  connected  with  several
Charleston  journals,  he  established  in  1849  "  The
Southern  and  Western  Masonic  Miscellany,"  a  week
ly  magazine,  which  he  maintained  for  the  follow
ing  three  years  almost  entirely  with  his  own  con
tributions.  In  1858-'60  he  conducted  a  "  Quarter
ly,"  which  he  devoted  to  the  same  interests.  He
acquired  the  Greek,  Latin,  Hebrew,  and  continental
languages  almost  unaided,  and  lectured  frequently
on  the  intellectual  and  moral  development  of  the
middle  ages.  Subsequently  he  turned  his  atten
tion  exclusively  to  the  investigation  of  abstruse
symbolism,  and  to  cabalistic  and  Talmudic  re
searches.  Besides  contributing  frequently  to  peri
odicals,  he  published  "  A  Lexicon  of  Freemasonry  "
(New  York,  1845;  3d  ed.,  enlarged  and  improved,
Philadelphia,  1855) ;  "  The  Mystic  Tie  "  (Charles
ton,  1849);  "Book  of  the  Chapter"  (New  York,
1858) ;  "  A  History  of  Freemasonry  in  South  Caro
lina"  (1861);  "A  Manual  of  the  Lodge"  (1862):
44  Cryptic  Masonry "  and  "  Masonic  Ritualist  "
(1867);  "Symbolism  of  Freemasonry"  and  "A
Text-Book  of  Masonic  Jurisprudence"  (1869) ;  and
44  Masonic  Parliamentary  Law  "  (1875).  His  largest
and  most  important  contribution  to  masonic  litera
ture,  however,  is  the  "  Encyclopaedia  of  Freema
sonry"  (1874),  the  second  edition  of  which,  pub
lished  after  his  death,  contains  an  extended  bio
graphical  sketch  of  the  author.  These  works  are
considered  authoritative,  and  the  majority  of  them
have  passed  through  many  editions  both  in  this
country  and  in  England.

MACKIE,  John  Milton,  author,  b.  in  W^are-
ham,  Plymouth  co.,  Mass.,  19  Dec.,  1813.  He  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1832,  and  studied  at  the
University  of  Berlin,  Germany,  in  1833-'4.  On  his
return  to  this  country  he  was  tutor  from  1835  till
1838  in  the  former  institution.  Besides  contribut
ing  to  the  "  North  American,"  "  American  Whig,"
and  "Christian"  reviews  chiefly  papers  relating  to
German  history  and  literature.  Mr.  Mackie  has  pub
lished  "  Life  of  Godfrey  Wrilliam  von  Leibnitz  "
(Boston,  1845);  and  "Life  of  Samuel  Gorton"  in
Sparks's  "  American  Biography  "  (1848) ;  "  Cosas  de
Espaiia,  or  Going  to  Madrid  via  Barcelona  "  (New
York,  1848);  "Life  of  Schamyl,  the  Circassian
Chief"  (1856);  '4Life  of  Tai-Pin'g-Wang,  Chief  of


136


MACKIE


the  Chinese  Insurrection  "  (1857) ;  and  "  From  Cape
Cod  to  Dixie  and  the  Tropics  "  (1804).

MACKIE,  Josias,  clergyman,  b.  in  County
Donegal.  Ireland  :  d.  in  Virginia  in  November,  171(5.
He  was  one  of  the  earliest  Presbyterian  ministers
that  came  to  this  country.  The  year  of  his  ar
rival  here  is  unknown,  but  the  earliest  notice  that
refers  to  him  bears  the  date  22  June,  1692.  His
first  charge  appears  to  have  been  on  Elizabeth
river,  Va.,  where  he  probably  became  the  successor
of  Francis  Mackemie,  the  first  regular  Presby
terian  clergyman  that  came  to  the  colonies.  He
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1G92,  and  selected  three
different  places  for  public  worship,  many  miles
apart,  on  Elizabeth  river;  these  were  in  the  East
ern  branch,  in  Tanner's  creek  precinct,  and  in  the
Western  branch,  to  which  was  added,  in  169G,  the
Southern  branch.  Here,  with  the  care  of  a  farm
and  store,  he  found  time  to  preach,  but  of  his  la
bors  no  record  has  been  preserved.

McKIM,  James  Miller,  reformer,  b.  in  Car
lisle,  Pa.,  14  Nov.,  1810 ;  d.  in  West  Orange,  N.  J.,  13
June,  1874.  He  studied  at  Dickinson  and  Prince
ton  colleges,  and  in  1835  was  ordained  pastor  of
a  Presbyterian  church  at  Womelsdorf,  Pa.  A  few
years  before  this  the  perusal  of  a  copy  of  Garri
son's  "  Thoughts  on  Colonization  "  had  made  him
an  Abolitionist.  He  was  a  member  of  the  conven
tion  that  formed  the  American  anti-slavery  society,
and  in  October,  1830,  left  the  pulpit  to  accept  a
lecturing  agency  under  its  auspices.  He  delivered
addresses  throughout  Pennsylvania,  although  often
subjected  to  obloquy,  and  even  danger  from  per
sonal  violence.  In  1840  he  removed  to  Philadel
phia,  and  became  the  publishing  agent  of  the
Pennsylvania  anti-slavery  society.  His  office  was
subsequently  changed  to  that  of  corresponding
secretary,  in  which  capacity  he  acted  for  a  quar
ter  of  a  century  as  general  manager  of  the  affairs
of  the  society,  "taking  an  active  part  in  national
as  well  as  local  anti-slavery  work.  Mr.  McKim's
labors  frequently  brought  him  in  contact  with  the
operations  of  the  "  underground  railroad,"  and  he
was  often  connected  with  the  slave  cases  that  came
before  the  courts,  especially  after  the  passage  of
tlie  fugitive-slave  law  of  1850.  In  the  winter  of
1862,  immediately  after  the  capture  of  Port  Royal,
he  was  instrumental  in  calling  a  public  meeting  of
the  citizens  of  Philadelphia  to  consider  and  pro
vide  for  the  wants  of  the  10,000  slaves  that  had  been
suddenly  liberated.  One  of  the  results  of  this
meeting  was  the  organization  of  the  Philadelphia
Port  Royal  relief  committee.  He  afterward  be
came  an  earnest  advocate  of  the  enlistment  of
colored  troops,  and  as  a  member  of  the  Union
league  aided  in  the  establishment  of  Camp  William
Penn,  and  the  recruiting  of  eleven  regiments.  In
November,  1863,  the  Port  Royal  relief  committee
was  enlarged  into  the  Pennsylvania  freedman's  re
lief  association,  and  Mr.  McKim  was  made  its  cor
responding  secretary.  In  this  capacity  he  travelled
extensively,  and  labored  diligently  to  establish
schools  at  the  south.  He  was  connected  from
1865  till  1869  with  the  American  freedman's  union
commission,  and  used  every  effort  to  promote
general  and  impartial  education  at  the  south.  In
July,  1869,  the  commission  having  accomplished
all  that  seemed  possible  at  the  time,  it  decided
unanimously,  on  Mr.  McKim's  motion,  to  disband.
His  health  having  meantime  become  greatly  im-

? aired,  he  soon  afterward  retired  from  public  life.
11 1865  he  assisted  in  founding  the  New  York  "  Na
tion." — His  son.  Charles  Pollen,  architect,  b.  in
Chester  county,  Pa.,  24  Aug.,  1847.  studied  at  the
scientific  school  of  Harvard  in  1866-'7,  and  then


McKIM


spent  three  years  in  the  architectural  course  at  tha
School  of  fine  arts  in  Paris.  On  his  return  to  the
United  States  he  settled  in  New  York,  and,  in  as
sociation  with  William  R.  Mead  and  Stanford
White,  formed  the  firm  whose  work  has  taken  part
in  the  recent  development  of  architecture  in  this
country.  The  variety  of  work  executed  by  this
firm  has  been  very  great,  but  their  main  tendency
has  been  to  produce  buildings  whose  original  influ
ence  has  been  derived  from  the  purest  styles  of
classic  architecture.  Among  their  best  produc
tions  in  country  work  are  the  cottages  erected  in
Newport,  Lenox,  and  other  summer  resorts,  nota
bly  the  house  at  Mamaroneck,  N.  Y.,  that  is  in
the  style  of  a  French  farm-house,  having  points  of
resemblance  to  tiie  half-timbered  work  oi  England.
Their  houses  at  Newport  are  typical  of  a  style  that
is  peculiar  to  themselves.  Among  their  city  resi
dences  the  Tiffany  house  on  Madison  avenue,  in  New
York  city,  which  is  Rhenish  in  style,  with  details


leaning  toward  the  Italian,  is  pronounced  by  some
critics  to  be  the  finest  piece  of  architecture  in  the
New  World.  The  Villard  block  of  houses  on  Madi
son  avenue,  behind  St.  Patrick's  cathedral,  designed
in  the  spirit  of  classic  Italian  architecture  of  the
16th  century,  is  the  most  beautiful  specimen  of  that
style  in  New  York  city.  Notable  among  their  coun
try  buildings  of  a  public  character  are  the  casinos
at  Newport  and  Narragansett  Pier,  and  the  Music
hall  in  Short  Hills,  N.  J.  They  have  also  built  St.
Paul's  church  in  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  and  St.  Peter's
in  Morristovvn,  N.  J.,  which  are  characterized  by
simple  dignity  and  beauty.  Their  large  business
edifices  include  that  of  the  American  safe  deposit
company  on  the  corner  of  42d  street  and  Fifth
avenue,  in  the  style  of  the  Italian  renaissance,  and
the  Goelet  building  on  the  corner  of  20th  street
and  Broadway,  New  York  city,  which  is  likewise
Italian  in  character;  and  also  the  two  large  office
buildings  of  the  New  York  life  insurance  company
in  Omaha  and  Kansas  City.  The  Algonquin  club
house  of  Boston  and  the  Freundschaft  club-house
of  New  York  are  at  present  in  course  of  construc
tion  under  their  superintendence,  and  the  accepted
designs  for  the  structure  to  be  known  as  the  Madi
son  Square  garden,  in  New  York  city,  were  fur
nished  by  them,  as  well  as  those  for  the  Boston
public  library.  The  latter,  shown  in  the  above  il
lustration,  is  now7  (1888)  in  course  of  construction.
McKIM,  Robert,  philanthropist,  b.  in  County
Tyrone,  Ireland,  24  May,  1816;  d.  in  Madison,
Ind.,  9  May,  1887.  After  completing  his  appren
ticeship  as  a  stone-mason  he  emigrated  to  the
United  States,  worked  for  a  time  at  his  trade  in
Philadelphia,  and  removed  to  Madison,  Ind.,  in
1837.  There  he  continued  to  ply  his  vocation  un
til  1855,  when  he  established  himself  in  the  coal
business.  Fortunate  investments  in  real  estate  en
abled  him  to  become  interested  in  manufacturing


McKINLEY


MACKINTOSH


137


enterprises,  and  he  soon  acquired  wealth.  Mr.
McKiin  had  always  been  a  lover  of  astronomical
studies,  and  when  he  grew  rich  he  purchased  for
his  own  use  one  of  the  best  telescopes  in  the
United  States,  and  mounted  it  in  an  observatory
that  he  built  adjoining  his  residence.  He  also
presented  to  the  observatory  of  De  Pauw  univer
sity  a  complete  astronomical  outfit  at  a  cost  of  over
$10.000,  and  public  charities  and  institutions  of
learning  also  benefited  by  his  bequests.

McKINLEY,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Culpeper
county,  Va.,  1  May,  1780;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  19
•July,  1852.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar,'  and  began  to  practise  at  Louisville,  Ky.,  but
subsequently  removed  to  Huntsville,  Ala.,  where
he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  state  house  of  rep
resentatives.  He  was  afterward  elected  U.  S.  sena
tor  from  Alabama  as  a  Jackson  Democrat  in  place
of  Henry  Chambers,  deceased,  and  served  from  21
Dec.,  1826,  till  3  March,  1831.  Having  removed
to  Florence  during  his  senatorial  term,  he  was,  on
its  conclusion,  elected  from  the  latter  place  a  mem
ber  of  the  23d  congress,  serving  from  2  Dec.,  1833,
till  3  March,  1835.  On  22  April,  1837.  he  was  ap
pointed  by  President  Van  Buren  a  justice  of  the
United  States  supreme  court,  which  office  he  held
until  the  time  of  his  death.

McKINLY,  John,  governor  of  Delaware,  b.  in
Ireland.  24  Feb.,  1724 ;  d.  in  Wilmington,  Del.,  31
Aug.,  1796.  He  studied  medicine,  emigrated  to
this  country,  and  began  practice  in  Wilmington
early  in  life,  soon  attaining  eminence  in  his  pro
fession.  He  filled  several  important  offices,  and  in
1777  was  elected  the  first  governor  of  Delaware.
On  12  Sept.,  the  night  after  the  battle  of  the
Brandywine,  a  party  of  British  soldiers  were  sent
to  Wilmington  to  seize  Gov.  McKinly,  and  secure
such  plunder  as  might  fall  in  their  way.  They
took  the  governor  from  his  bed,  and,  taking  pos
session  of  a  shallop  that  was  lying  in  the  stream
laden  with  plunder,  together  with  the  public  rec
ords  of  the  county,  plate,  and  jewels,  returned  to
camp.  The  invaders  were  marching  on  Philadel
phia,  and  all  lower  Pennsylvania  and  Delaware  were
in  a  state  of  panic.  In  August,  1778,  McKinly  was
allowed  to  return  on  parole  to  Wilmington,  where
he  remained  until  the  end  of  the  war.

McKINNEY,  Mordecai,  lawyer,  b.  near  Car
lisle,  Pa.,  about  1796;  d.  in  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  17
Dec.,  1867.  He  was  graduated  at  Dickinson  col
lege  in  1814,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1817,  and  practised  in  Harrisburg.  In  1821  he
was  appointed  deputy  attorney-general  for  Miami
county,  and  in  1827  he  became  associate  judge  of
Dauphin  county.  He  afterward  gave  his  attention
to  the  compilation  of  works  on  law.  and  published
"  The  Pennsylvania  Justice  of  the  Peace  "  (2  vols.,
Harrisburg.  1839);  "The  United  States  Constitu
tional  Manual"  (1845);  "Our  Government:  A
Manual  for  Popular  Use"  (Philadelphia,  1856);
'•The  American  Magistrate  and  Civil  Officer"
(1850);  "Pennsylvania  Tax  Laws"  (Harrisburg.
1850) ;  and  "  A  Digest  of  the  Laws  of  Pennsylvania
relative  to  Banks  and  Bankers"  (1854).

McKINXON,  Colin  F.,  Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Canada  in  1810;  d.  in  Antigonish,  Nova  Sco
tia,  26  Sept.,  1879.  His  father,  John,  emigrated
to  Nova  Scotia  from  Inverness-shire,  Scotland.
The  son  studied  theology  in  the  College  of  the
propaganda,  Rome,  and  after  his  ordination  was
engaged  in  missionary  work  in  Nova  Scotia.  He
was  nominated  bishop  of  Arichat,  11  Nov.,  1851,
and  consecrated  early  in  1852.  On  account  of  age
and  ill  health  he  resigned  his  see  on  17  July,  1877,
and  was  made  archbishop  of  Amida  in  part  thus


inftdelium.—His  elder  brother.  John,  b.  in  Dor
chester,  Antigonish,  N.  S.,  29  Nov.,  1808,  was  agri
cultural  commissioner,  and  a  member  of  the  execu
tive  council  of  Nova  Scotia,  in  1857-'60  and  1863-'7,
and  again  from  11  May,  1875,  till  15  Oct.,  1878.

McKINSTRY,  Janies  Paterson,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Spencertown,  Columbia  co.,  N.  Y.,  9  Feb.,
1807;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  11  Feb.,  1873.  He  en
tered  the  navy  as  midshipman,  1  Feb.,  1826,  and
became  lieutenant,  9  Feb.,  1837,  and  commanded
the  mail-steamer  '"Georgia"  in  1854-'5.  On  14
Sept.,  1855,  he  was  appointed  commander,  was
lighthouse-inspector  in  1858-'9,  and  assigned  to
the  "Dakota,"  of  the  blockading  squadron,  in

1861.  He was commissioned captain, 16 July,

1862,  had  charge  of  the  steam  sloop  "  Mononga-
hela,"  of  the  Western  Gulf  blockading  squadron,
and  was  present  at  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson,
where  he  was  severely  injured,  being  thrown  with
violence  on the  deck  when  the  bridge  on  which
he  was  standing  was  shot  away. During  the  re
mainder  of  the  civil  war  he  was  forced  to  remain
inactive. On  25  July,  1866,  he  was  appointed  com
modore,  and  after  serving  as  commandant  of  the
naval  station  in  Sackett's  Harbor,  N.  Y.,  he  was  re
tired  on  9  Feb.,  1869.

McKIXSTRY,  Justus,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
about  1821.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili
tary  academy  in  1838  and  assigned  to  the  2d  in
fantry.  He  became  1st  lieutenant,  18  April,  1841,
and  assistant  quartermaster  with  the  rank  of  cap
tain  on  3  March,  1847,  and  led  a  company  of  vol
unteers  at  Contreras  and  Churubusco,  where  he
was  brevetted  major  for  gallantry  on  20  Aug.,
1847.  He  participated  in  the  battle  of  Chapulte-
pec,  and  on  12  Jan.,  1848,  became  captain,  which
post  he  vacated  and  served  on  quartermaster  duty
with  the  commissioners  that  were  running  the
boundary-lines  between  the  United  States  and
Mexico  in  1849-'50,  and  in  California  in  1850-'5.
He  became  quartermaster  with  the  rank  of  major
on  3  Aug.,  1861,  and  was  stationed  at  St.  Louis  and
attached  to  the  staff  of  Gen.  John  C.  Fremont.
He  combined  the  duties  of  provost-marshal  with
those  of  quartermaster  of  the  Department  of  the
West,  on  2  Sept.,  1861,  was  appointed  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  and  commanded  a  division
on  Gen.  Fremont's  march  to  Springfield.  He  was
accused  of  dishonesty  in  his  transactions  as  quar
termaster,  and  was  arrested  on  11  Nov.,  1861,  by
Gen.  Hunter,  the  successor  of  Gen.  Fremont,  and
ordered  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  he  was  closely
confined  in  the  arsenal.  The  rigor  of  his  impris"-
onment  was  mitigated  on  28  Feb.,  1862.  and  in
May  he  was  released  on  parole,  but  required  to  re
main  in  St.  Louis.  In  October,  1862,  he  was  tried
by  court-martial,  and  on  28  Jan.,  1863,  dismissed
from  the  army  for  neglect  and  violation  of  duty.
In  1864-'7  he  was  a  stock-broker  in  New  York,  and
in  the  latter  year  became  a  land-agent  in  Rolla,  Mo.

MACKINTOSH,  Charles  Herbert,  Canadian
journalist,  b.  in  London,  Ont.,  in  1843.  He  was
educated  at  Gait  grammar-school  and  at  Caradock
academy  and  studied  law,  but  left  it  for  journal
ism.  In  1860,  on  the  visit  of  the  Prince  of  Wales
to  Canada,  he  wrote  the  address  of  welcome.  He
was  afterward  connected  with  newspapers  in  Lon
don  and  Hamilton,  Ont.,  and  in  1865  began  pub
lishing  the  Strathroy  "  Dispatch."  which  he  sold
in  1874.  Mr.  Mackintosh  founded  the  Parkhill
"  Gazette "  in  1871,  was  managing  editor  of  the
Chicago  "Journal  of  Commerce"  in  1873,  and  in
1874  became  editor  of  the  Ottawa  "  Daily  Citizen."
He  was  mayor  of  Ottawa  in  1879-'81,  chairman  of
the  Dominion  exhibition  in  1879,  and  president  of


138


MCKNIGHT


McLANE


the  Agricultural  association  in  1881.  He  was  an
unsuccessful  candidate  for  the  legislature  of  On
tario  in  1871,  but  was  elected  to  the  Dominion
parliament  for  the  city  of  Ottawa  in  1882.  He  is
president  of  the  Ottawa  Colonization  railway,  of
the  Ottawa  and  Gatineau  Valley  railway,  and  of
the  "Citizen"  printing  and  publishing  company.
He  wrote  "The  Chicago  Fire"  (1871);  "The  Fi
nancial  Panic  in  the  United  States  and  its  Causes  "
(1873) ;  a  prize  poem  for  the  O'Connell  centennial,
for  which  he  was  awarded  a  gold  and  silver  medal
(1875);  and  speeches  in  pamphlet-form,  in  which
he  advocates  a  protective  tariff  (1876- '8);  and  he
edited  the  "  Canadian  Parliamentary  Companion  "
(Ottawa,  1877-82).

McKNIGHT,  Alexander,  Canadian  educator,
b.  in  Dalmellington,  Ayrshire,  Scotland,  about
1823.  After  taking  a  four  years'  course  in  the
University  of  Glasgow,  he  entered  New  college,
Edinburgh,  and  from  1845  till  1849  studied  theol
ogy.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  Free  church
presbytery  in  1850,  and  in  January,  1855,  was  ap
pointed,  by  the  colonial  committee  of  the  church,
teacher  of 'Hebrew  at  Halifax  free  college.  In  1857
Mr.  McKnight  became  pastor  of  St.  James's  church,
Dartmouth,  Nova  Scotia,  and  until  18(58  acted  as
minister  and  professor.  In  the  same  year  he  be
came  professor  of  exegetics  in  addition  to  Hebrew,
in  1871  the  chair  of  systematic  theology  was  given
to  him.  and  in  1877  the  degree  of  D.  D.  was  con
ferred  upon  him.  In  1878,  after  the  union  of  all
the  Presbyterian  churches  in  Canada,  Dr.  Mc
Knight  was  appointed  principal  of  the  Presby
terian  college  of  the  maritime  provinces  at  Hali
fax.  He  was  moderator  of  the  general  assembly
of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  1885-'6.

McKNIGHT,  Charles,  surgeon,  b.  in  Cran-
bury,  N.  J.,  10  Oct.,  1750;  d.  in  New  York,  10
Nov.,  1791.  His  grandfather,  a  Presbyterian  min
ister,  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1740  and  settled
in  New  Jersey.  His  father  was  also  a  minister,
and  by  opposing  the  crown  made  enemies  of  the
Tories,  who  burned  his  church  in  Middletown
Point  in  1777  and  threw  him  in  prison,  where  he
died  in  1778.  The  son,  after  graduation  at  Prince
ton  in  1771,  studied  medicine  with  Dr.  William
Shippen,  entered  the  Revolutionary  army,  and  be
came  senior  surgeon  of  the  Flying  hospital  of  the
middle  department  on  11  April,  1777.  At  one
time  he  acted  as  the  chief  physician  and  surgeon-
general  in  command  of  the  huts  or  hospital  at  the
cantonments  on  Hudson  river  near  New  Windsor.
After  the  close  of  the  war  he  settled  in  New  York
city,  married  the  daughter  of  Gen.  John  Morin
Scott,  and  was  eminent  as  a  surgeon.  From  1785
till  his  death  he  was  professor  of  anatomy  at  Co
lumbia.  Dr.  McKnight  published  various  papers
on  medical  and  surgical  subjects.

McKNIGHT,  George,  poet,  b.  in  Sterling,  Ca-
yuga  co.,  N.  Y.,  14  March.  1840.  He  was  graduated
at  Genesee  college,  Lima,  N.  Y.,  in  I860,  received
the  degree  of  M.  D.  from  Buffalo  medical  college
in  1864,  and  since  that  date  has  practised  medicine
in  Sterling.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Firm  Ground  "
(Sterling,  1877).  a  collection  of  religious  sonnets,
revised  and  reissued  with  the  title  "  Life  and
Faith  "  (New  York,  1878).

McKNIGHT,  Harvey  Washington,  clergy
man,  b.  in  McKnightstown,  Adams  co.,  Pa.,  "3
April,  1843.  After  serving  in  the  civil  war  as
lieutenant  of  Pennsylvania  volunteers  and  then  as
adjutant  of  a  militia  regiment,  he  was  graduated
at  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettysburg,  in  1865,  and
at  the  theological  seminary  there  in  1867,  and  in
the  latter  year  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of


the  Lutheran  church,  in  which  he  has  since  con
tinued.  After  holding  pastorates  at  Newville,  Pa.,
in  1867-'70.  Easton,  Pa.,  in  1872-'80,  and  Cincin
nati,  Ohio,  in  1880-'4,  he  was  elected  in  the  last-
named  year  president  of  Pennsylvania  college,
which  post  he  now  (1888)  fills,  'in  1880  he  re
ceived  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Monmouth  col
lege.  111.  lie  has  published  an  historical  addre^
at"  the  semi-centennial  of  Pennsylvania  college
(Gettysburg,  1882),  and  his  inaugural  address  us
president  of  Pennsylvania  college  (1884).

McLACHLAN,  "Alexander,  poet,  b.  in  John-
stone,  Renfrewshire,  Scotland,  12  Aug.,  1818.  His
father,  Charles  McLachlan,  a  mechanic  and  the
author  of  verses,  purchased  land  in  Canada  in
1820,  which  he  partially  cleared,  but  returned  to
Scotland  and  died  there.  The  son  aided  in  sup
porting  the  family  by  working  in  a  cotton-factory,
after  which  he  became  a  tailor's  apprentice,  but
devoted  his  leisure  to  study.  In  1841  he  removed
to  Canada,  and  in  1862  he  was  sent  by  the  Cana
dian  government  to  Scotland  to  represent  the  ad
vantages  of  emigration.  In  1874  he  again  visited
Scotland  and  delivered  lectures  on  Canadian  life
and  literary  subjects.  His  aim  has  been  to  amelio
rate  the  condition  of  the  working  classes,  and  to
be  an  exponent  of  their  desires  and  feelings.  He
has  also  lectured  in  the  United  States  and  Can
ada,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Poems,  chiefly  in  the
Scottish  Dialect  "  (1855) ;  "  Lyrics  "  (1858) ;  "  The
Emigrant  and  other  Poems  "  (1861) ;  and  "  Poems
and  Songs "  (1874).  See  "  The  Poets  and  Poetry
of  Scotland,"  edited  by  Gen.  James  Grant  Wilsoii
(New  York,  1876).

McLANAHAN,  James  Xavier,  lawyer,  b.  near
Greencastle,  Franklin  co.,  Pa.,  in  1809  ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  16  Dec..  1861.  He  was  graduated  at
Dickinson  college,  Carlisle,  Pa.,  in  1826,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  to  prac
tise  in  Chambersburg,  Pa.  In  1841  he  served  in
the  Pennsylvania  legislature,  and  he  was  afterward
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  holding  his
seat  from  3  Dec.,  1849,  till  3  March,  1853.  As
chairman  of  the  judiciary  committee  he  projected
several  reforms  that  met  with  the  concurrence  of
the  house  and  the  nation.

McLANDBURGH,  Florence,  author,  b.  in
Chillicothe,  Ohio,  22  April,  1850.  In  1863  she  re
moved  with  her  family  to  Chicago,  where  she  has
since  resided.  She  was  educated  by  her  brother
John,  a  critic  and  essayist,  and  in  1868  began  to
write  imaginative  sketches  and  tales.  Several
brilliant  short  stories  that  she  contributed  to  pe
riodicals  gave  her  a  reputation,  and  she  afterward
published  a  collection  of  them  in  book-form,  under
the  title  of  "  The  Automaton  Ear  "  (Chicago,  1876).
But  impaired  health  subsequently  compelled  her
to  abandon  literary  work,  and  she  has  spent  sev
eral  years  in  travelling.

McLANE,  Allan,  soldier  and  jurist,  b.  8  Aug.,
1746;  d.  in  Wilmington,  Del.,  22  May,  1829.  He
removed  to  Kent  county,  Del.,  in  1774,  and  took  an
early  and  active  part  in  the  American  Revolution.
He  was  a  volunteer  in  the  Great  Bridge  fight,  near
Norfolk,  Va.,  in  1775,  where  the  Virginia  militia  re
pelled  an  assault  of  600  British  and  Tories  with  a  loss
of  55  to  the  enemy  in  killed  and  wounded,  only  one
of  the  patriots  being  injured.  Afterward  he  joined
Rodney's  Delaware  regiment  as  lieutenant,  sacrific
ing  his  valuable  property  in  Philadelphia  when  that
city  was  occupied  by  the  British.  He  fought  gal
lantly  at  the  battles  of  Long  Island,  White  Plains,
Princeton,  Monmouth,  and  Yorktown,  and  retired
from  the  army  at  the  close  of  the  war  with  the  rank
of  colonel.  In  a  personal  combat  with  three  Brit-


McLAXE


MCLAREN


139


ish  dragoons  near  Frankford,  Pa.,  he  killed  one,
wounded  another,  and  compelled  the  third  to  retire.
On  his  return  to  civil  life  he  was  first  made  judge

of  the  court  of  ap
peals  of  Delaware.
In  1790  Washing
ton  appointed  him
U.  S.  marshal  of
that  state,  which
post  he  held  until
1798.  In  1808  Jef
ferson  appointed
him  collector  of
the  port  of  Wil
mington,  Del.,  in
which  office  he  re
mained  until  his
death,  having  been
reappointed  under
three  different  ad-
ministrations,  irre-
spective  of  party.
He  was  also  a  mem
ber  and  speaker  of  the  legislature. — His  son,  Louis,
statesman,  b.  in  Smyrna,  Del.,  28  May,  1786;  d.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  7  Oct.,  1857,  entered  the  U.  S.  navy
as  midshipman  at  the  age  of  twelve  and  cruised  one
year  in  the  "  Philadelphia  "  under  Com.  Stephen
Decatur.  In  1801  he  left  the  navy  and  entered
Newark  college,  Del.,  afterward  studying  law  under
James  A.  Bayard,  and  being  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1807,  when  he  began  to  practise  in  Smyrna.  He
served  as  a  volunteer  in  Caesar  A.  Rodney's  com
pany  in  the  defence  of  Baltimore  against  the  threat
ened  attack  of  the  British  in  1814,  and  was  after
ward  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving
from  1  Dec.,  1817,  till  3  March,  1827,  and  voting
against  the  admission  of  slavery  into  Missouri  and
the  territories.  From  3  Dec.,  '1827,  till  16  April,
1829,  he  served  as  U.  S.  senator,  resigning  to  accept
the  appointment  of  minister  to  England,  which  post
he  held  from  18  April,  1829,  till  6  July,  1831,  when
he  resigned  to  become  secretary  of  the  treasury.
He  held  this  office  from  8  Aug.,"  1831,  till  29  May,
1833,  and  he  was  then  transferred  to  the  depart
ment  of  state  in  consequence  of  his  refusal  to  sanc
tion  the  removal  of  the  deposits  from  the  Bank  of
the  United  States.  In  1834  he  retired  from  political
life  to  his  estate  in  Cecil  county,  Md.  From  1837
till  1847  he  was  president  of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio
railroad  company,  whose  affairs  he  managed  with
vigor  and  success.  He  was  again  appointed  minis
ter  to  England  during  the  Oregon  negotiations,  but
resigned  after  their  settlement,  serving  from  16
June,  1845,  till  18  Aug.,  1846.  His  last  public  service
was  as  a  delegate  to  the  Maryland  constitutional
convention  of  1850-'!. — Louis's  eldest  son,  Robert
Milliaran,  diplomatist,  b.  in  Wilmington.  Del.,  23
June,  1815,  after  attending  a  private  school  in  his
native  city  and  St.  Mary's  college,  Baltimore,  was
placed  by  his  father  in  the  College  Bourbon,  Paris.
He  afterward  entered  the  U.  S.  military  academy,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1837,  and  assigned  to
the  1st  artillery.  He  joined  his  regiment  the  same
summer  in  Florida,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the
Seminole  war.  The  next  year  he  joined  Gen.  Win-
field  Scott  in  the  Cherokee  country,  Georgia,  and
after  another  period  of  service  in  Florida,  under
Gen.  Taylor,  he  was  ordei'ed  to  join  Capt.  Augustus
Canfield,  in  the  autumn  of  1839,  in  a  military  survey
of  the  northern  lakes,  and  in  1841  he  was  sent  to
Europe  for  the  purpose  of  examining  the  system  of
dikes  and  drainage  in  Holland  and  Italy.  Before
going  to  Europe  he  had  studied  law.  and  had  been
admitted  to  the  bar  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  and


in  1843  he  resigned  his  commission  in  the  army  and
began  the  practice  of  his  profession.  He  took  an
immediate  and  commanding  position  as  a  public
speaker  in  Maryland,  and  in  the  exciting  presi
dential  campaign  of  1844  made  extraordinary  ef
forts  to  carry  the  state  for  the  Democrats.  The
next  year  he  was  elected  to  congress,  and  he  was  re-
elected  in  1847.  He  supported  the  Mexican-war
policy  of  Folk's  administration,  and  in  1849  was
again  elected  to  congress  by  an  increased  majority.
At  the  expiration  of  his  third  successive  term  he
went  to  California,  where  he  was  actively  engaged
in  professional  business  until  the  summer  of  1852.
In  the  autumn  of  that  year  he  was  elected  one  of
the  Maryland  presidential  electors,  and  the  next
year  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  commissioner  to  China
with  the  power  of  a  minister  plenipotentiary,  being
at  the  same  time  accredited  to  Japan.  Siam.  Corea,
and  Cochin-China.  He  arrived  at  Hong  Kong  in
April,  1854,  having  an  important  naval  force  under
his  control.  The  object  of  his  mission  being  ac
complished, he  requested  to  be  recalled, and  returned
home  early  in  1856.  The  same  year  he  was  a  Mary
land  delegate  to  the  National  Democratic  conven
tion  that  nominated  James  Buchanan  for  the
presidency.  In  1859  he  was  appointed  minister  to
Mexico,  and  negotiated  a  treaty  for  the  protection
of  the  lives  and  property  of  American  citizens.
After  the  secession  of  the  cotton  states  he  resigned,
and,  returning  to  Baltimore,  took  an  active  part  in
the  public  discussions  of  the  winter  of  1861.  When
the  Maryland  legislature  met  in  extra  session,  in
May.  1861,  he  was  one  of  a  committee  to  confer
with  President  Lincoln  in  reference  to  what  were
regarded  as  the  unconstitutional  proceedings  of  the
U.  S.  authorities  within  the  state.  Upon  the  report
of  this  commission,  the  legislature  resolved  that
it  was  inexpedient  for  the  state  to  secede.  He  re
tired  from  public  life  from  that  time,  and  was  en
gaged  for  several  years  as  counsel  for  the  WTestern
Pacific  railroad,  his  duties  requiring  him  to  spend
his  time  between  New
York.  Paris,  and  San
Francisco.  In  1876  he
was  one  of  the  Mary
land  delegates  to  the
National  Democratic
convention  tha^  nom
inated  Samuel  J.  Til-
den  for  the  presi
dency,  and  the  next
year  he  was  elected  a
Maryland  state  sena
tor  for  four  years,
but  in  1878  he  was
elected  to  the  house
of  representatives,
and  re  -  elected  in
1880.  In  1883  he  was
elected  governor  of
Maryland,  but  he  re
signed  in  1885,  upon  being  appointed  minister  to
France  by  President  Cleveland.

McLAREN,  Donald  Campbell,  clergyman,  b.
in  New  York  city,  3  Oct.,  1794 ;  d.  in  Geneva.  N.  Y..  7
May,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  college  in
1813,  studied  theology  under  Rev.  John  M.  Mason  in
New  York,  and  held  pastorates  in  Cambridge  and
Caledonia,  N.  Y.  He  was  moderator  of  the  general
assembly  of  the  Associate  Reformed  church  at  the
meeting  in  Pittsburg.  when  by  union  with  the  As
sociate  church  the  United  Presbyterian  church  was
formed.  Jefferson  college,  Washington,  Pa.,  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1857.  In  addition  to  pam
phlets  and  sermons  he  published  a  new  version  of


140


MACLAREN


McLAWS


the  "  Book  of  Psalms"  (Rochester,  1877).— His  son,
Robert  Neil,  soldier,  b.  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  9  April.
1828 ;  d.  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  30  July,  1886,  was  edu
cated  at  Union,  which  he  left  before  graduation,
and  went  to  Oregon,  and  subsequently  removed  to
Red  Wing,  Minn.,  in  1850,  where  he  became  a  grain-
commissioner.  In  1859-'61  he  was  a  member  of
the  Minnesota  senate.  He  removed  to  St.  Paul
about  the  beginning  of  the  Sioux  war,  for  which  he
raised  the  (5th  Minnesota  regiment,  of  which  he  was
captain.  He  became  major  and  served  in  Gen.
Henry  H.  Sibley's  expedition  across  the  north
western  plains  and  participated  in  a  similar  expe
dition  under  Gen.  Alfred  Sully  in  after  years.  He
served  in  the  civil  war,  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  for  meritorious  service  on  14
Dec.,  1865,  and  was  post -commandant  at  Fort
Snelling,  Minn.,  when  the  Indian  chiefs  Little  Six
and  Medicine  Hat  were  hanged.  After  the  war  he
became  collector  of  internal  revenue  for  Minnesota
and  U.  S.  marshal  for  that  state.  He  was  chair
man  of  the  state  central  Republican  committee
and  was  a  recognized  leader  of  that  party. — His
nephew,  William  Edward,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Geneva,  N.  Y.,  13  Dec.,  1831.  He  was  graduated
at  Washington  and  Jefferson  college,  Washing
ton,  Pa.,  in  1851,  and  for  six  years  thereafter  was
occupied  in  teaching  and  in  journalistic  work.  He
then  went  to  the  Alleghany  Presbyterian  theo
logical  seminary,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1800,
became  a  Presbyterian  minister,  and  was  a  mission
ary  to  Bogota,  South  America,  for  three  years.  On
his  return  to  the  United  States  he  continued  min
isterial  work  in  Peoria,  111.,  and  Detroit,  Mich. ;
but  having  become  involved  in  doubt  as  to  his
position  in  the  Presbyterian  ministry,  he  concluded,
after  careful  study,  to  enter  the  Protestant  Episco
pal  church.  He  was  made  deacon,  29  July,  1872,
and  ordained  priest,  20  Oct.,  1872.  Directly  after
his  ordination  he  accepted  a  call  to  Trinity  church,
Cleveland,  Ohio.  In  September,  1875,  he  was  elected
bishop  of  Illinois,  and  consecrated  in  the  cathedral
church  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  in  Chicago,  111.,
6  Dec.,  1875.  With  his  consent,  two  new  dioceses
were  formed  in  Illinois  in  1877 — those  of  Quincy
and  Springfield — and  he  retained  that  part  of  the
state  that  is  now  called  the  diocese  of  Chicago.  He
received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Racine  college
in  1873,  and  that  of  D.  C.  L.  from  the  University
of  the  south  in  1883.  During  his  episcopate,
church  work  has  been  active  and  effective,  and  the
founding  of  the  Western  theological  seminary  of
Chicago,  with  an  endowment  of  $225,000,  is  re
garded  as  an  important  aid  with  reference  to  the
future  of  the  Episcopal  church  in  the  west.  Bishop
McLaren  has  published  "  Catholic  Dogma  the
Antidote  of  Doubt  "  (Xew  York,  1884),  besides  nu
merous  sermons,  addresses,  and  poems.

MACLAREN,  John  James,  Canadian  lawyer,
b.  near  Lachute,  Quebec,  1  July,  1842.  He  was
graduated  at  Victoria  college,  Cobourg,  receiving
the  Prince  of  Wales  medal,  in  1862,  took  his  degree
in  law  at  McGill  university  in  1868,  and  in  the
same  year  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Lower  Can
ada.  He  afterward  practised  in  Montreal,  but  in
1884  removed  to  Toronto.  He  was  appointed  sec
retary  to  the  British  and  American  joint  com
mission  under  the  treaty  on  Hudson  bay  claims
against  the  United  States  in  Oregon  in  1867,  and
has  been  engaged  as  counsel  in  some  of  the  most
important  Canadian  legal  cases  since  1870.  He  has
been  since  that  year  a  member  of  the  board  of  gov
ernors  and  an  examiner  in  law  in  Victoria  univer
sity,  a  representative  fellow-in-law  in  the  corpora
tion  of  McGill  university,  and  since  1872  he  has


been  a  member  of  the  university  board  and  that  of
the  Montreal  Wesleyan  college.  He  became  a
Queen's  counsel  in  1878,  has  been  president  of  the
Reform  club,  and  was  appointed  a  member  of  the
royal  commission  on  the  Quebec  code  of  procedure
in  1887.  Mr.  Maclaren  has  been  associated  with
many  educational,  temperance,  and  other  societies,
and  is  the  author  of  "  The  Roman  Law  in  Eng
lish  Jurisprudence  "  (Toronto,  1887).

McLAUCwHLEN,  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  sol
dier,  b.  in  Chelsea,  Vt.,  8  Dec.,  1823;  d.  in  Mid-
dletown,  N.  Y.,  27  Jan..  1887.  He  enlisted  in  the
2d  U.  S.  dragoons  in  1850,  rose  to  be  sergeant,  re-
enlisted  when  his  term  of  service  expired,  and  on
27  March,  1861,  was  appointed  a  lieutenant  in  the
1st  cavalry.  He  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant  in
May,  transferred  to  the  4th  cavalry  in  August,  and
served  as  inspector-general  of  the  Army  of  Ken
tucky.  On  17  July,  1802,  he  was  commissioned
captain,  and  on  1  Oct.  was  appointed  colonel  of
the  1st  Massachusetts  volunteers.  He  was  en
gaged  at  Fredericksburg,  receiving  the  brevet  of
major  for  Chancellorsville,  won  another  brevet  at
Gettysburg,  fought  at  Locust  Grove  and  in  the
battle  of  the  Wilderness,  and  commanded  a  pro
visional  brigade  at  Spottsylvania.  In  June,  1864,
he  rejoined  his  regiment  in  front  of  Atlanta,  but
in  September  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  57th
Massachusetts  veteran  volunteers,  commanded  a
brigade  at  the  siege  of  Petersburg,  and  also  at  the
battle  of  Poplar  Grove  Church,  and  for  his  gallant
ry  in  this  engagement  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  and  assigned  to  duty  accord
ing  to  his  brevet  rank.  He  did  good  service  in
defence  of  Fort  Steedman,  receiving  the  brevet
of  colonel  in  the  U.  S.  army,  and  was  taken  pris
oner  there  and  confined  in  Libby  prison  till  the
surrender  of  Gen.  Lee.  He  was  brevetted  briga
dier-general,  U.  S.  army,  in  March,  1805,  for  gallant
conduct  in  the  field  during  the  war,  mustered  out
of  the  volunteer  service  on  10  Aug..  1865,  pro
moted  major  in  the  10th  cavalry  on  17  May,  1876,
and  placed  on  the  retired  list  on  26  June,  1882.

McLAUGHLIN,  Edward  Augustus,  poet,  b.
in  North  Stamford,  Conn.,  9  Jan..  1798;  d.  in  New
York  city,  15  Nov.,  1861.  He  followed  the  trade
of  a  printer,  but  passed  many  years  as  a  sailor  in
the  U.  S.  navy.  His  first  poems  were  published
when  he  was  sixteen  years  old,  and  during  his  voy
ages  he  was  accustomed  to  cultivate  his  faculty  for
versification.  He  published  a  volume  containing,
besides  some  graceful  shorter  pieces,  "  The  Lovers
of  the  Deep,"  a  long  poem  in  Spcncerian  stanza,
describing  the  experiences  of  two  castaways  who
formed  a  mutual  attachment  while  floating  on  a
fragment  of  wreck  (Cincinnati,  1841).

McLAWS,  Lafayette,  soldier,  b.  in  Augusta,
Ga.,  15  Jan.,  1821.  After  studying  one  year  in  the
University  of  Virginia,  he  was  appointed  to  the
U.  S.  military  academy,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1842.  He  was  stationed  for  some  time  in  In
dian  territory,  and  in  1846  joined  Gen.  Zachary
Taylor's  army  of  occupation  at  Corpus  Christi,
and  was  engaged  in  the  defence  of  Fort  Brown,
the  battle  of  Monterey,  and  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz.
His  health  failing,  he  returned  to  the  United
States  on  recruiting  duty,  and  after  the  peace  was
assistant  adjutant-general  in  the  Department  of
New  Mexico  for  two  years.  He  was  promoted  captain
of  infantry  on  24  Aug..  1851,  and  took  part  in  the
expedition  of  1858  against  the  Mormons,  and  in
the  operations  against  the  Navajo  Indians  in
1859-'00.  He  resigned  his  commission  and  offered
his  services  to  his  state  on  its  secession  from  the
Union.  After  the  organization  of  the  Confeder-


McLAWS


MACLAY


141


ate  army  he  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  10th
Georgia  regiment,  and  on  25  Sept.,  1861,  was  com
missioned as a brigadier-general. He brought
himself  to  notice  by  his  conduct  in  an  action  at  Lee's
Mill,  was  afterward  engaged  in  the  retreat  to  Rich
mond and the  bat
tle  of  Williamsburg,
and,  on  the arrival
of  the  army  at  Rich
mond was promot
ed  major-general,  23
May,  1862. His  di
vision  was  engaged
at Savage's Station
and Malvern Hill,
and  when  Gen.  John
Pope's  army  retreat
ed  it  remained  for  a
time to watch the
movements of the
National troops at
Harrison's  Landing,
but  afterward  joined
the  rest  of  the  army  near  Warrenton,  and  marched
with  it  into  Maryland. Gen.  McLaws  was  placed
in  command  of  a  corps,  and  ordered  to  march  on
Harper's  Ferrv  and  capture  Maryland  Heights. A
road  was  built  up  the  side  of  the  mountain,  by
which  cannon  were  got  to  the  summit,  and  when
they  opened  fire  Harper's  Ferry  at once  surren
dered. The  troops,  who  had  been  for  sixty  hours
under  fire  and  without  water  on  Elk  Ridge,  halted
a  few  hours  in  Harper's  Ferry,  and  then  inarched
all  night,  and  reached  Sharpsburg  when  the  troops
of  Jackson  and  Hood  were  retiring  in  disorder,
and,  driving  back  the  National troops,  restored
the  Confederate  line. At  Fredericksburg  his  men
were  posted  along  the  bank  of  the  Rappahannock,
opposite  the  city,  and  on  Marye's  Hill,  where,  from
a sunken road,  they drove "  back the National
troops. At  Chancellorsville his division  formed
the  right  wing  of  the  Confederate  force. At  Get
tysburg  his  division  formed  part  of  Gen.  James
Longstreet's  corps,  which  assaulted  and  drove  back
Gen.  Daniel  E.  Sickles's  corps  and  other  troops  in
the  second  day's  fight. At  the  siege  of  Knoxville
he  reluctantly  carried  out  Gen.  Longstreet's  order
to  assault  Fort  Saunders.  and  desisted  from  the
attack  when  he  perceived  that  success  was  impos
sible. He was  subsequently  summoned  before  a
court-martial,  which  justified  his  conduct. He  was
chief  in  command  at  Salem  Church,  where  he  de
feated  Gen.  Sedgwick's  assault. During  Gen.  Will
iam  T.  Sherman's  invasion,  McLaws  commanded
the  military  district  of  Georgia,  conducting  the
defence  of  Savannah,  and  afterward  falling  back
on the line  of the Salkehatchie, where he  at
tempted to check Gen. Sherman's northward
march  and  resisted  the  crossing  of  the  army  over
the  three  bridges  successively. He  commanded  a
division  at  the  battle  of  Averysborough,  N.  C.,  16
March,  1865.  and  at  that  of  Goldsborough,  on  21
March,  and  then  was  sent  back  to  Augusta  to  re
sume  command  of  the  district  of  Georgia,  but  before
he  reached  that  place  Gen.  Lee  had  surrendered,
and the surrender  of Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston,
which  followed,  included  his  command. After  the
close  of  the  war  Gen.  McLaws  engaged  in  business,
and  was  appointed  collector  of  internal  revenue  at
Savannah,  Ga.,  in  1875, and  postmaster  of  that
city  in  1876. In  November,  1886,  he  opened  a  se
ries  of  lectures  by  northern  and  southern  military
leaders,  that  was  instituted  by  the  Grand  army  of
the republic,  in  Boston,  his 'subject  being  "The
Maryland  Campaign."


MACLAY,  Archibald,  clergyman,  b.  at  Kil-
learn,  Scotland,  14  May,  1776 ;  "d.  in  New  York
city,  2  May,  1860.  He  was  only  nine  years  old
when  his  father  died,  and  when  twelve  years  old
was  thrown  upon  his  own  resources,  and  became
the  support  of  the  family.  He  was  educated  in
I  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  began  to  preach  be
fore  he  left,  had  calls  to  seven  different  churches,
and  became  pastor  in  Kirkcaldy  in  1802.  In  1804
he  was  appointed  missionary  to"  India,  but  insuper-
I  able  obstacles  prevented  his  acceptance.  He  emi-
1  grated  in  1805  with  his  wife  and  children  to  New
York,  where  he  was  soon  in  charge  of  a  Congrega
tional  church,  but  in  1809  his  views  on  the  scrip
tural  mode  and  subjects  of  baptism  underwent  a
change,  and  he  became  pastor  of  a  Baptist  church
in  New  York  city,  with  which  he  continued  for
thirty  years.  When  sixty-one  years  of  age  he  re
tired  from  the  pastorate,' became  general  agent  of
the  American  and  foreign  Bible  society,  and  trav
elled  extensively  throughout  the  United  States,
Great  Britain,  and  the  British  provinces.  He  was
instrumental  in  organizing  the  Bible  translation
society  of  England,  and  in  1850  in  forming  the
American  Bible  union,  becoming  general  agent  of
this  organization.  His  views  of  revision  were  not
at  first  generally  accepted  even  by  his  own  denomi
nation,  but  he  was  successful  in  overcoming  oppo
sition  and  winning  co-operation.  He  procured  the
subscription  of  large  sums  for  this  purpose,  and
obtained  also  an  endowment  for  a  Baptist  liter
ary  institution  in  Canada,  called  Mac-lay  college,
of  which  he  was  offered  the  presidency,  but
declined.  •  He  was  elected  president  of  the  Bible
union,  but  soon  resigned.  Dr.  Mac-lay  compiled  a
"Hymn-Book"  supplemental  to  Watts's  "Psalms
and  Hymns,"  and  preached  a  sermon  on  the  "  Im-

gDrtance  of  the  Bible,"  which  was  published  in
nglish  and  Welsh. — His  son,  William  Brown,
member  of  congress,  b.  in  New  York  city,  20
March,  1812 ;  d.  there,  19  Feb.,  1882,  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1836,
filled  temporarily  the  chair  of  Latin  in  that  insti
tution,  and  was  afterward  associate  editor  of  the
"  New  York  Quarterly  Review."  He  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar.  began  practice  in  New
York  city,  and  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in
1839,  and  re-elected  for  the  two  succeeding  terms.
He  introduced  and  procured  the  passage  against  a
powerful  opposition  of  the  act  that  established  the
present  system  of  public  schools  in  New  York  city.
He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1842,
and  re-elected  for  the  two  following  terms,  serving
from  4  Dec.,  1843,  till  3  March.  1849.  In  congress
he  was  instrumental  in  securing  the  reduction  of
letter-postage.  In  1856  and  in  the  succeeding  elec
tion  he  was  again  returned,  serving  from  7  Dec.,
1857,  till  3  March,  1861. — Archibald's  grandson,
William  Walter,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  New  York
city,  27  March,  1846,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
naval  academy,  and  commissioned  ensign,  28  May,
1863.  He  was  attached  to  the  steam  sloop  "  Ti-
conderoga,"  and  participated  in  both  attacks  on
Fort  Fisher.  After  the  war  he  made  a  cruise  of
four  years  with  Com.  Louis  M.  Goldsborough  as
his  navigating  officer,  being  promoted  lieutenant
on  10  Nov.,  1866.  He  was  commissioned  as  lieu
tenant-commander  on  12  March,  1868,  and.  while
acting  as  fleet-captain  of  the  Asiatic  squadron,  was
selected  by  the  Japanese  government  to  survey  and
designate  sites  for  light-houses.  He  was  subse
quently  appointed  assistant  professor  of  mathe
matics  in  the  naval  academy,  but  resigned  in  order
to  pursue  the  study  of  civil  engineering,  and  re
ceived  the  degree  of  C.  E.  from  the  University  of


142


MACLAY


MCLEAN


the  city  of  New  York  in  1873.  In  the  same  year  he
was  appointed  assistant  engineer  in  the  department
of  docks  in  New  York  city.  He  served  on  a  com
mittee  of  the  American  society  of  civil  engineers
that  recommended  a  uniform  system  of  tests  for
cement,  and  conducted  during  a  period  of  several
years  a  series  of  experiments,  the  results  of  which
he  digested  in  a  treatise,  entitled  "Notes  and  Ex-
periments  on  the  Use  and  Testing  of  Portland  Ce
ment,"  that  received  the  Norman  gold  medal  of  the
American  society  of  civil  engineers  (New  York  and
London,  1877;  German  translation,  Leipsic,  1877).
MACLAY,  William,  senator,  b.  in  New  Garden,
Chester  co..  Pa.,  20  July,  1737;  d.  in  Harrisbnrg,
Pa.,  16  April.  1804.  In' 1740  his  father  settled  in
Lurgan,  Franklin  co.,  Pa.  He  received  a  classical
education,  and  served  as  a  lieutenant  during  the
French  war,  taking  part  in  Gen.  John  Forbes's
expedition  against  Fort  Duquesne  in  1758,  in  which
he  did  good  service  himself  at  Loyalhannah :  also
in  Gen.  Henry  Bouquet's  march  to  Fort  Pitt  and
the  combat  at  Bushy  Run.  When  not  in  active
service  he  pursued  the  study  of  law,  and  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1760.  He  assisted  in  survey
ing  the  officers'  grant  on  the  Susquehanna,  in
which  he  shared,  as  well  as  other  lands.  At  the
close  of  the  war  he  visited  England  to  consult  the
proprietors  on  business  connected  with  the  surveys,
and  after  his  return  he  acted  as  representative  of
the  Penn  family.  In  1769  he  married  a  daughter
of  John  Harris"  (q.  r.).  In  1772,  upon  the  organi
zation  of  Northumberland  county,  he  was  appointed
prothonotary,  and  about  this  time  assisted  in  lay
ing  out  the  town  of  Sunbury.  He  took  an  active
part  in,  the  Pennymite  war.  opposing  the  claims  of
the  Susquehanna  company,  and  advising  Penn  not
to  sell  his  rights  in  the  Wyoming  valley.  Although
an  officer  of  the  proprietary  government,  he  was
active  in  raising  and  equipping  troops  for  the  Con
tinental  army,  and  marched  with  them  to  the  seat
of  war,  taking  part  in  the  battles  of  Trenton  and
Princeton.  During  the  Revolution  he  was  assist
ant  commissary  of  purchases.  He  was  sent  to  the
assembly  in  1781.  and  was  subsequently  a  member
of  the  executive  council,  judge  of  common  pleas,
and  a  commissioner  to  carry  into  effect  an  act  re
specting  the  navigation  of  the  Susquehanna  river.
In  January,  1789,  he  was  elected  with  Robert
Morris  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  drew  the  short  term,
which  expired  on  3  March,  1791.  In  the  senate  he
advanced  democratic  principles,  and  led  the  oppo
sition  to  President  Washington,  objecting  to  his
presence  in  the  senate  during  the  transaction  of
business,  assailing  the  policy  of  the  administration
before  him,  and  reprobating  the  state  and  cere
mony  that  were  observed  in  the  intercourse  of  the
president  with  congress.  He  opposed  the  funding
of  the  debt  and  the  chartering  of  the  U.  S.  bank,
and  was  the  leader  of  the  movement  that  resulted
in  the  formation  of  the  Democratic  party.  On  the
expiration  of  his  term  the  legislature  elected  James
Ross,  a  Federalist,  in  his  place.  He  then  retired
to  his  farm  near  Harrisburg,  was  a  member  of  the
state  house  of  representatives  in  1795,  a  presiden
tial  elector  in  1795,  a  county  judge  in  1801-'3,
and  a  member  of  the  legislature  again  in  1803.
While  in  the  senate  he  took  notes  of  the  discus
sions  in  the  open  and  secret  sessions,  which,  with
his  observations  on  contemporary  statesmen,  was
published  by  George  W.  Harris  under  the  title  of
"  Sketches  of  Debate  in  the  First  Senate  of  the
United  States,  1789-'91 "  (Harrisburg).— His  broth
er,  Samuel,  senator,  b.  in  Lurgan,  Pa.,  7  June,  1741 ;
d.  in  Northumberland  county,  Pa.,  5  Oct.,  1811,  re
ceived  a  classical  education,  assisted  his  brother  in


surveying  the  officers'  tracts  in  Buffalo  valley,  and
settled  there.  During  the  Revolution  he  saw  ac
tive  service  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  troops  of
Northumberland  county.  He  was  appointed  an
associate  judge  of  that  county  in  1792,  which  office
he  resigned  on  his  election  to  congress  in  1795.  On
the  expiration  of  his  term  in  1797  he  entered  the
state  senate,  and  in  1801  was  chosen  speaker.  He
was  still  speaker,  on  14  Dec.,  1802,  when  he  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  as  such  signed  his
own  certificate.  Still  retaining  his  seat,  he  pre
sided  over  an  impeachment  trial,  and  continued  to
preside  against  the  protests  of  the  opposition,  until
he  resigned  the  speakershipon  16  March,  1803.  lie
gave  up  his  seat  as  state  senator  on  2  Sept.,  1803,
and  entered  the  U.  S.  senate  at  the  opening  of  the
session,  17  Oct.,  1803.  He  resigned  on  account  of
failing  health  on  4  Jan.,  1809.  —  Samuel's  son,
William  Plunkett,  member  of  congress,  b.  in
Buffalo  valley,  Pa,,  23  Aug.,  1774;  d.  in  Milroy,
Mifflin  co.,  Pa.,  2  Sept..  1842.  was  prothonotary  of
Mifflin  county  from  1808  till  1810,  when  he  was
elected  to  congress  to  fill  a  vacancy.  He  was  re-
elected  at  the  regular  election  in  1816  and  in  1818.
In  1837  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  State  constitu
tional  convention,  and  declined  signing  the  instru
ment  that  was  framed  because  it  withheld  from
colored  men  the  right  of  suffrage.

MacLEAN,  Sir  Allan,  British  soldier,  b.  at
Torloish,  Scotland,  about  1725;  d.  there  in  1784.
He  began  his  military  career  in  the  service  of  Hol
land  as  lieutenant  in  a  brigade  of  Scotch  High
landers,  and  was  in  the  assault  and  capture  of
Bergen -op -Zoom.  He  subsequently  obtained  a
commission  in  the  60th  or  royal  American  regi
ment,  of  which  he  was  for  some  time  adjutant.
He  served  as  a  captain  in  the  expedition  of  Gen.
Wolfe  in  1759  for  the  conquest  of  Canada,  and
was  afterward  appointed  to  the  command  of  the
New  York  independent  company,  with  which  he
was  present  at  the  battle  of  Ticonderoga,  where  he
was  severely  wounded.  He  was  again  dangerously
wounded  at  the  action  that  immediately  preceded
the  surrender  of  Niagara.  At  the  end  of  the  Cana
dian  war  he  returned  to  England.  On  the  revolt
of  the  American  colonies  he  was  promoted  to  the
rank  of  colonel.  He  and  his  men  were  mainly  in
strumental  in  the  defeat  of  Arnold  before  Quebec.
The  garrison  consisted,  besides  50  fusileers  and  350
Highland  emigrants,  of  700  militia  and  seamen.  Sir
Guy  Carleton  being  occupied  with  arrangements
for  the  general  defence  of  the  colony,  the  defence
of  the  town  was  intrusted  to  Col.  MacLean.  Some
of  the  faint-hearted  and  disaffected  were  now  in
clined  to  open  the  gates  to  the  enemy,  but  were
held  in  check  by  MacLean,  who  guarded  the  gate
with  his  Highlanders,  forbade  all  communication
with  the  besiegers,  and  fired  upon  their  flag,  an  en
sign  of  rebellion,  with  the  result  that,  after  Mont
gomery  was  killed,  Arnold  abandoned  the  siege
and  left  the  country.  Col.  MacLean  was  subse
quently  stationed  at  Niagara,  and  was  in  the  battle
of  Eutaw  Springs  with  his  regiment.  He  was  pro
moted  brigadier-general  after  leaving  this  country.

McLEAN,  Archibald,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
St.  Andrews  in  April,  1791 ;  d.  in  Toronto  in  Oc
tober,  1865.  His  father,  Neil,  a  native  of  Mull,
Scotland,  served  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  was  a
member  of  the  legislative  council  of  Canada.  The
son  was  educated  at  Cornwall  grammar-school,
studied  law  in  the  office  of  the  attorney-general
at  York,  and  before  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar
served  in  the  war  of  1812  with  the  United  States,
in  which  he  was  severely  wounded.  He  declined
a  commission  in  the  regular  army,  but  afterward,


McLEAN


MACLEAN


143


having  been  appointed  assistant  quartermaster-
general,  he  was  placed  on  the  staff.  He  remained
on  active  service  until  the  battle  of  Lundy's  Lane,
where  he  was  taken  prisoner  and  detained  on  parole
at  Greenbush,  near  Albany,  N.  Y.,  till  the  end  of
the  war.  After  his  return  he  was  admitted  to  the
bar.  and  in  a  short  time  was  employed  as  counsel
in  the  difficulties  that  arose  out  of  contentions  be
tween  the  Hudson  bay  and  the  Northwest  companies.
He  represented  Stormont  and  Cornwall  for  several
years  in  the  legislative  assembly  of  Upper  Canada,
and  was  twice  elected  speaker  of  that  body.  In
1837  he  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  court  of  king's
bench,  and  the  same  year  took  an  active  part  in
suppressing  the  rebellion.  He  resigned  his  judge-
ship  in  1856,  but  was  soon  afterward  appointed
chief  justice  of  Upper  Canada  by  John  A.  Mae-
donald,  which  place  he  retained  till  he  was  ap
pointed  president  of  the  court  of  error  and  appeal,
in  which  capacity  he  officiated  till  his  death.  Mr.
McLean  was  noted  for  his  liberal  hospitality  while
on  circuit.  His  elder  brother,  JOHN,  was  for  years
sheriff  of  Kingston,  and  his  youngest  brother,  ALEX
ANDER,  entered  the  royal  Newfoundland  regiment,
subsequently  enlisted  in  the  Stormont  militia,  saw
a  great  deal  of  service  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  was
wounded  at  the  capture  of  Ogdensburg.  He  was
afterward  a  member  of  the  provincial  parliament,
and  treasurer  of  Stormont  and  Glengarry.

McLEAN,  Daniel  Yeech,  educator,  b.  in  Fay-
ette  county.  Pa..  24  Nov.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Red  Bank,
N.  J.,  23  Nov.,  18G9.  He  was  brought  up  in  Ross
county,  Ohio,  graduated  at  Ohio  university  in  1824,
taught  in  Chambersburg,  Pa.,  in  1825-' '6,  and  in
1827  entered  Princeton  seminary,  where  he  re
mained  two  years.  He  was  ordained  as  an  evange
list  in  Miami,  Ohio,  on  29  June,  1831,  and  preached
for  two  years  at  Lebanon.  Ohio,  and  then  took
charge  of  the  church  at  Tennent,  Monmouth  co.,
N.  J.,  and  four  years  later  of  a  church  organized
by  him  at  Freehold,  with  which  he  remained  till
1850,  when  he  was  chosen  president  of  Lafayette
college.  He  devoted  himself  to  raising  an  endow
ment  for  the  college,  and  secured  $100,000  by  the
sale  of  scholarships,  which,  however,  afforded  but
a  temporary  relief.  In  1857  he  resigned  his  post,
and  returned  to  the  ministry,  spending  four  years
in  London,  where  he  preached  frequently,  and  after
his  return  to  the  United  States  serving  as  pastor
at  Plainfield,  N.  J.,  in  18(52-'3,  and  then  at  Red
Bank  till  his  death.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Lafayette  college  in  1802.

MacLEAN,  Francis,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Scot
land  about  1727;  d.  in  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  in
1781.  He  served  in  the  Dutch  war,  was  at  the
capture  of  Bergen-op-Zoom  by  Count  Lowendahl,
was  captured  and  held  a  prisoner  by  the  French,
and  subsequently  served  in  Portugal,  and  during
the  Revolutionary  war  in  this  country,  rising  to
the  rank  of  general.  He  commanded  the  fort  at
Penobscot,  Me.,  against  which  an  expedition  was
sent  from  Boston  in  July,  1779,  when  he  success
fully  defended  it  with  700  men  against  an  attack
ing  force  of  2,000  Americans.

McLEAN,  John,  merchant,  b.  in  Thomaston,
Me.,  in  1761 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1823.  He
was  educated  in  the  public  schools  of  Milton,  Mass.,
to  which  place  his  parents  had  removed,  and  those
of  Boston,  engaged  in  trade  in  that  city,  and  accu
mulated  a  fortune.  When  he  died  he  left  $25,000
to  found  a  professorship  of  ancient  and  modern
history  at  Harvard,  and  upward  of  $100.000  to  the
Massachusetts  general  hospital,  which  was  devoted
to  the  asylum  for  the  insane  at  Somerville,  since
called  the  McLean  asylum.


MACLEAN,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Glasgow,
Scotland,  1  March,  1771 ;  d.  in  Princeton,  N.  J. ,  17
Feb.,  1814.  He  studied  chemistry  and  surgery  at
Edinburgh,  London,  and  Paris,"  completed  his
medical  course  at  Glasgow,  and  was  admitted  a
member  of  the  faculty  of  that  city  at  the  age  of
twenty-one.  While  in  Paris  he  became  an  adherent
of  the  new  theories  of  chemistry  that  had  been
developed  by  Lavoisier.  Embracing  republican
views,  he  determined  to  become  an  American  citi
zen,  and  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  April,
1795.  He  settled  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  where  he
delivered  a  course  of  lectures  on  chemistry,  and
on  1  Oct.,  1795,  was  appointed  professor  of  "chem
istry  and  natural  history  in  the  college.  In  April,
1797,  he  was  appointed  professor  of  mathematics,
and  natural  philosophy  also.  His  chemical  in
structions  embraced  the  practical  applications  of
chemistry  to  agriculture  and  manufactures  as  well
as  theoretical  science.  In  the  second  year  of  his
instructions  at  Princeton  he  wrote  two  "Lectures
on  Combustion  "  in  answer  to  a  pamphlet  by  Dr.
Joseph  Priestley  that  upheld  the  phlogistic  theory,
and  a  controversy  between  Priestley  and  Maclean
was  carried  on  for  some  time  in  the  columns  of  the
New  York  "Medical  Repository."  In  1812  Dr.
Maclean  accepted  the  chair  of  natural  philosophy
and  chemistry  at  William  and  Mary  college,  but
at  the  end  of  the  college  year  was  compelled  by
sickness  to  resign.  His  "  Memoir"  was  written  by
his  son  John  (printed  privately,  Princeton,  1885). —
His  son,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  3
March,  1800 ;  d.  there,  10  Aug.,  1886,  was  gradu
ated  at  Princeton  in  1816,  taught  for  a  year,  en
tered  the  Princeton
theological  semina
ry  in  1818,  and  was
tutor  of  Greek  in
the  college  while
attending  theologi
cal  lectures  for  two
years.  In  1822  he
was  appointed  pro
fessor  of  mathe
matics  and  natural
philosophy.  In  1829
he  exchanged  this
chair  for  that  of
ancient  languages.
In  1847  he  was  re
lieved  of  the  charge
of  the  Latin  de
partment.  In  1854  <-— ____^7  .^f  s

he succeeded Dr. -^sh*^.  e//(  e^c-ft  e*~*.

James  Carnahan  as

president  of  the  college,  which  office  he  resigned  in
1868.  He  was  given  the  degree  of  D.  D.  by  Wash
ington  college,  Pa.,  in  1841,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by
the  University  of  the  state  of  New  York  in  1854.
The  legislature  of  New  Jersey,  in  establishing  the
common-school  system  of  the  state,  followed  the
suggestions  of  a  lecture  on  "A  School  System
for  New  Jersey,"  delivered  by  Dr.  Maclean  before
the  Literary  and  philosophical  society  of  New  Jer
sey  in  January,  1828,  and  afterward  published  and
widely  distributed  in  pamphlet-form  (Princeton.
1829).'  In  the  discussion  of  the  questions  that  di
vided  the  Presbyterian  church  into  the  old-  and
new-school  branches  he  took  an  active  part,  pub
lishing  a  series  of  letters  in  "  The  Presbyterian,"
afterward  issued  in  pamphlet-form,  in  defence  of
the  action  of  the  assembly  of  1837.  Notable
among  his  many  contributions  to  the  "  Princeton
Review  "  were  two  articles  in  1841  controverting
the  argument  that  unfermented  grape-juice  was


144


McLEAN


used  by  Jesus  Christ  in  instituting  the  sacrament
of  the  supper,  as  affirmed  in  two  prize  essays  that
were  widely  circulated  by  the  temperance  societies
of  England  and  the  United  States.  After  retiring
from  the  presidency  he  prepared  a  '•  History  of
the  College  of  Xew  Jersey"  (Philadelphia,  1877).

McLEAN,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Morris  county,
N.  J.,  11  March,  1785;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  4
April,  1861.  In  1789  his  father,  a  poor  man  with
a  large  family,  removed  to  the  west  and  settled,
first  at  Morganstown,
Va.,  subsequently  at
Nicholasville,  Ky.,and
finally,  in  1799,  on
a  farm  in  Warren
county,  Ohio.  Young
McLean  worked  on
the  farm  that  his
father  had  cleared  till
he  was  sixteen  years
old,  then  received  pri
vate  instruction  in  the
classics  for  two  years,
and  at  the  age  of
eighteen  went  to  Cin
cinnati  to  study  law,


/>^


ported  himself  by
writing  in  the  office  of  the  clerk  of  the  county.  In
the  autumn  of  1807  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
began  practice  at  Lebanon.  In  October,  1812,  he
was  elected  to  congress  from  his  district,  which  then
included  Cincinnati,  by  the  Democratic  party,  de
feating  two  competitors  in  an  exciting  contest,  and
was  re-elected  by  the  unanimous  vote  of  the  dis
trict  in  1814.  lie  supported  the  Madison  adminis
tration,  originated  the  law  to  indemnify  individ
uals  for  the  loss  of  property  in  the  public  service,
and  introduced  an  inquiry  as  to  pensioning  the
widows  of  fallen  officers  and  soldiers.  He  declined
a  nomination  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1815.  and  in
1816  was  elected  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  the
state,  which  office  he  held  till  1822,  when  Presi
dent  Monroe  appointed  him  commissioner  of  the
general  land-office.  In  July,  1823,  he  was  ap
pointed  postmaster-general,  and  by  his  energetic
administration  introduced  order,  efficiency,  and
economy  into  that  department.  The  salary  of  the
office  was  raised  from  $4,000  to  $  6,000"  by  an
almost  unanimous  vote  of  both  houses  of  congress
during  his  administration.  He  was  continued  in  the
office  by  President  John  Q.  Adams,  and  was  asked
to  remain  by  Gen.  Jackson  in  1829,  but  declined,  be
cause  he  differed  with  the  president  on  the  question
of  official  appointments  and  removals.  President
Jackson  then  tendered  him  in  succession  the  war  and
the  navy  departments,  and,  on  his  declining  both,
appointed  him  an  associate  justice  of  the  U.  S.  su
preme  court.  He  entered  upon  his  duties  in  Janu
ary,  1830.  His  charges  to  grand  juries  while  on
circuit  were  distinguished  for  ability  and  eloquence.
In  December,  1838,  he  delivered  a  charge  in  regard
to  aiding  or  favoring  "  unlawful  military  combina
tions  by  our  citizens  against  any  foreign  govern
ment  with  whom  we  are  at  peace,"  with  special
reference  to  the  Canadian  insurrection  and  its
American  abettors.  The  most  celebrated  of  his
opinions  was  that  in  the  Dred  Scott  case,  dissent
ing  from  the  decision  of  the  court  as  given  by
Chief-Justice  Taney,  and  enunciating  the  doctrine
that  slavery  was  contrary  to  right  and  had  its  ori
gin  in  power,  and  that  in  this  country  it  was  sus
tained  only  by  local  law.  He  was  long  identified
with  the  party  that  opposed  the  extension  of  sla-


McLEAN

very,  and  his  name  was  before  the  Free-soil  conven
tion  at  Buffalo  in  1848  as  a  candidate  for  nomina
tion  as  president.  In  the  Republican  national  con
vention  at  Philadelphia  in  1856  he  received  19(5
votes  for  the  same  office  to  359  for  John  C.  Fre
mont.  In  the  Republican  convention  at  Chicago
in  1860  he  also  received  several  votes.  He  pub
lished  "  Reports  of  the  United  States  Circuit  Court "
(6  vols.,  1829-'55) ;  a  '•  Eulogy  on  James  Monroe  "
(1831);  and  several  addresses.— His  brother,  Will
iam,  member  of  congress,  b.  in  Morris  county,
X.  J. :  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  12  Oct.,  1839,  was
educated  in  the  public  schools,  removed  to  Ohio,
and,  after  holding  for  some  time  the  office  of  re
ceiver  of  public  moneys  at  Piqua,  was  elected  a
representative  in  congress,  and  twice  re-elected^
serving  from  1  Dec.,  1823,  till  3  March,  1829.  He
was  instrumental  in  procuring  a  land  subsidy  of
500,000  acres  for  the  extension  of  the  Ohio  canal
from  Cincinnati  to  Cleveland.  After  returning  to
private  life  he  engaged  in  mercantile  business  in
Cincinnati.— John's  son.  Nathaniel  Collins,  sol
dier,  b.  in  Warren  county,  Ohio,  2  Feb.,  1815,  was
graduated  at  Augusta  college.  Ky.,  in  1832,  studied
for  a  year  or  two  longer  at  Harvard,  and  took  his
degree'  at  the  law-school  there  in  1838.  He  married
a  daughter  of  Judge  Jacob  Burnet  the  same  year,
and  began  practice  in  Cincinnati,  where  he  attained
success  at  the  bar.  He  entered  the  National  army
on  11  Jan.,  1862,  as  colonel  of  the  75th  Ohio  vol
unteers,  being  commissioned  brigadier-general  on
29  Nov..  1862,  and  resigned  on  20  April.  1865.

McLEAN,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Xorth  Carolina
in  1791 ;  d.  in  Shawneetown,  111.,- 4  Oct.,  1830.  He
was  taken  by  his  father  to  Logan  county,  Ky.,  in
1795,  and,  after  a  limited  education,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  practice  at
Shawneetown  in  1815.  He  was  the  first  congress
man  that  was  elected  from  Illinois,  taking  his  seat
on  4  Dec.,  1818,  and  serving  till  the  following
March.  In  1820  he  was  elected  to  the  state  house
of  representatives  and  chosen  speaker.  On  the
resignation  of  Xinian  Edwards  he  was  appointed
to  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  served  from  20  Dec.,  1824,
till  3  March,  1825.  The  year  before  his  death  he
was  elected  United  States  senator  for  a  full  term
by  the  unanimous  vote  of  the  legislature,  and  took
his  seat  on  7  Dec.,  1829.

McLEAN,  John,  Canadian  Anglican  bishop,  b.
in  Portsay,  Banffshire.  Scotland,  17  Nov.,  1828.
He  was  graduated  at  Aberdeen  university  in  1851,
came  to  Canada  soon  afterward,  and  in  1858  was
ordained  a  priest  by  the  bishop  of  Huron.  He  was
appointed  curate  of  St.  Paul's  cathedral,  London,
Ont.,  in  that  year.  In  1866  he  removed  to  the
northwest,  and  was  appointed  rector  of  St.  John's
cathedral,  and  professor  of  divinity  and  warden  in
St.  John's  college,  Winnipeg.  A  few  years  later
he  became  archdeacon  of  Assiniboia,  and  in  1871
received  the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.  from  the  universi
ties  of  Trinity  college,  Toronto,  and  Bishop's  col
lege,  Lennoxville,  and  that  of  D.  D.  from  Kenyon
college,  Ohio.  When  the  diocese  of  Saskatchewan
was  constituted  in  1874,  Dr.  McLean  wras  nomi
nated  bishop  of  the  new  see,  and  was  consecrated
at  Lambeth  the  same  year  by  the  archbishop  of
Canterbury.  In  1880  Bishop  McLean  founded
Emmanuel  college,  in  which  he  is  now  (1888)  war
den  and  professor  of  divinity.

McLEAN,  Sarah  Pratt,  author,  b.  in  Simsbury,
Conn.,  3  July,  1858.  She  was  educated  at  South
Hadley  seminary,  took  charge  for  a  season  of  a
village  school  on  the  Massachusetts  coast  between
Plymouth  and  Sandwich,  and  while  thus  occupied
closely  observed  the  local  type  of  character  and.


McLELAN


McLEOD


145


peculiarities  of  idiom  and  manners.  Her  first
novel,  '•  Cape  Cod  Folks,"  was  the  product  of  this
study,  and  obtained  a  large  circulation  by  reason
of  its  realism,  which  was  so  striking  that  certain  in
habitants  of  the  district  brought  suit  against  her
for  libel.  Miss  McLean  married  Franklin  Lynde
Greene  on  27  July,  1887.  Her  works,  besides  stories
and  sketches  in  magazines,  are  "  Cape  Cod  Folks  "
(Boston,  1882);  "Some  Other  Folks "  (1883) ;  and
"  Towhead.  the  Story  of  a  Girl  "  (1884).

McLELAN,  Archibald  Woodlmry,  Canadian
statesman,  b.  in  Londonderry,  Xova  Scotia,  24  Dec.,
1824.  He  is  descended  from  an  Irish  family  that
settled  in  Xova  Scotia  in  the  18th  century.  He
was  educated  at  his  native  place  and  at  Mount
Alison  Wesleyan  academy,  and  engaged  in  mercan
tile  business,  and  later  in  ship-building  and  ship-
owning.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Xova  Scotia
assembly  from  1858  till  that  province  entered  the
confederation  in  1867,  and  from  that  date  was  a
member  of  the  Dominion  parliament  until  he  was
called  to  the  senate,  21  June,  1869.  At  this  time
he  was  appointed  one  of  the  commissioners  for  the
construction  of  the  Intercolonial  railway,  and  was
a  commissioner  from  Canada  at  the  Intercolonial
fisheries  exhibition  in  London,  England,  in  1883.
He  became  president  of  the  privy  council  of  Canada
and  a  member  of  the  cabinet,  20  May,  1881,  and,  re
signing  his  place  in  the  senate  to  accept  office,  was
elected  for  Colchester  to  the  Dominion  parliament.
Mr.  McLelan  was  appointed  minister  of  marine  and
fisheries,  10  July,  1882  ;  minister  of  finance,  10  Dec.,
1885  ;  and  postmaster-general,  27  Jan.,  1887.  He
was  re-elected  at  the  general  election  in  1882,  and
in  1887,  but  was  unseated,  owing  to  bribery  by
agents  at  the  last  election.

McLELLAN,  Isaac,  poet,  b.  in  Portland,  Me.,
21  May,  1806.  He  removed  to  Boston  in  1812.  was
graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1826,  and  engaged  in  the
practice  of  law  for
several  years  in  Bos
ton,  meanwhile  con
tributing  largely  in
prose  and  verse  to
Willis's  "  Monthly
Magazine,"  the  "New
England  Magazine,"
and  the  "  Knicker
bocker."  He  was  for
a  time  associate  edi
tor  of  the  Boston
"  Daily  Patriot."  and
afterward  published
a  monthly  magazine
that  finally  was  con
solidated  with  the
"Weekly  Pearl."  The
most  notable  of  his
early  poems  is  "  The  Death  of  Xapoleon,"  which  has
been  widely  quoted,  and  "  Xew  England's  Dead."
Mr.  Me Le'lan's  passionate. love  of  out-door  recre
ation,  and  his  numerous  poems  on  field-sports,  have
gained  for  him  the  title  of  the  poet-sportsman,  and
he  shares  with  Alfred  B.  Street  the  honors  of  lau
reate  of  the  woods  and  waters.  Among  the  shooting-
resorts  that  he  frequented  were  Cohasset.  Plymouth,
and  Marshfield,  the  latter  being  the  rural  home  of
Daniel  Webster.  Through  his  courtesy  the  poet
spent  two  seasons  at  Marshfield.  occupying^one  of
the  farm-houses  that  were  owned  by  Mr.  Webster.
In  1851  Mr.  McLellan  removed  to  Xew  York  city
and  devoted  his  attention  to  literature.  He  now
(1888)  resides  at  Greenport,  L.  1.,  and  at  the  age  of
fourscore  is  still  able  to  divide  his  time  between
sports  of  the  field  and  the  literary  work  of  the
VOL.  iv. — 10


••  study. He  is  the  author  of  "  The  Fall  of  the  In-

|  dian""  (Boston,  1830):  "The  Year"  (1832);  "Jour-

!  nal  of  a  Residence  in  Scotland,"  from  the  manu-

!  scripts  of  H. B.  McLellan  (1834);  "Mount  Au-

l  burn  "  (1843) ;  and  "  Poems  of  the  Rod  and  Gun,"

edited,  with  a  sketch  of  the  author,  by  Frederick

E.  Pond  (Xew  York,  1886).

McLENE,  James,  congressman,  b.  in  New  Lon
don,  Chester  co..  Pa.,  14  Oct.,  1730;  d.  in  Antrim,
Franklin  co.,  Pa.,  13  March,  1806.  He  was  edu
cated  at  the  academy  of  the  Rev.  Francis  Alison,
and  in  175G  removed  to  Cumberland  county.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania  convention  in
1776,  of  the  assembly  several  times  between  1776
and  1794,  and  its  speaker  in  1778,  and  of  the
supreme  executive  council  of  the  state  in  1778  and
1783-'4.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  Continental
congress  in  1778-'80,  of  the  council  of  censors  of
Pennsylvania  in  1783,  of  the  board  of  property  of
that  state  in  1786-'7,  of  its  Constitutional  conven
tion  in  1700,  and  a  justice  of  the  peace  in  1800.

McLENE,  Jeremiah,  statesman,  b.  in  1767;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C..  19  March,  1837.  He  received  a
common-school  education,  served  in  the  Revolution
ary  army,  and  in  1790  settled  in  Chillicothe,  Ohio,
afterward  removing  to  Columbus  in  1816.  He  was
secretary  of  Ohio  from  1808  till  1831,  and  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  2
Dec.,  1833,  till  3  March,  1837.

McLEOD,  Alexander,  clergyman,  b.  in  the
island  of  Mull,  Scotland,  12  June.  1774;  d.  in  Xew
York  city,  17  Feb.,  1833.  His  father,  Rev.  Xiel
McLeod,  was  the  entertainer  of  Dr.  Samuel  John
son  on  the  latter's  visit  to  Mull.  The  son  came  to
this  country  while  yet  young,  was  graduated  at
Union  college  in  1798,  licensed  to  preach  in  the
following  year,  and  ordained  over  two  churches —
one  in  Xew  York  and  one  in  Wallkill,  N.  Y.  The
latter  charge  he  soon  resigned ;  but  he  retained  the
former,  the  first  Reformed  Presbyterian  church  of
Xew  York,  until  his  death.  McLeod  was  long
well  known  among  the  clergy  of  Xew  York  city,
and  was  eminent  both  as  a  writer  and  as  a  preacher,
He  was  for  some  time  one  of  the  editors  of  the
"  Christian  Magazine."  Among  his  published
works  are  "  Xegro  Slavery  Unjustifiable"  (New
York.  1802) ;  "  The  Messiah  "  (1803) ;  "  Ecclesiasti
cal  Catechism"  (1807);  "On  the  Ministry"  (1808);
'•  Lectures  on  the  Principal  Prophecies  of  the  Rev
elation  "  (1814);  "View  of  the  Late  War"  (1815);
"The  Life  and  Power  of  True  Godliness  "  (1816);
and  "  The  American  Christian  Expositor  "  (2  vols.,
1832- '3).  A  memoir  of  McLeod  was  published  by
Samuel  B.  Wylie.  D.  D.  (Xew  York,  1855).— His
son.  John  Niel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Xew  York  city,
11  Oct.,  1806;  d.  there*  27  April.  1874,  was  gradu
ated  at  Columbia  in  1826,  studied  theology  with
his  father,  and  in  1828  was  ordained  as  his  assistant.
After  the  formers  death  the  son  became  his  suc
cessor.  He  was  for  many  years  the  stated  clerk  of
the  general  synod  of  the  'Reformed  Presbyterian
church,  and  a'professor  in  the  theological  seminary
of  that  denomination  in  Philadelphia,  Dr.  McLeod
was  active  in  his  efforts  to  prevent  the  union  of
the  Reformed  Presbyterian  church  with  the  other
Presbyterian  bodies.' and  in  his  condemnation  of
hymns  other  than  the  psalms  of  David,  and  of
1  secret  societies,  was  conspicuous  in  the  infliction  of
church  discipline  of  George  W.  Stuart,  of  Phila
delphia,  for  singing  uninspired  hymns  at  a  union
meeting.  He  published  various  sermons  and  ad
dresses.— Another  son.  Xarier  Donald,  author,  b.
in  Xew  York  city,  17  Nov.,  1821 ;  d.  near  Cincin
nati.  Ohio.  20  July.  1865.  studied  at  Columbia,  and
surprised  his  family  and  friends  by  taking  orders


146


McLEOD


in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1845.  After
spending  a  few  years  in  a  country  parish,  he  went
in  1850  to  Europe,  where  he  travelled  and  studied
until  1852.  The  result  of  his  European  visit  was
his  conversion  to  the  Roman  Catholic  faith.  In
1857  he  became  editorially  connected  with  the  St.
Louis  "  Leader."  Subsequently  he  was  ordained  a
priest,  and  appointed  professor  of  rhetoric  and
belles-lettres  at  Mount  St.  Mary's  college,  Ohio,
lie  met  his  death  in  a  railroad  accident.  He  pub
lished  '•  Pynnshurst :  His  Wanderings  and  Ways
of  Thinking"  (New  York,  1852):  "Life  of  Sir
Walter  Scott"  (1852) ;  "Life  of  Mary,  Queen  of
Scots"  (1857);  "The  Elder's  House,  or  the  Three
Converts";  "Chateau  Lescure,  or  the  Last  Mar
quis  "  ;  and  a  "  Life  of  Fernando  Wood,  Mayor  of
New  York"  (1856).  As  a  poet,  McLeod  is  known
•by  "  The  Saga  of  Viking  Torquil."

"McLEOP,  Hiigrh,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York  city,
1  Aug.,  1814;  d.  in  Dumfries,  Va.,  2  Jan.,  1802.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1835,  and  entered  the  army  as  2d  lieutenant,
but  resigned  the  same  year  and  joined  the  Texan
forces  in  their  struggle  with  Mexico,  also  com
manding  a  company  in  the  battle  with  the  Chero-
kees  in  1839.  He  then  studied  and  subsequently
practised  law.  In  1841,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-
general,  he  commanded  an  expedition  to  Santa  Fe
that  was  sent  by  President  Mirabeau  B.  Lamar  to
open  trade  with  New  Mexico,  and  fell  into  the
hands  of  the  Mexicans,  who  treacherously  disre
garded  the  flag  of  truce.  After  being  held  a
prisoner  for  nearly  a  year,  he  was  released  through
the  intercession  of  the  LT.  S.  government.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Texas  congress  in  1842-'3,  and
served  throughout  the  Mexican  war,  and  subse
quently  in  the  state  legislature  after  the  annexation
of  Texas.  He  joined  the  Confederate  army  in
1861,  directed  the  movement  against  the  U.  S.
forts  on  the  Rio  Grande,  and  was  commissioned
successively  major,  lieutenant-colonel,  and  colonel
of  the  1st  Texas  regiment,  with  which  he  partici
pated  in  the  first  Virginia  campaign.

McLEOD,  James  Farquharson,  Canadian
official,  b.  in  1836.  He  is  the  son  of  a  British
army  officer,  was  educated  at  Upper  Canada  col
lege,  and  at  Queen's  university,  Kingston,  and
graduated  there  in  1854.  He  subsequently  studied
law  and  became  a  barrister  in  1860.  He  entered
the  militia  in  1856,  and  became  major  and  brevet
lieutenant-colonel  in  1867.  He  served  during  the
first  Riel  rebellion  in  the  Northwest  in  1870,  was
mentioned  in  despatches  by  Sir  Garnet  (now  Lord)
\Volseley  in  command  of  the  expeditionary  force,
and  was  created  a  companion  of  the  order  of  St.
Michael  and  St.  George  by  the  Queen  for  his  ser
vices.  He  was  appointed  a  captain  in  the  North
west  mounted  police  in  1873,  assistant  commissioner
in  1874,  and  stipendiary  magistrate  for  the  North
west  territory,  commissioner  in  command  of  the
force,  and  a  member  of  the  Northwest  council,  7
Oct.,  1876.  In  1880  he  was  appointed  stipendiary
magistrate,  with  jurisdiction  over  all  cases,  crimi
nal  and  civil,  in  the  Northwest  territory.

McLEOD,  John,  Canadian  explorer  and  trader,
b.  in  Stornoway,  Scotland,  in  1788  ;  d.  in  Montreal,
24  July,  1849.  He  was  a  successful  merchant  in
his  native  town,  when,  in  1811,  he  was  engaged  by
the  Hudson  bay  company  to  muster  men  in  the
Hebrides  for  service  in  their  struggle  with  the
Canadian  fur  companies.  In  effecting  this  Mr.
McLeod  was  opposed  by  the  agents  of  Sir  Alexan
der  Mackenzie,  representing  the  Northwest  com
pany.  On  25  Sept.,  1811,  Mr.  McLeod  was  special
ly  detailed  by  the  Hudson  bay  company  to  assist


the  1st  brigade  of  Highlanders  that  was  brought
out  by  Earl  Selkirk  in  their  journey  from  York
factory  to  the  Red  river  settlement.  During
1812-'16  he  built  and  established  all  the  first  trad
ing-posts  of  the  Hudson  bay  company  in  that  re
gion  and  500  miles  westward.  At  the  same  time
he  successfully  opposed  the  Northwest  company
under  the  most  disadvantageous  circumstances  and
was  the  means  of  saving  the  Red  river  colony  from
annihilation.  From  1816  till  1821,  when  the  Hud
son  bay  and  Northwest  companies  were  united,
Mr.  McLeod  led  the  struggle  against  the  rival
company  in  the  far  north  toward  the  arctic  circle
and  westward  to  the  Rocky  mountains.  He  ef
fected  with  his  associates  an  expansion  of  trade  in
furs  and  other  natural  resources  of  the  Pacific
slope  from  Yukon  to  San  Francisco,  and  with  the
Sandwich  islands  and  Alaska.  At  the  coalition  of
the  two  companies,  Mr.  McLeod  was  the  first  mem
ber  of  the  original  Hudson  bay  company  that
crossed  the  Rocky  mountains  formally  to  accept
the  delivery  of  the  country  west  of  that  range
from  the  agents  of  the  Northwest  company.  lie
was  the  first  man  that  was  known  to  have  crossed
the  continent  from  Hudson  bay  to  the  Pacific
coast,  From  1826  till  1830  he  had  charge  of  Nor
way  house,  which  he  built,  and  which  was  the  ren
dezvous  of  all  important  trade-brigades  from  the
interior.  Here  the  chief  council  for  the  govern
ment  of  the  trade  met  annually  until  a  few  years
ago,  when  the  place  of  meeting  was  transferred  to
Winnipeg.  In  the  autumn  of  1830  he  sailed  from
York  factory,  by  way  of  Hudson  bay,  to  London,
visited  Scotland,  and  on  his  return  in  1831  was  ap
pointed  to  the  charge  of  the  Chicoulimi  district.
Two  years  afterward  he  was  appointed  to  the  St.
Maurice  district,  extending  from  Hudson  bay  to
the  St.  Lawrence.  In  1849,  while  taking  his'  an
nual  report  to  Montreal,  he  was  attacked  by  chole
ra  and  died  the  same  day.  He  did  more  than  any
other  man  to  open  up  the  northwest  for  settlement,
and  was  loved  and  respected  equally  among  the
Indians  and  his  white  associates.  Hubert  H.  Ban
croft,  in  his  history  of  British  Columbia,  refers  to
him  as  the  "veteran"  among  the  fur-traders  and
pioneers  of  the  northwest. — His  son,  Malcolm,  b.
in  Green  Lake,  Beaver  River,  Northwest  territories.
21  Oct.,  1821.  was  educated  in  Edinburgh.  Scot
land,  studied  law  in  Montreal,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1845.  Ever  since  that  time  he  has
been  in  active  practice,  with  the  exception  of  the
years  1873-'6,  when  he  was  district  judge  for  the
counties  of  Ottawa  and  Pontiae.  In  1887  he  was
appointed  Queen's  counsel.  In  the  parliament  of
Canada  and  in  the  press  his  name  has  been  asso
ciated  with  the  subjects  of  the  annexation  of  the
Northwest  to  Canada  and  the  construction  of  a  rail
way  over  British  territory  to  the  Pacific  ocean.  In
the  session  of  1862  he  presented  a  memorial  describ
ing  the  condition  of  the  people  of  the  Red  river
settlement,  who  had  in  vain  petitioned  the  imperial
authorities  for  government  of  some  kind,  owing  to
the  inefficiency  of  the  Hudson  bay  company.  The
memorial  failed,  as  the  government  of  that  day  was
opposed  to  the  western  extension  of  Canada.  Mr.
McLeod  then  addressed  himself  to  the  colonial
secretary,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  on  the  subject.
A  few  days  after  receiving  the  papers  the  duke  de
livered  a  speech  in  the  house  of  lords,  declaring
against  the  Hudson  bay  company,  and  the  an
nouncement  was  then  for  the  first  time  made  that
the  charter  would  be  withdrawn  and  the  adminis
tration  of  the  country  resumed  by  the  imperial
government.  A  marked  change  followed  on  the
part  of  the  company,  and  had  it  not  occurred  just


MACLOSKIE


McMAHON


147


then  its  territories  would  in  all  probability  have
fallen  into  the  hands  of  a  syndicate  of  American
fur-traders.  He  was  the  first  really  to  point  out
the  possibility  of  a  transcontinental  railway,  and
in  1869  defined  a  feasible  route  for  it  from"  Mon
treal  to  the  Pacific.  He  also  presented  three  routes,
giving  estimates  of  distances  and  heights.  When,
under  the  terms  of  union  with  British  Columbia,
an  exploration  was  set  on  foot  by  the  Canadian
government,  Sandford  Fleming,  the  chief  engi
neer,  put  himself  in  communication  with  Mr.  Mc-
Leod,  who  rendered  valuable  assistance  in  connec
tion  with  the  preliminary  survey  for  the  Canadian
Pacific  railway.  He  has  published  "  The  Peace
Kiver,"  from  his  father's  journal  and  his  own  ob
servations  while  living  in  the  Rocky  mountains
(( >t,ta\va,  1872) ;  five  pamphlets  on  the  "  Pacific
Railway,"  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Britannicus  "
(1874-'80) ;  and  "  Problem  of  Canada  "  (1880).

MACLOSKIE,  George,  naturalist,  b.  in  Castle-
dawson,  County  Londonderry,  Ireland,  14  Sept.,
1884.  He  was,  educated  at  Queen's  college,  Belfast,
where  he  received  a  gold  medal  in  natural  science
in  1807,  and  in  physical  science  in  1858.  Subse
quently  he  studied  theology,  and  became  a  Presby
terian  clergyman,  having  charge  of  the  parish  of
Ballygoney  during  1861-'73,  and  then  was  secretary
of  the  Bible  and  colportage  society  during  1873-'o.
He  was  called  to  the  chair  of  biology  in  Princeton
in  1874,  and  has  since  held  that  professorship.
Prof.  Macloskie  has  received  the  honorary  degree  of
1).  Sc.  from  Queen's  university,  and  that  of  LL.  D.
from  London  university,  where  in  1871  he  received
a  gold  medal  for  special  excellence  in  a  law-
examination.  He  is  a  member  of  various  scientific
societies,  and  is  a  fellow  of  the  American  associ
ation  for  the  advancement  of  science.  His  writ
ings  include  papers  on  insects  and  on  botany  in
the  "  American  Naturalist"  and  "  Psyche/'  and  he
has  published  "  Elementary  Botany  "  (New  York,
1888  ;  2d  ed.,  1887).

MACLURE,  William,  geologist,  b.  in  Ayr,
Scotland,  in  1763  ;  d.  in  San  Angel,  Mexico,  23
March,  1840.  He  visited  New  York  in  1782,  but
soon  returned  to  London,  where  be  became  a
partner  in  the  firm  of  Miller,  Hart  and  Co.,  and
rapidly  acquired  a  fortune.  In  1796  he  returned
to  the  United  States,  and  in  1803  he  served  abroad
as  one  of  the  commissioners  to  settle  the  French
spoliation  claims  of  American  citizens.  While  in
Europe  he  became  interested  in  geology,  and  col
lected  objects  in  natural  history.  On  his  return
he  undertook  the  geological  survey  of  the  entire
country,  depending  on  his  private  resources  and
observations,  and  at  a  time  when  geology  was  not
regarded  as  a  science,  so  that  but  few  sympathized
with  his  motives.  He  visited  nearly  every  part  of
the  country,  and  crossed  the  Alleghanies  fifty
times.  In  January,  1809.  he  presented  his  "  Ob
servations  on  the  Geology  of  the  United  States,
explanatory  of  a  Geological  Map,"  before  the
American  philosophical  society,  and  so  the  matter
came  before  the  public,  lie  continued  his  explo
rations,  and  in  1817  again  discussed  this  subject
before  the  same  society,  presenting  his  map.  Its
publication,  with  the  description,  attracted  much
attention,  and  he  was  styled  the  "  father  of  Ameri
can  geology."  He  became  a  member  of  the  Acade
my  of  natural  sciences  soon  after  its  organization
in"  1812,  and  was  its  president  from  1817  till  his
death.  Its  library  and  museum  were  enriched  by
his  books — nearly  5,000  volumes — and  his  speci
mens,  making  a  collection  that  was  unequalled  in
the  United  States.  His  contributions  to  the  so
ciety  in  money  aggregated  $25,000,  and  by  means


of  them  it  was  able  to  complete  its  edifice  on  Broad
street,  Philadelphia.  In  1816-'17  he  visited  the
West  India  islands  to  study  their  geology,  and  he
published  subsequently  an  account  of  twenty  visits
to  those  islands.  He  "went  to  France  in  18i9,  and
then  to  Spain,  where  he  proposed  to  establish  a
great  agricultural  school  for  the  lower  classes,  in
which  labor  should  be  combined  with  moral  and
intellectual  culture.  He  purchased  land  near  Ali
cante,  and  erected  buildings  ;  but  on  the  overthrow
of  the  revolutionary  government  the  land  reverted
to  the  church,  from  which  it  had  been  confiscated.
In  1824  he  returned  to  the  United  States,  and,  asso
ciating  with  him  Thomas  Say,  Gerald  Froost,  and
other  scientists,  attempted  to  carry  out  a  similar
plan  in  New  Harmony,  Ind.  For  several  years
Mr.  Mac-lure  continued  his  efforts,  in  hope  of
bringing  the  school  into  operation,  but  without
success.  In  1827  he  went  to  Mexico  in  failing
health,  and  continued  to  reside  there  until  his
death,  with  occasional  visits  to  the  United  States.
He  was  president  of  the  American  geological  so
ciety  in  1828.  Mr.  Mac-lure  contributed  numerous
papers  to  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science,"  and
published  "  Opinions  on  Various  Subjects,"  de
voted  mainly  to  questions  of  political  economy  (2
vols.,  New  Harmony,  1837).

MacMAHON,  Bernard,  horticulturist,  b.  in
Ireland  about  1775  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa,,  16
Sept.,  1816.  He  came  to  the  United  States  in
17!)6.  and  settled  in  Philadelphia,  where,  in  1809,
he  founded  a  botanic  garden,  which  he  named
Upsal.  Mr.  MacMahon  was  one  of  the  first  suc
cessful  gardeners  of  the  United  States,  a  man  of
education,  and  devoted  to  his  profession.  He
published  "The  American  Gardener's  Calendar"
(1806;  llth  ed.,  revised  by  John  Jay  Smith,  1857).

McMAHON,  John  Tan  Lear,  lawyer,  b.  in
Maryland  in  1800 ;  d.  in  Cumberland,  Md.,  15  June,
1871.  Fie  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1817,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1821.
He  served  in  the  state  legislature,  and,  possessing
rare  personal  ad
vantages,  soon
gained  reputa
tion  as  a  political
speaker,  as  well
as  a  high  place
in  his  profession.
He  adapted  the
old  turnpike  laws
of  Maryland  to
the  new  condi
tion  of  affairs
caused  by  the
incorporation  of
the  Baltimore
and  Ohio  rail
road,  and  was  for  A  r>  »
some  years  its  J.  J/.  /_.  J\t?
counsel.  He  is

said  to  have  contributed  more  than  any  other  to
the  prosperity  of  the  Jackson  party  in  Maryland,
but  subsequently  deserted  it  on  the  U.  S.  bank
question.  He  took  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  can
vass  of  1840,  and  presided  at  a  great^ratification
meeting,  where  Henry  Clay,  Daniel  Webster,  and
William  C.  Preston  made  speeches.  The  failure  of
his  eyesight  compelled  him  to  relinquish  his  pro
fession  about  1855,  and  much  of  his  later  life  was
spent  in  Ohio.  St.  John's  college,  Annapolis,  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  I),  in  1869.  He  published
"An  Historical  View  of  Maryland,"  which  is  a
standard  authority  on  the  early  history  of  the
province  (Baltimore,  1831).


148


McMAHON


McMASTER


McMAHON.  Laurence  Stephen,  R.C.  bishop.
b.  in  Nova  Scotia.  24  Dec..  1835.  He  was  removed

to  the  United  States  while  an  infant.  After  study
ing  in  Boston,  Worcester,  Mass.,  Baltimore,  Md.,
and  Montreal,  Canada,  he  went  abroad,  and  re
ceived  his  theological  education  in  Aix  and  in
Rome.  He  was  ordained  to  the  Roman  Catholic
priesthood  in  18(50,  and,  returning  to  the  United
States,  was  first  stationed  at  the  cathedral  in
Boston,  Mass.  In  1803  he  became  chaplain  of  the
28th  Massachusetts  regiment,  and  after  the  war  he
was  pastor  in  Bridgeport,  Conn.,  and  subsequently
in  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  where  he  built  the  church
of  St.  Lawrence  and  a  hospital  under  the  charge  of
the  Sisters  of  Mercy.  He  was  vicar-general  of  the
see  of  Providence  in  1872-'9,  and  at  the  latter  date
was  consecrated  bishop  of  Hartford,  Conn.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Rome  in  1872.

McMAHON,  Martin  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  La-
prairie,  Canada.  21  March,  1838.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  St.  John's  college,  Fordham,  N.  Y..  in  1855.
and  subsequently  studied  law.  For  a  time  he  was
special  post-office  agent  for  the  Pacific  coast,  and
also  served  as  Indian  agent,  but  at  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  volunteered  and  was  made  cap
tain,  becoming  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  George  B.
McClellan.  In  1862  he  was  appointed  adjutant-
general  and  chief  of  staff  of  the  (5th  corps  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  under  Gen.  William  B.
Franklin,  serving  also  under  Gens.  John  Sedgwick
and  Horatio  G.  Wright  until  after  the  final  opera
tions  before  Petersburg.  He  resigned  in  1800.  after
receiving  the  brevets  of  brigadier-  and  major-gen
eral  of  volunteers  on  13  March,  18(55.  In  1806-'7  he
was  corporation  attorney  of  the  city  of  New  York,
and  in  1868-'9  he  was  IT.  S.  minister  to  Paraguay.
In  1872  he  was  appointed  receiver  of  taxes  in  New
York  city,  which  office  he  held  until  1885,  when  he
became  U.  S.  marshal  of  the  southern  district  of
New  York.  Gen.  McMahon  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  St.  John's  college  in  I860.  During
1886-'7  he  was  president  of  the  Society  of  the  Army
of  the  Potomac.  His  brother,  JOHN  EUGENE,  b.  in
Waterford,  Ireland,  in  1834.  d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,
in  May.  1803,  and  another  brother,  JAMES  POWER,
b.  in  Waterford,  Ireland,  in  183(5,  killed  at  the  bat
tle  of  Cold  Harbor,  in  June,  1804,  each  had  com
mand  of  the  104th  New  York  volunteers.  They  had
previously  graduated  from  St.  John's  college,  and
were  practising  lawyers  when  the  civil  war  began.

MA  CM  ASTER,  Donald,  Canadian  member  of
parliament,  b.  in  Glengarry,  3  Sept.,  1840.  He  was
graduated  at  McGill  university  as  bachelor  of  civil
law  in  1871,  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Quebec  in
that  year,  and  to  that  of  Ontario  in  1882,  when  he
also  became  a  Queen's  counsel.  He  represented
Glengarry  in  the  Ontario  parliament  from  1879
till  he  resigned  in  May,  1882.  to  become  a  candi
date  for  the  Dominion  parliament,  to  which  he  was
elected  for  the  same  constituency.  He  has  gained
reputation  as  an  eloquent  speaker.

McMASTER,  Gilbert,  clergyman,  b.  in  the
parish  of  Saintfield,  Ireland,  13 'Feb.,  1778;  d.  in
New  Albany,  Ind.,  15  March,  1854.  He  emigrated
with  his  parents  to  the  United  States  in  1791,
studied  two  years  at  Jefferson  college.  Pa.,  and  was
licensed  to  practise  medicine  in  1805,  but  aban
doned  it  for  theology,  and  in  1807  was  licensed  to
preach,  being  ordained  the  next  year  as  pastor  of
the  Reformed  Presbyterian  church  of  Duanes-
burg,  N.  Y.  He  officiated  there  until  1840,  when
he  accepted  a  call  from  the  church  in  Princeton,
Ind.,  which  he  resigned,  on  account  of  the  failure
of  his  health,  in  184(5.  Union  gave  him  the  degree
of  D.  D.  in  1828.  His  works  include  "  An  Essay  in


Defence  of  Some  Fundamental  Doctrines  of  Chris
tianity"  (Utica,  N.  Y..  1815);  "The  Shorter  Cate
chism"  Analyzed"  (1815);  "An  Apology  for  the
Book  of  Psalms  "  (1818) ;  and  the  "  Moral  Character
of  Civil  Government"  (1832). — His  son,  Erasmus
Darwin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mercer,  Pa.,  4  Feb.,
180(5:  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  11  Sept.,  186(5.  was  gradu
ated  at  Union  in  1827,  studied  theology  under  his
father,  and  in  1831  was  ordained  pastor  of  the
Presbyterian  church  in  Ballston,  N.  Y.  He  be
came  president  of  South  Hanover  college,  Ind.,  in
1838,  but  resigned  in  1845  to  accept  the  presidency
of  Miami  university.  After  four  years'  service  in
that  institution  he  was  made  professor  of  systematic
theology  in  New  Albany  theological  seminary,  and
from  January,  1866,  till  his  death,  a  few  months
afterward,  occupied  the  same  chair  in  the  Theo
logical  seminary  of  the  northwest,  Chicago.  111.
Dr.  McMaster  exercised  an  almost  unbounded  in
fluence  over  the  students  with  whom  he  was  con
nected.  Union  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  .D.  in
1841. — Another  son.  James  Alphonsns.  journalist,
b.  in  Duaneslmrg.  Schenectady  co.,  N.  Y.,  1  April,
1820;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  29  Dec.,  1886,  entered
Union  college,  but  left  without  being  graduated,
began  the  study  of  law,  and  became  a  private  tu
tor.  In  1845  he  united  with  the  Roman  Catholic
church,  and  soon  afterward  went  to  Belgium,
where  he  entered  a  Redemptorist  novitiate  for
"  reflection  and  study  to  decide  his  vocation."  His
own  inclination  at  that  time  tended  toward  the
priesthood,  but  his  confessor  commanded  him  to
"enter  the  world  and  become  a  Catholic  journal
ist."  He  returned  to  the  United  States,  bought  in
1848  the  "  Freeman's  Journal  and  Catholic  Regis
ter,"  and  for  nearly  forty  years  was  regarded  as  the
chief  Roman  Catholic  journalist  in  this  country.
In  1861  he  was  arrested  and  confined  in  Fort  La
fayette  for  his  uncompromising  strictures  upon  the
war  measures  of  President  Lincoln,  and  his  paper
was  suppressed.  At  the  end  of  eleven  months  he
was  released,  and  the  publication  of  the  "Free
man's  Journal"  was  resumed,  19  April.  1862.  Al
though  a  life-long  Democrat,  he  bitterly  opposed
the  candidacy  of  Samuel  J.  Tilden,  and,  in  spite  of
his  devotion  to  his  church,  he  did  not  spare  its
highest  dignitaries.  Much  of  his  violent  language
during  the  last  ten  years  of  his  life  was  attributed
to  chronic  disease.

McMASTER,  Guy  Humphrey,  poet,  b.  in
Clyde,  N.  Y.,  31  Jan.,  1829  :  d.  in  Bath,  Steuben
co.',  N.  Y.,  13  Sept.,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at
Hamilton  college  in  1847.  with  the  reputation  of
being  the  most  brilliant  student  that  the  college
had  ever  known.  At  nineteen  years  of  age  he
wrote  "  Carmen  Bellicosum,"  better  known  as  "  The
Old  Continentals,"  which  was  published  in  the
"  Knickerbocker  Magazine,"  and  at  once  attained
popularity.  In  his  youth  he  also  contributed  to  the
"Whig  Review"  and  "Putnam's  Monthly,"  and
published  a  "  History  of  Steuben  County,"  N.  Y."
(Bath,  1849).  He  afterward  abandoned  literature
for  law,  and  contributed  to  the  press  only  at  inter
vals.  He  edited  the  "Steuben  Courier"  in  1855.
again  in  1870,  and  in  1877,  while  he  was  abroad,
he  contributed  to  its  columns  a  series  of  articles
called  "  Other  Side  Letters,"  that  were  widely
copied.  His  best-known  poems  besides  "  Carmen
Bellicosum  "  are  a  "  Dream  of  Thanksgiving  Eve  "
(1804);  "The  Commanders,"  a  poem  delivered  at
the  Newton  Sullivan  centennial  celebration,  which
is  included  in  "  Gen.  Sullivan's  Indian  Expedition  "
(New  York,  1887);  and  "The  Professor's  Guest
Chamber"  (1880).  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
Steuben  county  in  1852,  and  practised  until  1863,


McMASTER

when  he  became  county  judge  and  surrogate,  held
both  offices  till  their  separation  in  1883,  when  he
was  elected  surrogate.

McMASTER,  John  Bach,  historian,  b.  in
Brooklyn,  X.  Y.,  29  June,  1852.  His  father,  a  na
tive  of  New  York,  was  a  banker  and  planter  at  New
Orleans  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  The
son  was  educated  in  the  public  schools,  and  gradu
ated  at  the  College  of  the  city,  of  New  York  in
1872.  He  taught  grammar  in  that  institution  for
a  year,  spent  several  months  in  the  study  of  civil
engineering,  and  in  the  autumn  of  1873'  devoted
himself  to  the  work  of  writing  his  "  History  of  the
People  of  the  United  States,"  for  which 'he  had
been  gathering  material  since  1870.  He  was  ap
pointed  instructor  in  civil  engineering  at  Prince
ton  in  1877,  and  in  1883  became  professor  of  Ameri
can  history  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.
The  first  volume  of  his  "  History  of  the  People  of
the  United  States  from  the  Revolution  to  the  Civil
War"  (New  York,  1883)  achieved  an  immediate
success.  His  other  writings  include  numerous
magazine  articles ;  the  2d  volume  of  his  history
(1885):  and  "Life  of  Benjamin  Franklin"  in  the
"  Men  of  Letters  "  series  (Boston,  1887).

McMASTER,  William,  Canadian  merchant,  b.
in  Tyrone,  Ireland,  24  Dec.,  1811  ;  d.  in  Toronto,
22  Sept.,  1887.  He  came  to  Canada  in  1833,  en
tered  the  wholesale  mercantile  establishment  of
Robert  Cathcart,  in  Toronto,  and  afterward  en
gaged  in  business  on  his  own  account.  Mr.  Mc-
Master  was  a  member  of  the  legislative  council  of
Canada,  for  the  Midland  division,  from  1862  till
1867.  when  he  was  called  to  the  senate  by  royal
proclamation.  He  was  noted  for  his  liberality*  in
behalf  of  the  educational  and  religious  institutions
of  the  Baptist  denomination,  to  which  he  belonged.
He  was  a  liberal  supporter  of  the  Canadian  liter
ary  institute  at  Woodstock,  to  whose  building  fund
alone  he  contributed  $12,000 :  erected  and  furnished,
at  an  expense  of  over  $100,000,  McMaster  Hall,
the  new  Baptist  college  in  Toronto;  and,  with  his
wife,  gave  over  $60.000  toward  the  building  of  the
Jarvis  street  Baptist  church.  Toronto.  He  was  in
strumental  in  establishing  the  Superannuated  min
isters'  society  of  the  Baptist  church,  was  for  many
years  treasurer  of  the  Upper  Canada  Bible  society
and  among  its  most  generous  subscribers,  and  was  j
chairman  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the  Baptist
college.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  senate  of  !
the  University  of  Toronto,  chairman  of  the  Canada  ;
board  of  the  Great  Western  railway,  president  of
the  Canadian  Bank  of  Commerce," and  was  con
nected  with  other  institutions.  While  speaking  in  |
McMaster  Hall,  he  fainted,  and  remained  uncon-  !
scions  till  his  death  on  the  following  morning.

McMICHAEL,  Morton,  journalist,  b.  in  Bur
lington,  N.  J.,  2  Oct.,  1807';  d.  in  Philadelphia,  '
Pa.,  6  Jan.,  1879.  He  was  educated  in  the  schools
of  his  native  town  and  at  the  University  of  Penn
sylvania,  read  law,  and  in  1827  was  admitted  to  the  j
Philadelphia  bar.  He  became  editor  of  the  "  Sat-  j
unlay  Evening  Post "  in  1826,  from  1831  to  1836
was  editor-in-chief  of  the  "  Saturday  Courier,"  and
during  the  latter  year,  with  others,  began  the  pub
lication  of  the  "Saturday  News."  In  1844  he  as
sociated  himself  with  Joseph  C.  Neal  in  the  editor
ship  of  the  "  Saturday  Gazette,"  and  in  1847  he
acquired  an  interest  in  the  "North  American."
which  journal  was,  during  that  year,  consolidated
with  the  "  United  States  Gazette,"  and  under  this
union  the  publication  was  thereafter  known  as  the
"  North  American  and  United  States  Gazette."
He  was  sole  proprietor  of  this  journal  from  1854
till  his  death,  and  under  his  management  and  edi-  i


McMICKEN


149


torship  it  grew  to  be  one  of  the  best-known  jour
nals  in  the  country.  While  a  young  man  he  served
several  years  as  an  alderman  of  Philadelphia,  from
1843  till  1846  he  was  sheriff  of  the  county,  from
1866  till  1869  mayor  of  the  city,  in  1867,  on' the  or
ganization  of  the  park  commission,  was  chosen
president  of  that  body,  which  post  he  held  till  his
death,  and  in  1873  he  was  appointed  a  delegate  at
large  to  the  fourth  Constitutional  convention  of
Pennsylvania.  He  was  frequently  invited  to  ad
dress  public  audiences  on  great  occasions,  and
achieved  note  as  an  orator.  Of  his  speeches  a
critic  has  written  :  "  Prepared  or  unprepared,  they
were  always  finished  models."  A  bronze  statue
of  him.  in  Fairmount  park,  bears  the  inscription,
"  An  honored  and  beloved  citizen  of  Philadel
phia." —  His  third  son.  William,  lawyer,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4  March,  1841,  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1859,  and  had
begun  law  studies  when,  "in  April,  1861.  he  enlisted
as  a  private  under  President  Lincoln's  first  call  for
troops.  He  was  afterward  promoted  to  captain
and  aide-de-camp,  then  major,  and  later  brevetted
colonel,  acting  under  Gen.  Grant,  Gen.  Rosecrans,
and  Gen.  Thomas.  After  serving  through  the  war
he  resumed  his  law  studies,  and  was  admitted  to
the  Philadelphia  bar  in  1865.  He  was  appointed
solicitor  of  internal  revenue  of  the  treasury  depart
ment  soon  after  Gen.  Grant's  first  election  to  the
presidency,  and  resigned  the  office  in  1871  to  be
come  U.  S.  assistant  attorney-general.  That  office
he  held  until  1877,  when  he  was  appointed  U.  S.
district  attorney  for  the  eastern  district  of  Pennsyl
vania,  but  he  resigned  in  1875  to  enter  into  private
practice.  He  was  appointed  by  President  Garfield
I  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  board  of  Indian  commis
sioners.  In  1882  he  was  a  candidate  for  congress-
man-at-large  on  the  Independent  Republican  tick
et.  He  has  always  been  an  active  participant  in
public  affairs.  He  is  now  (1888)  a  member  of  the
bar  of  New  York  city.  He  inherited  in  a  large  de
gree  the  oratorical  gifts  of  his  father.  Among  his
addresses  is  a  eulogy  on  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas
at  a  memorial  meeting  at  the  Academy  of  Music,
and  an  oration  at  the  unveiling  of  the  Lincoln
monument  in  Fairmount  park. — Morton's  fourth
son,  Clayton,  journalist,  b.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,
30  June,  1844.  was  educated  in  private  schools,  en
listed  in  the  army  in  April,  1861,  and  was  commis
sioned  2d  lieutenant  in  the  U.  S.  army  on  5  Aug.
He  resigned,  27  Sept.,  1865,  with  the  brevet  rank
of  major  in  the  regular  army.  After  leaving  the
army  he  began  journalistic  work  in  connection
with  his  father's  newspaper,  and  a  few  years  before
the  latter's  death  succeeded  him  in  its  editorship,
in  which  post  he  has  since  continued.  In  1872  he
was  appointed  commissioner  to  the  International
exposition  at  Vienna,  and  in  December,  1882,  be
came  U.  S.  marshal  for  the  District  of  Columbia.
He  resigned,  4  March,  1885,  but  his  resignation  was
not  accepted  by  President  Cleveland  until  3  Dec.

McMICKEN,  Gilbert,  Canadian  member  of
parliament,  b.  in  Wigtonshire,  Scotland,  in  1813.
He  came  to  Canada  in  1832.  was  for  many  years  a
resident  of  the  Niagara  district,  and  held  several
municipal  offices  there.  He  represented  Welland
county  in  the  legislative  assembly  of  Canada  from
1857  till  1861,  was  stipendiary  magistrate  for
Canada  West  during  the  civil  war  in  the  United
States,  and  was  specially  thanked  by  Lord  Monk
for  the  efficient  discharge  of  his  duties.  During
the  Fenian  excitement  he  was  commissioner  of
police  for  the  Dominion,  and  contributed  to  the
repulse  of  the  raiders  in  1870.  After  his  removal
to  Manitoba  he  performed  a  similar  service  in  con-


150


MCMILLAN


McMURRAY


noction  with  the  contemplated  Fenian  attack  on
Fort  Garry  during  Lieut.-Gov.  Archibald's  term.
He  had  charge  of  the  Dominion  land-office  in
Manitoba  from  the  time  it  was  opened,  and  held
the  office  of  assistant  receiver-general  and  other
posts  till  he  was  retired  in  1877.  Mr.  McMicken
represented  Cartier  as  a  Conservative  in  1880-'2.
He  patented  two  important  inventions  in  telegra
phy  in  1847,  and  was  the  first  to  span  Niagara
river  with  a  telegraph-wire.

McMILLAN,"  James,  capitalist,  b.  in  Hamil
ton,  Ont.,  13  May,  1838.  He  went  to  Detroit
when  he  was  sixteen  years  of  age,  and  was  clerk  in
a  hardware-store  for  two  years,  until  he  was  ap
pointed  purchasing-agent  for  the  Detroit  and  Mil
waukee  railroad  company.  In  1804,  with  John
S.  Newberry  and  others,  he  organized  the  Michigan
car  company,  for  the  manufacture  of  freight-cars.
This  business  grew  very  rapidly,  and  in  ten  years
it  was  one  of  the  largest  in  the  United  States.  Its
success  led  to  the  formation  of  the  Detroit  car-
wheel  company,  the  Baugh  steam-forge  company,
the  Detroit  iron-furnace  company,  and  the  Vulcan
furnace  company.  In  1881,  with  his  associates  in
business,  he  organized  the  Detroit,  Mackinaw,  and
Marquette  railroad  company,  of  which  he  became
president.  Mr.  McMillan  is  one  of  the  largest
owners  of  the  Detroit  and  Cleveland  steam  naviga
tion  company,  and  the  Detroit  transportation  com
pany,  has  been  a  director  of  several  banks  in  De
troit,  and  is  interested  in  other  large  business  en
terprises.  He  has  been  chairman  of  the  Michigan
state  Republican  committee,  contributing  largely
to  its  funds.  His  business  enterprises  have  uni
formly  proved  successful,  and  he  has  acquired  a
large  fortune.  In  188(5  he  joined  with  John  S.
Newberry  in  contributing  $100,000  each  for  the
establishment  and  maintenance  of  a  hospital  in
Detroit,  and  he  has  been  a  generous  contributor  to
other  charitable  institutions.

McMILLAN,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Fagg's
Manor,  Chester  co.,  Pa.,  11  Nov.,  1752;  d.  in  Can-
onsburg,  Pa.,  16  Nov.,  1833.  After  graduation  at
Princeton  in  1772  he  studied  theology,  was  licensed
to  preach  in  1774,  and  performed  missionary  ser
vice  in  Maryland,  western  Virginia,  and  western
Pennsylvania.  In  1775  he  organized  the  churches
of  Pigeon  Creek  and  Chartiers,  Pa.,  over  which  he
was  ordained  in  1776.  He  endured  many  hard
ships,  owing  to  troubles  with  the  Indians'on  the
frontier  during  the  Revolutionary  war,  and  lived
in  a  log-house  in  Canonsburg,  Pa.,  which  he  partly
built.  He  established  there  a  small  Latin-school
and  theological  seminary,  which  were  developed
into  Canonsburg  academy  in  1700  and  became  the
nucleus  of  Jefferson  college.  From  this  institu
tion  he  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  in  1805.

McMILLAN,  Samuel  James  Renwick,  jurist,
b.  in  Brownsville,  Fayette  co.,  Pa.,  22  Feb.,  1826.
In  early  years  he  removed  to  Pittsburg.  and  was
graduated  in  1846  at  Duquesne  college  in  that
city.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1849,  and  began  to  practise  in  Stillwater,  Minn.,
in  1852.  In  185(5  he  removed  to  St.  Paul,  practis
ing  there  until,  in  1857,  the  state  government  of
Minnesota  was  formed,  when  he  was  made  judge
of  the  1st  judicial  circuit.  In  1864  he  was  ap
pointed  justice  of  the  state  supreme  court  to  fill  a
vacancv,  and  in  the  same  year  elected  to  that,  office
for  a  full  term  of  seven  years,  being  re-elected  in
1871.  In  1874  he  was  appointed  chief  justice  of
the  supreme  court  to  fill  a  vacancy,  and  was  sub
sequently  elected  for  a  full  term.  lie  was  chosen
to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Republican  in  1875,  and
afterward  re-elected  for  the  term  that  expired


3  March,  1887.  His  judicial  opinions  are  em
braced  in  "Minnesota  Reports"  (vols.  ix.-xxi.,  in
clusive.  St.  Paul,  1864-'7o).

McMILLEN,  William  Linn,  soldier,  b.  in
Hillsboro',  Highland  co.,  Ohio,  18  Oct.,  1829.  He
was  graduated  at  Starling  medical  college,  Colum
bus,  Ohio,  in  1852,  was  surgeon  in  the  Russian
army  from  1855  till  the  end  of  the  Crimean  war,
and  of  the  1st  Ohio  infantry  in  1861,  and  in  1862
he  became  colonel  of  the  95th  Ohio.  He  served  in
the  west  and  south,  led  a  brigade  at  Nashville,
commanded  a  district  after  Lee's  surrender,  and
received  the  brevets  of  brigadier-general  and  ma
jor-general  of  volunteers  on  16  Dec.,  1864,  and  13
March.  1865,  respectively.  lie  then  became  a  plant-
'  er  in  Louisiana,  served  several  terms  in  the  legis-
lature,  and  in  1872  and  1873  was  chosen  to  the
U.  S.  senate  by  the  McEnery  legislature,  but  not
admitted  to  a  seat.  In  1878-'83  he  was  postmaster
of  New  Orleans.

McMULLEN,  John,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Ballina-
hinch,  County  Down,  Ireland.  8  March,  1833;  d.  in
Davenport,  Iowa,  3  July,  1883.  His  family  emi
grated  to  Canada  in  his  infancy,  then  removed  to
Ogdensburg,  N.  Y.,  and  settled  finally  in  Chicago,
where  this  son  was  graduated  at  St.  Mary's  col
lege  in  1854.  He  then  went  to  Rome,  studied  at
Urban  college,  was  ordained  priest  in  1858,  re
ceived  the  degree  of  I).  D.,  and  returned  to  Chica
go.  In  1861  he  became  president  of  the  University
of  St.  Mary's  of  the  Lake,  which  charge  he  held  for
four  years,  and  in  1863  began  the  erection  of  a  new
university  building,  which  was  destroyed  in  the
great  fire.  He  then  spent  some  time  in  Wilming
ton,  111.,  but  returned  to  Chicago  in  1870  to  take
charge  of  the  Cathedral  of  the  Holy  Name.  In
1877  he  was  appointed  vicar-general  of  the  diocese,
and  in  1881  consecrated  bishop  of  the  new  diocese
that  had  been  formed  in  Davenport,  Iowa,  where
he  remained  until  his  death.  He  organized  a  high-
school  for  boys  and  several  parochial  schools,  and
was  the  author  of  many  articles  on  church  history.

MeMURDIE,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  London.
England,  21  May,  1822;  d.  in  Eramettsburg,  Md.,
20  Jan.,  1880.  He  received  his  preparatory  edu
cation  in  London,  and  entered  a  mercantile  house
in  Liverpool.  During  the  Tract arian  movement
in  England  he  became  a  Roman  Catholic,  and,  com
ing  to  the  United  States,  entered  Mount  St.  Mary's
seminary,  Eramettsburg,  and  in  1854  was  ordained
priest.  He  was  appointed  professor  of  dogmatic
theology  and  moral  philosophy  in  St.  Mary's,  and
succeeded  Archbishop  Elder  as  director  of  the  ec
clesiastical  seminary.  He  was  looked  on  as  one  of
the  ablest  theologians  and  metaphysicians  of  his
church  in  the  United  States.

McMURRAY,  William,  Canadian  clergyman,
b.  in  Seagoe,  near  Portadown,  Ireland,  19  Sept.,

1810.  He  came to  Canada  with his parents in

1811,  was  educated  under  Dr.  Strachan  (afterward
bishop)  at  Toronto,  and  sent  as  a  missionary  of  the
Church  of  England  to  the  Indians  at  Sault  Sainte
Marie  in  1832. He  was  ordained  priest  by  Bishop
Stewart,  of  Quebec,  in  1833,  and  became  rector  of
Ancaster  in  1840,  rural  dean  of  Lincoln  and  \Vel-
land  in  1867,  and  archdeacon  of  Niagara  in  1875.
He  was  instrumental  in  settling  the  clergy  reserves
in 1853,  was appointed  agent by  the senate of
Trinity  college.  Toronto,  in  1854,  to  ask  assistance
for  that  institution  from  the  United  States,  and
was  sent  in  1864  on  a  similar  mission  to  England.
The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  in
1853  by  Columbia,  and  that  of  doctor  of  common
law  in  1857  by  the  university  of  Trinity  college,
Toronto. Dr.  McMurray  is  the  oldest  clergyman


McMURRlCH


MAcNAB


151


of  his  church  in  Canada,  with  the  exception  of  the
metropolitan.  Bishop  Medley,  of  Fredericton,  X.  B.

McMl'RRICH,  John,  Canadian  merchant,  b.  in
Renfrewshire.  Scotland,  in  1804 ;  d.  in  Toronto,  13
Feb.,  1883.  He  was  engaged  for  some  time  in
business  in  Glasgow,  and  in  1835  came  to  Canada,
where  he  subsequently  became  a  partner  in  a  large
mercantile  firm  in  Toronto.  In  1850,  when  the
legislative  council  became  elective,  Mr.  McMurrich
was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  the  Saugeen  di
vision,  but  in  1862  he  was  elected  for  that  constitu
ency  by  a  large  majority.  In  1864  he  declined  a
renomination,  and  in  1867  he  was  elected  to  the
Ontario  assembly  for  North  York,  but,  on  suffering
defeat  in  1871,  he  retired  from  political  life.  He
was  a  Liberal  in  politics.

MeMUBTBIE,  Henry,  educator,  b.  in  Phila
delphia  in  1793;  d.  there,  26  May,  1865.  He  was
graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1814,  and  became  pro
fessor  of  anatomy  and  physiology  in  the  Central
high-school  of  Philadelphia.  He  was  the  author  of
valuable  text-books,  including  a  "  Lexicon  Scien-
tarinm  :  a  Dictionary  of  Terms  used  in  the  Various
Branches  of  Anatomy,  Astronomy,  Botany,  Geol
ogy,  Geometry,  Hygiene,  Mineralogy,  Natural  Phi
losophy,  Physiology.  Zoology,  etc."  (Philadelphia,
1847).  *  He  also  published  a  translation  of  Cuvier's
'•  Animal  Kingdom  "  (1832).— His  cousin,  Richard
Coxe,  lawyer,  b.  in  Cumberland  county,  N.  J..  24
Oct.,  1819.  studied  law  in  Philadelphia,  where  in
1840  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  Shortly  after
ward  he  served  for  a  year  as  captain's  clerk  in  the
U.  S.  navy,  then  entered  on  the  practice  of  law,  in
which  he  early  attained  prominence,  and  is  now
(1888)  one  of  the  recognized  leaders  of  the  Phila
delphia  bar.  He  was  a  vice-provost  of  the  law
academy  of  Philadelphia  from  1864  till  1881.  He
was  for  several  years  one  of  the  guardians  of  the
poor,  and  is  now  a  director  of  the  department  of
charities  and  corrections  of  Philadelphia.  He  pub
lished,  with  George  W.  Biddle.  a  "General  Index,
etc."  (2  vols..  Philadelphia.  1857) :  and  "  A  Reading
on  Article  XVI.,  Sec.  7,  Constitution  of  Pennsyl
vania"  (1885);  and  has  written  on  legal  subjects
for  several  magazines.

McMl  RTRIE.  William,  chemist,  b.  in  Belvi-
dere,  N.  J.,  10  March,  1851.  He  was  graduated  at
Lafayette  in  1871  as  a  mining  engineer,  and  re
ceived  in  course  the  degree  of  Ph.  1).  in  1875.  In
1872  he  was  appointed  assistant  chemist  to  the  U.  S.
department  of  agriculture  in  Washington,  and  in
1873-'8  he  was  chemist-in-chief.  He  was  then  ap
pointed  superintendent  of  agricultural  products  in
the  U.  S.  section  of  the  World's  fair  in  Paris  in
1878,  and  at  the  same  time  commissioned  agent
and  representative  of  the  U.  S.  department  of  agri
culture  to  the  exposition.  Since  1882  he  has  filled
the  chair  of  chemistry  and  mineralogy  in  the  Uni
versity  of  Illinois,  and  he  is  also  chemist  to  the
state  board  of  agriculture.  Prof.  McMurtrie  is  a
member  of  scientific  societies,  and  in  1884  received
from  the  French  government  the  title  of  chevalier
du  merit  e  agricole.  He  published  reports  from  the
division  of  chemistry  of  the  department  of  agricul
ture,  which  were  issued  annually  and  under  the  di
rection  of  the  commissioner;  "  Report  on  Culture
of  the  Sugar-Beet "  (Washington.  1879);  "  Report  on
Culture  of  Sumac  "  (1879) :  "  Report  on  Statistics
of  Grape  Culture  in  the  United  States"  (1880) ;  and
"  Report  upon  Examination  of  Wools  and  other
Animal  Fibres"  (1887).

MacNAli,  Sir  Allan  Napier,  bart..  Canadian
soldier,  b.  in  Newark  (now  Niagara).  Ont..  19  Feb.,
1798;  d.  in  Toronto,  8  Aug.,  1862.  His  grand


father  was  Capt.  Robert  MacNab,  of  the  "  Black
Watch."  His  father  was  Lieut.  Allan  MacNab,
of  the  3d  dragoons,  who  afterward  came  to  this
country  as  an  officer  in  the  Queen's  ranger  hus
sars,  under  Col.  Sim-
coe.  The  rangers
took  an  active  part
in  the  Revolution
ary  war.  At  the  close
of  the  American  war
Lieut.  MacNab  re
tired  on  half-pay  to
Upper  Canada  with
his  young  wife,  the
daughter  of  Capt.
William  Napier,
commissioner  of  the
port  and  harbor  of
Quebec.  Shortly
after  the  birth  of
Allan  Napier  the
family  removed  to
York  (now  Toronto),
where  the  father  be
came  clerk  in  the  office  of  William  Jarvis.  provincial
secretary,  and  the  son  was  sent  to  the  home  district-
school.  As  a  pupil  he  did  not  win  high  honors,
being  fonder  of  play  than  of  study.  He  was  but
fifteen  years  of  age  when  the  American  invasion
of  Canada  took  place,  in  April,  1813,  and  he  and
his  father  at  once  volunteered,  and  were  sent  to  the
front  with  a  small  regular  and  militia  force.  The
town  was  ill  prepared  to  withstand  a  siege,  and  the
British  and  Canadian  troops  were  driven  back  on
Kingston.  During  the  retreat,  which  was  success
fully  accomplished,  young  MacNab  attracted  the
notice  of  his  commander,  and  through  the  latter's
influence  he  was  subsequently  appointed  a  mid
shipman  on  board  the  "  Wolfe."  the  flag-ship  of  Sir
James  Lucas  Yeo.  He  accompanied  Yeo's  expedi
tion  to  Sackett's  Harbor  and  other  points  along
the  southern  side  of  Lake  Ontario ;  but  the  navy
had  no  charm  for  him,  and  he  relinquished  his
place  after  a  few  months'  service  and  joined  the
100th  foot,  then  commanded  by  Col.  John  Murray.
He  took  an  active  part  in  several  movements,  and
his  prominence  in  the  advanced  guard  at  the
storming  of  Fort  Niagara  won  for  him  an  ensigncy
in  the  49th  regiment  and  honorable  mention  in^the
despatches.  Eleven  days  later  he  was  found  at  Fort
Erie,  and  on  the  night  of  29  Dec.  he  took  part  in
Sir  Phineas  Riall's  exploits  against  Buffalo  and
Black  Rock.  At  the  close  of  the  hostilities  of  that
season,  on  the  Niagara  frontier,  he  went  to  Mon
treal,  joined  his  new  regiment,  and  at  the  affair  at
Plattsburg  led  the  advanced  guard  at  the  Saranac
bridge.  After  the  defeat  of  the  British  forces
young  MacNab.  greatly  chagrined,  is  said  to  have
broken  his  sword  and  "vowed  that  he  would  never
draw  blade  again  under  such  a  leader  as  Sir
George  Prevost.  After  the  proclamation  of  peace,
MacNab  returned  to  his  home  in  York  on  half-pay.
He  now  began  to  look  about  him  for  a  career.
Military  life  was  out  of  the  question,  he  was  not
well  educated,  and  his  capacity  was  not  large.  He
was  a  fine  specimen  of  manhood,  and  a  thorough
aristocrat  in  every  way.  In  politics  he  was  a  born
Tory  of  the  severest  school.  The  influence  of
friends  secured  for  him  an  articled  clerkship  in  the
office  of  the  attorney-general,  and  a  situation  as
copying-clerk  in  one  of  the  government  offices.
At  the  Michaelmas  term  of  1826  he  was  called  to
the  bar  of  Upper  Canada.  In  May.  1821.  he  mar
ried  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Lieut.  Daniel  Brooke,
of  Toronto.  On  being  called  to  the  bar,  MacNab


152


MAcXAB


McNAIR


removed  to  Hamilton,  where  he  began  the  practice
of  his  profession.  In  1829  a  circumstance  occurred
that  proved  the  direct  means  of  his  entrance  into
public  life.  The  "Hamilton  outrage,"  as  the  ex
hibition  of  Sir  John  Colborne  in  effigy  through
the  streets  of  that  city  was  called,  became  the  sub
ject  of  parliamentary  inquiry.  MacNab  was  sum
moned  as  a  witness,  and,  on  certain  questions  being
put  to  him,  he  declined  to  testify,  averring  that  if
he  did  so  he  might  compromise  himself.  He  was
declared  guilty  of  contempt,  and  the  sergeant-at-
arms  promptly  took  him  into  custody  and  brought
him  to  the  bar  of  the  house.  On  motion  of  William
Lyon  Mackenzie,  the  leader  of  the  Upper  Canadian
rebellion  of  eight  years  afterward,  the  recalcitrant
witness  was  committed  to  the  common  jail.  He
was  confined  for  a  brief  period  only,  but  the  Con
servatives  chose  to  regard  him  as  a  martyr,  and
when  the  general  elections  of  1830  occurred  Mac-
Nab  was  selected  as  their  candidate.  He  was  sent
to  the  house  of  assembly  as  the  representative  of
Wentworth  county,  and  one  of  his  first  acts  in  the
legislature  was  to  second  a  motion  for  the  expul
sion  of  Mr.  Mackenzie  from  parliament  for  breach
of  privilege,  the  offence  being  the  publication  in
Mackenzie's  newspaper  of  some  sharp  criticism  of
the  government's  policy.  The  conduct  of  MacNab
and  his  friends  was  indefensible,  but  party  feeling
ran  high  in  those  days,  and  members  stopped  at
nothing.  MacNab  followed  his  movement  of  hos
tility  against  Mackenzie  with  a  series  of  attacks,
which  hardly  ceased  during  the  lifetime  of  the  agi
tator.  In  1837  he  was  elected  speaker  of  the  house
of  assembly,  and  he  continued  to  hold  that  office
until  the  union  of  1841.  He  represented  Went
worth  county  for  three  terms,  and  then  sat  for
Hamilton.  The  Upper  Canadian  rebellion  of  1837-'8
gave  him  another  opportunity  to  employ  his  sol
dier-like  qualities.  As  soon  as  the  uprising  took
place  he  put  himself  at  the  head  of  a  band  of  fol
lowers,  whom  he  styled  his  "  Men  of  Gore,"  and
proceeded  to  Toronto  to  the  assistance  of  the  lieu
tenant-governor.  The  rout  of  the  rebels  at  Mont
gomery's  tavern,  the  dispersion  of  the  malcontents
of  the  western  district,  the  Niagara  frontier  epi
sode,  and  the  cutting  out  of  the  steamer  "Caro
line  "  followed  in  quick  succession.  For  services
that  he  rendered  in  the  campaign,  MacNab  was
knighted,  and  received  the  thanks  of  the  provincial
legislature.  Later  he  was  created  Queen's  counsel.
Soon  after  the  union  of  Upper  and  Lower  Cana
da,  Sir  Allan  became  leader  of  the  Conservatives,
then  in  opposition.  On  the  defeat  of  the  Baldwin-
Lafontaine  administration,  MacNab  was  elected  to
the  speaker's  chair,  and  he  occupied  it  from  1844
till  1848,  when  he  once  more  became  chief  of  the
Conservative  opposition,  and  Baldwin  and  Lafon-
taine  succeeded  to  power  for  a  second  time.  He
opposed  with  great  vehemence  Lafontaine's  rebel
lion  losses  bill,  and  even  went  to  England  to  invoke
imperial  interference.  His  mission  failed,  though
Mr.  Gladstone  strongly  supported  his  cause.  On
the  defeat  of  the  Ilincks-Morin  government  in
1854,  Sir  Allan  was  asked  by  the  Earl  of  Elgin  to
form  a  cabinet.  He  called  Mr.  Morin  to  his  aid,
and  in  the  month  of  September  in  the  same  year
he  succeeded  in  forming  a  coalition  ministry,  taking
the  offices  of  president  of  the  council  and  minister
of  agriculture.  In  this  cabinet  by  far  the  more
active  spirit  was  John  A.  Macdonald.  Sir  Allan's
lieutenant.  This  government  succeeded  in  negoti
ating  a  reciprocity  treaty  with  the  United  States,
abolishing  the  seigniorial  tenure  laws,  and  secular
izing  the  clergy  reserves.  The  premier  suffered
severely  from  gout,  and  his  energy  and  force  began


to  show  signs  of  weakening.  On  Macdonald's  shoul
ders  fell  the  real  work  of  the  government.  It  was
MacNab's  wish  that  John  Ilillyard  Cameron  should
succeed  him  in  the  leadership  of  his  party,  but  the
party  itself  had  decided  on  Macdonald.  and  when
Sir  Allan  was  forced  to  yield  to  disease,  in  185(5.  the
latter  became  the  virtual  chief.  On  retiring  from
office,  Sir  Allan  was  created  a  baronet,  and  in  1857
he  sailed  for  England  in  search  of  rest  and  health.
He  went  to  reside  at  a  place  near  Brighton,  and  his
health  was  so  much  benefited  that  he  announced
himself  as  a  candidate  for  the  English  house  of
commons,  as  a  supporter  of  the  Earl  of  Derby's  ad
ministration.  He  was  defeated,  and  then  deter
mined  to  return  home.

On  arriving  at  Hamilton  in  1800  he  was  pros
trated  by  his  old  trouble,  and  forced  to  keep  his
bed  for  several  weeks.  A  vacancy  occurring  in  the
western  division  in  the  legislative  council,  Sir  Al
lan  was  asked  to  become  a  candidate.  He  rallied,
promptly  accepted  the  nomination,  and  was  carried
to  the  hustings,  where  he  addressed  the  electors,
and,  notwithstanding  his  feeble  condition,  he  se
cured  his  election  by  a  majority  of  twenty-six  votes.
A  partial  reconciliation  took  place  between  him
and  Macdonald,  but  the  old  feeling  was  still  strong.
While  in  England,  Sir  Allan  had  been  consulted
by  the  home  government  on  the  subject  of  colonial
defences.  For  the  advice  he  gave  he  was  made  an
honorary  colonel  of  the  British  army.  lie  was  also
accorded  the  rank  of  an  honorary  aide-de-camp  to
the  Queen,  an  honor  that  is  never  lightly  given,  and
in  that  capacity  he  attended  the  Prince  of  Wales
during  the  Jatter's  visit  to  Canada  in  18(10.  When
the  parliamentary  session  of  1802  opened,  Sir  Allan
was  chosen  as  the  first  elective  speaker  of  the  legis
lative  council.  Failing  health  and  general  pros
tration,  however,  had  done  their  work,  and  he  was
unable  to  perform  the  duties  of  his  office.  In  the
declining  days  of  the  session  he  was  too  ill  to  be  in
his  place.  When  prorogation  came  in  June,  he
was  barely  able  to  get  to  his  home  in  Hamilton,
and  six  weeks  later  he  died.  Throughout  his  life
time  he  had  been  a  zealous  member  of  the  Church
of  England,  but  just  after  his  death  his  sister-
in-law,  who  had  attended  him  during  his  closing
years,  declared  that  he  had  died  in  the  Koman
Catholic  faith,  and,  as  she  was  the  executrix  of
the  estate,  by  her  order  he  was  buried  in  Koman
Catholic  ground  and  according  to  Roman  Catholic
rites.  This  incident  created  great  excitement,  and
became  the  subject  of  controversy  in  the  news
papers.  Many  men  in  political  and  legal  life  re
fused  to  attend  the  body  of  their  friend  to  the
grave.  Sir  Allan  married  in  1831,  as  his  second
wife,  Mary  Stuart,  elder  daughter  of  the  sheriff  of
Johnstown  district.  She  died  in  1840,  leaving  two
daughters,  Sophia  Mary,  who,  in  1855,  became,  the
wife  of  William  Coutts  Keppel,  Viscount  Bury,
who  sits  as  Baron  Ashford  in  the  house  of  lords,
and  Mary  Stuart,  who  married,  in  1801,  a  son  of
the  late  Sir  Dominick  Daly.

McNAIR,  Alexander,  first  governor  of  Mis
souri,  b.  in  Derry  township,  Lancaster  (now  Dau
phin)  co..  Pa.,  in  1774:  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  18
March,  1820.  He  was  educated  in  Derry.  and  then
spent  one  term  at  Philadelphia  college  (now  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania),  when  he  was  called  home
by  the  death  of  his  father.  His  mother  agreed
that  whoever  of  her  sons  should  be  the  victor  in  a
fair  encounter  should  become  the  owner  of  the
homestead.  Alexander,  who  was  the  eldest,  re
ceived  a  severe  whipping  at  the  hands  of  a  younger
brother,  to  whom  he  afterward  acknowledged  that
he  owed  the  honor  of  being  governor  of  Missouri.


McNAMARA


153


In  1794  he  was  lieutenant  in  command  of  a  com
pany  from  Dauphin  county  during  the  whiskey
insurrection  of  that  year,  and  in  January,  1799,
he  was  appointed  lieutenant  of  infantry,  but  was
mustered  out  in  June,  1800.  He  went  to  Missouri
territory  in  1804,  and  settled  in  St.  Louis,  where
he  served  for  several  years  as  U.  S.  commissary.
In  1812  he  was  appointed  adjutant-  and  inspector-
general,  and  during  the  war  with  England  was  a
colonel  of  Missouri  militia  in  the  U.  S.  service.
Subsequently  he  turned  his  attention  to  mercantile
pursuits.  He  was  elected  first  governor  of  Mis
souri,  holding  office  from  1820,  when  the  state
government  was  formed,  to  1824,  and  thereafter
held  an  important  office  in  the  Indian  department.
— His  grandson,  Antoine  Reilhe,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Louisiana,  15  Sept.,  1839.  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1860,  assigned  to  the
"  Seminole,"  and  engaged  off  the  coast  of  South
Carolina  and  Georgia  during  the  two  following
years.  In  July,  1802,  he  was  promoted  lieutenant
and  engaged  in  the  attack  on  Fort  Sumter  and  the
defences  of  Charleston,  the  capture  of  the  batteries
on  Morris  island,  in  the  capture  of  Fort  Fisher,
and  other  minor  engagements  on  the  Atlantic
seaboard.  After  the  civil  war  he  served  on  the
"Chicopee."  In  July,  1866,  he  was  promoted  lieu
tenant-commander,  and,  after  a  year  at  the  naval
academy  as  instructor,  saw  duty  on  the  flag-ships
of  the  West  India  squadron  and  the  European
squadron  until  1870.  He  then  was  appointed
equipment-officer  and  inspector  of  supplies  at  the
Norfolk  navy-yard,  but  was  retired  on  26  Oct.,
1872,  in  consequence  of  an  injury  that  he  received
in  the  West  Indies  in  1868. — Another  grandson,
Frederick  Vallette,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Pennsyl
vania,  13  Jan.,  1839.  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
naval  academy  in  1857,  after  which  he  served  on
the  "  Minnesota  "  in  the  East  India  squadron.  He
was  made  lieutenant  in  1861,  transferred  to  the
"  Iroquois,"  of  the  West  Gulf  squadron,  and  par
ticipated  in  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Jackson
and  Fort  St.  Philip,  the  capture  of  New  Orleans,
passage  both  ways  of  the  Vicksburg  batteries,
and  the  destruction  of  the  Confederate  ram  '•  Ar
kansas."  Later  he  served  as  executive  officer  of
the  '•  Juniata,"  of  the  South  Atlantic  blockading
.squadron,  acting  in  this  capacity  in  both  of  the
attacks  on  Fort  Fisher,  and  received  special  men
tion  for  his  conduct.  In  1864  he  was  commissioned
lieutenant-commander,  and  after  the  civil  war  was
assigned  to  duty  in  the  Brazil  squadron  in  1865-'6,
and  in  the  South  Atlantic  squadron  in  1866-'7.  He
was  stationed  at  the  naval  academy  in  18C8,  after
which  he  was  on  the  flag-ship  of  the  European
squadron.  In  1872  he  was  commissioned  com
mander  and  given  the  "  Kearsarge,"  and  later  the
"  Portsmouth,"  becoming  in  1879-'80  commandant
of  cadets  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  at  Annapolis.
Subsequently  he  was  captain  of  the  navy-yard  at
Mare  island,  Cal.,  having,  on  13  April,  1883,  been
promoted  captain,  and  at  present  (1888)  has  com
mand  of  the  "  Omaha,"  of  the  Asiatic  squadron.

McNAMARA,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dromore,
County  Down,  Ireland,  27  Dec.,  1824 ;  d.  in  North
Platted  Neb.,  24  Oct.,  1885.  He  was  educated  at
St.  Paul's  college,  Flushing,  L.  L,  and  completed
his  theological  course  at  the  General  theological
seminary  of  New  York.  He  was  assistant  to  Rev.
William  A.  Muhlenberg,  D.  D.,  in  St.  Luke's  hos
pital,  and  was  then  a  missionary  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church  in  Kansas.  He  was  clerical  dep
uty  to  the  general  convention  for  many  years  from
Nebraska,  where  he  was  pastor  of  the  Church  of
Our  Saviour  in  North  Platte.  In  1869  the  degree


of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Nebraska  college,
of  which  institution  he  was  president  for  several
years.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Three  Years  on  the
Kansas  Border"  (New  York,  1852),  and  "The
Black  Code  of  Kansas  "  (1857).

McNAUGHTON,  James,  physician,  b.  in  Ken-
more,  Scotland,  10  Dec.,  1796;  d.  in  Paris,  France,
12  June,  1874.  He  was  educated  at  Kenmore  col
lege  and  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  where
he  was  graduated  in  medicine  in  1816.  In  1817  he
came  to  the  United  States  and,  settling  in  Albany,
followed  his  profession.  Soon  afterward  he  was
chosen  a  member  of  the  faculty  in  the  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons  of  the'westcrn  district  of
New  York,  Fail-field,  N.  Y.,  where  he  lectured  for
twenty  years.  In  1840  he  was  elected  professor  of
the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine  in  Albany  medi
cal  college,  which  chair  he  held  until  his  death.  It
is  said  that  he  did  not  miss  a  week  of  lectures
during  his  connection  with  the  latter  institution.
At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  the  oldest  living
teacher  of  medicine,  having  lectured  for  fifty-three
years  and  delivered  seventy  courses.  Dr.  McNaugh-
ton  was  president  of  the  Albany  county  medical
society  in  1848-'9.  a  governor  of  the  medical  de
partment  of  Union  college,  and  president  of  the
medical  and  surgical  staff  of  the  Albany  hospital.

MACNEILL,  Hector,  poet.  b.  in  Rosebank.  near
Roslin,  Scotland,  22  Oct.,  1746:  d.  in  Edinburgh.  15
March,  1818.  He  studied  in  a  grammar-school  in
Stirling,  and  at  the  age  of  fourteen  was  sent  to  Bris
tol  to  enter  the  counting-house  of  his  cousin,  a  West
India  trader.  Subsequently  he  went  to  the  West  In
dies,  and  became  the  manager  of  a  sugar-plantation
in  Jamaica,  where  he  wrote  a  pamphlet  in  defence
of  slavery  in  the  West  Indies  (1788).  About  this
time  he  returned  to  Scotland,  and  became  assistant
secretary  in  the  flag-ship  of  Admiral  Geary,  which
post,  after  two  cruises,  he  exchanged  for  a  similar
one  in  a  ship  bound  to  the  East  Indies,  remaining
there  for  five  years.  He  then  spent  two  years  in
retirement  in  Stirling,  where  he  published  "The
Harp,  a  Legendary  Tale,"  which  had  but  little
success  (1789).  Again  he  visited  the  West  Indies,
where  he  was  engaged  in  the  custom-house  in
Kingston.  Jamaica,  and  his  friend  and  former  em
ployer,  John  Graham,  a  planter,  bequeathed  him
an  annuity  of  £100.  On  his  estate  of  Three-Mile-
River.  Macneill  wrote  "  The  Pastoral,  or  Lyric
Muse  of  Scotland."  The  last  years  of  his  life  were
spent  in  Edinburgh,  where  he  wrote  several  novels,
and  was  editor  of  the  "Scots  Magazine."  He  pub
lished  an  edition  of  his  poems  (2  vols.,  1801).  The
chief  of  these  are  "  Scotland's  Scaith.  or  the  His
tory  of  Will  and  Jean."  and  "  The  Waes  o'  War,
or  the  Upshot  o' the  History  o'  Will  and  Jean"
(179(5).  Several  of  his  songs,  including  "Come
under  my  Plaidie,"  "My  Boy  Tammy,"  "Saw  ye
my  Wee  Thing,"  and  "  Donald  and  Flora."  have  a
wide  popularity.  See  James  Grant  Wilson's  "  Poets
and  Poetry  of  Scotland  "  (New  York,  1876).

McNEIL,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Halifax.  N.  S.,  4
Feb..  1813.  He  received  a  common-school  educa
tion  and  learned  in  Boston  the  trade  of  a  hatter,
which  he  carried  on  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  for  twenty
years.  In  1844-'5  he  was  in  the  Missouri  legisla
ture.  He  was  president  of  the  Pacific  insurance
company  from  1855  till  1861,  when  he  joined  the
National  army  under  Gen.  Nathaniel  Lyon,  with
the  rank  of  colonel.  With  GOO  men  he  routed
Gen.  David  B.  Harris  at  Fulton,  Mo.,  on  17  July,
1861,  and  was  then  placed  by  Gen.  John  C.  Fre
mont  in  command  of  St.  Louis.  He  was  made
colonel  of  the  19th  Missouri  volunteers,  3  Aug.,
and  early  in  1862  took  command  of  a  cavalry  regi-


154


McNEILL


McNIERNEY


ment,  and  of  the  district  of  northeast  Missouri,
which  he  soon  cleared  of  guerillas.  He  was  made
a  brigadier  -  general  of  volunteers,  29  Nov.,  1802,
and  did  good  service  in  defence  of  Cape  Qirardeau
in  the  spring  of  1863,  and  during  Price's  raid  in
October,  1864,  and  resigned  in  1865.  He  was  sheriff
of  St.  Louis  county,  Mo.,  in  1866  and  1870,  clerk
of  the  criminal  court  in  1875-'6,  U.  S.  commissioner
to  the  Centennial  exhibition  in  Philadelphia  in
1876,  and  inspector  in  the  U.  S.  Indian  service  in
1878  and  again  in  1882.

McNEILL,  William  (iil)bs,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  Wilmington,  N.  C.,  3  Oct.,  1800  ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  16  Feb.,  1853.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1817,  and  entered  the
artillery  branch  of  the  service  as  3d  lieutenant,
serving  on  topographical  duty  until  January,  1823,
when  he  was  transferred  to  the  corps  of  topograph
ical  engineers  with  the  brevet  rank  of  captain.
Subsequently,  while  in  this  corps,  his  work  included
engagements  on  the  construction  of  the  Chesapeake
and  Ohio  canal  in  1824-'6,  on  Kanawha,  James,
and  Roanoke  rivers  in  1827,  and  as  member  of  the
board  of  engineers  on  the  construction  of  the  Balti
more  and  Ohio  railroad  in  1827-'30,  and  he  be
came  chief  engineer  in  charge  of  the  construction
of  the  Baltimore  and  Susquehanna  railroad  in
1830-'6,  meanwhile  also  holding  engineering  ap
pointments  to  various  other  roads.  He  then  was
chief  engineer  in  charge  of  the  construction  of
railroads  till  1837,  and  during  the  latter  year  lie
also  had  charge  of  the  examination  of  the  coasts
of  North  and  South  Carolina,  but  he  resigned  from
the  army  in  November,  after  attaining  the  rank  of
brevet  major  on  the  staff  of  the  topographical  en
gineers,  lie  had  achieved  the  reputation  of  being
one  of  the  foremost  railroad  engineers  in  the
United  States,  and  his  services  were  sought  for  at
unusual  prices.  At  the  time  of  the  Dorr  rebellion
in  1842  he  was  commissioned  major-general  of
Rhode  Island  militia,  and  commanded  the  state
troops  during  that  excitement.  He  was  president
of  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  canal  company  in
1842-'3,  and  chief  engineer  of  the  dry  dock  at  the
U.  S.  navy-yard  in  Brooklyn  in  1844-'5.  Subse
quently  he  held  consulting  appointments  princi
pally  to  various  railroad  and  other  public  works
in  the  United  States  and  Cuba.

MacNEVIN,  William  James,  physician,  b.  in
Bnllynahowne.  County  Galway,  Ireland,  21  March,
1763:  d.  in  New  York  city,  12  July,  1841.  At  the
age  of  twelve  he  was  sent  to  Austria,  where  his
uncle,  Baron  O'Kelly  MacNevin,  was  physician  to
the  Empress  Maria  Teresa.  He  was  educated  at
Prague,  and,  after  a  course  of  medicine  in  that
city,  finished  his  professional  studies  in  the  Uni
versity  of  Vienna,  taking  the  degree  of  M.  D.  in
1784.  He  then  returned  to  Ireland,  where  he  be
came  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  United  Irishmen,
and  was  imprisoned  from  1798  till  1802.  On  his
release  he  went  to  France,  and  entered  the  Irish
legion  in  the  army  of  Napoleon,  but,  despairing  of
a  French  invasion  of  Ireland,  he  came  to  the
United  States  in  1805.  Soon  after  his  arrival  he
began  the  practice  of  his  profession,  in  which  he
quickly  attained  distinction.  In  1808  he  was  ap
pointed  professor  of  obstetrics  in  the  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons,  and  in  1811  filled  the
chair  of  chemistry  and  materia  medica.  He  was
the  first  to  establish  a  chemical  laboratory  in  New
York.  In  1826  lie  resigned  his  professorship,  and,
in  conjunction  with  Dr.  Valentine  Mott,  I>r.  John
W.  Francis,  Dr.  David  Hosack,  and  others,  founded
a  new  medical  school  on  Duane  street,  in  which  he
lectured  on  materia  medica  and  therapeutics  till


1830.  He  was  president  of  "  The  Friends  of  Ire
land  "  and  a  member  of  nearly  every  Irish  society  in
New  York  city.  He  published  a  pamphlet  for  immi
grants  entitled  '•  Directions,  or  Advice  to  Irishmen
arriving  in  America."  and  he  established  a  bureau
to  obtain  places  for  Irish  servant-girls.  Besides
his  great  professional  attainments,  Dr.  MacNevin
was  a  man  of  wide  learning  and  rare  accomplish
ments.  He  was  a  proficient  in  the  principal  modern
languages  and  well  versed  in  their  literature.  His
writings  were  mainly  on  medical,  scientific,  and
political  subjects,  and  were  commonly  in  the  form
of  essays  and  lectures.  His  principal  works  are
"  Rambles  through  Switzerland  in  the  Summer
and  Autumn  of  1802"  (Dublin,  1803);  "Pieces  of
Irish  History,"  with  Thomas  Addis  Emmet  (New
York,  1807);  "Chemical  Examination  of  the  Min
eral  Water  of  Schooley's  Mountain"  (1815);  and
"Exposition  of  the  Atomic  Theory  of  Chemistry"
(1819).  He  also  published  an  edition  of  "Brande's
Chemistry."  and  was  associate  editor  for  three
years,  with  Dr.  Benjamin  De  Witt,  of  New  York,
of  the  "  Medical  and  Philosophical  Journal."

McNIEL,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Ilillsborough,
N.  II.,  in  1784 :  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C..  23  Feb.,
1850.  He  was  commissioned  captain  in  the  llth
infantry  on  12  March.  1813,  and  became  major  on
15  Aug.  At  the  battle  of  Chippewa,  5  July,  1814,
the  bayonet  charge  of  this  regiment  under  his
command  secured  the  victory  to  the  Americans,
for  which  he  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel.  He
was  brevetted
colonel  on  25
July,  1814.  for
services  at  the
battle  of  Ni
agara,  in  which
he  was  severely
wounded,  and
h  e  became  lieu  -
tenant-colonel
of  the  1st  in
fantry  on  24
Feb.,"  1818,  re
maining  in  the
service  after
the  peace.  He
attained  the
rank  of  brevet
brigadier-  gen
eral  on  25  July,
1824,  and  was
made  colonel  of  the  1st  infantry  on  28  Aug.,  1826.
but  resigned  his  commission  on  23  April,  1830,
having  been  appointed  in  1829  surveyor  of  the  port
of  Boston,  which  office  he  held  for  several  years.

McNIERNEY,  Francis,  It.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
New  York  city,  25  April,  1828.  lie  received  his
early  education  at  private  schools  in  New  York,
and  then  went  to  Montreal,  where,  after  complet
ing  his  clerical  education,  he  entered  the  seminary
of  the  Sulpicians  for  the  study  of  theology  and
philosophy.  He  was  ordained  in  St.  Patrick's
cathedral,  New  York,  17  Aug.,  1854,  and  made
private  secretary  of  Archbishop  McCloskey,  which
post  he  held  for  seventeen  years,  until,  in  1871.
he  was  appointed  titular  bishop  of  Rhesina  and
coadjutor  of  Albany.  He  was  consecrated  in  St.
Patrick's  cathedral.  New  York,  21  April,  1871.
On  19  Feb.,  1874,  he  was  appointed  administrator
of  the  diocese  of  Albany,  and  on  12  Oct.,  1877,  be
came  bishop  of  that  see  by  the  right  of  succession.
He  has  administered  both  the  spiritual  and  tempo
ral  affairs  of  his  diocese  with  great  success.  lie
was  present  at  the  3d  plenary  council  of  BalMmore


McNISH


MACOMBER


in  November,  1884,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  ;
discussions  of  that  body.

McNISH,  George,  clergyman,  b.  about  1660;
d.  in  Newton,  N.  J.,  10  March,  1722.  Authorities
disagree  as  to  whether  he  was  a  native  of  Ireland  or
of  Scotland.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1705  as
an  ordained  clergyman  of  the  Presbyterian  church,
labored  for  a  short  time  in  Somerset  county,  Md.,
and  was  one  of  the  original  members  of  the  pres
bytery  of  Philadelphia,  the  first  of  that  church
that,  was  formed  in  the  colonies.  He  became  pas
tor  in  Jamaica,  N.  Y.,  in  1711,  was  styled  the
••  father  of  Presbyterianism  in  the  state  of  New
York,"  and  instituted  the  first  presbytery  therein.
He  was  moderator  of  the  presbytery  of  Philadel
phia  in  1710  and  1717,  preached  the  synodical  ser
mon  of  the  latter  year,  and  was  deputed  by  that
body  to  act  as  its  representative  abroad  for  the
promotion  of  the  gospel  in  the  United  States,  but
subsequently  declined.  Throughout  his  ministry
in  Long  Island  a  violent  controversy  was  waged  i
for  the  possession  of  the  church  building  in  Ja
maica,  which,  although  originally  erected  for  the
Presbyterians,  was  given  to  the  Episcopalians  by
Lord  Cornbury,  and  Mr.  McNish  is  supposed  never
to  have  preached  in  it.

McNUTT,  Alexander  Gallatin,  governor  of
Mississippi,  b.  in  Kockbridge  county,  Ya.,  12  Sept.,
1801 :  d.  in  De  Soto  county.  Miss."  22  Oct.,  1848.
He  was  educated  at  \Yashington  college,  Ya.,  emi
grated  to  Mississippi  in  1828,  settled  in  Vieksburg
in  the  practice  of  law,  and  soon  established  a  repu
tation  as  a  political  speaker.  He  was  in  the  legis
lature  for  several  years,  speaker  of  the  senate  in  j

1837,  and governor the next  year. During his
legislative  career  he  secured  the  right  of  represen
tation  to  the  counties  that  were  formed  out  of  the
Chickasaw  and Choctaw  cessions. Sergeant S.
Prentiss  opposed  this  measure,  and  subsequently
attacked  him  in  a  series  of  brilliant  speeches  in

1838,  during  Prentiss's  canvass  for  congress,  Mc-
Nutt's  slovenly  dress  and  intemperate  habits  form
ing  a  target  for  the  former's  wit. McNutt  subse
quently  reformed,  and  accumulated  a  large  fortune
from  his  practice. He  was  a  Democrat  in  politics,
and  yielded  in  debate  to  none  but  Prentiss,  whom,
after  the  canvass  of  1838,  he  resolutely  refused
ever  to  meet  on  the  "stump."

MACOMB,  Alexander,  merchant,  b.  in  Belfast,
Ireland,  27  July,  1748 ;  d.  in  Georgetown.  D.  C.,  in
1832.  He  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  his
youth,  became  a  fur-merchant  in  Detroit,  and  was
associated  with  John  Jacob  Astor,  Elias  Kane,  and
others.  He  subsequently  removed  to  New  York,
and  was  engaged  in  shipping  and  speculations  in
landed  estate,  buying  large  tracts  in  Georgia.  Ken
tucky,  and  North  Carolina.  In  1791  he  bought  of
the  state  of  New  York  3,670,715  acres  at  about  one
shilling  (one  eighth  of  a  dollar)  an  acre,  on  St.
Lawrence  river,  including  all  the  Thousand  Islands
that  belonged  to  New  York.  This  tract  is  known
as  "  Macomb's  purchase." — His  son.  Alexander,
soldier,  b.  in  Detroit,  Mich..  3  April.  1782;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C.,  25  June,  1841,  entered  the  army
as  a  cornet  of  cavalry  in  1799,  was  retained  in  the
service  after  the  partial  disbanding  of  troops  in
1802,  became  captain  in  1805  and  major  in  1808,
and  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  1812  held  the
rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  of  engineers,  and  adju
tant-general  of  the  army.  Finding  his  position  un
likely  to  bring  him  into  active  service,  he  was  trans
ferred  to  the  artillery,  and  in  1813,  as  colonel  of  the
3d  regiment  of  artillery,  did  effective  service  at  Ni
agara  and  at  Fort  George.  He  was  promoted  briga
dier-general  in  1814,  and  placed  in  command  of  the


northern  frontier,  bordering  on  Lake  Champlain-
At  Plattsburg  on  11  Sept.  of  this  year,  while  in
command  of  1.500  regular  troops  and  some  detach
ments  of  militia,  he  sustained  the  attack  of  a
greatly  superior
British  force  un
der  Sir  George
Provost,  which,
after  the  defeat
of  the  Brit
ish  squadron  on
LakeChamplain
on  the  same  day,
retreated  to  Can
ada.  Gen.  Ma-
comb  was  pro
moted  major-
general  for  his
conduct  on  this
occasion,  and
received  the
thanks  of  con
gress  and  a  gold  /^^>
medal.  He  was  C)^^A^_^a^£-^^^^
subsequently  re-  dx
tained  in  the  ser
vice  as  colonel  of  engineers,  and,  after  the  death  of
Gen.  Jacob  Brown  in  1828,  became  major-general
and  general-in-chief  of  the  army.  During  the
Florida  war  in  1835  he  took  the  field  for  a  short
time.  He  was  buried  with  military  honors  in  the
congressional  cemetery  in  Washington,  and  his
tomb  is  marked  by  a  handsome  monument.  He
published  "A  Treatise  on  Martial  Law  and  Court-
Mart  ials  as  practised  in  the  United  States "
(Charleston,  1809),  and  "  A  Treatise  on  the  Prac
tice  of  Court-Martials"  (New  York,  1840).  and
supervised  Adjutant  Samuel  Cooper's  "  Tactics  and
Regulations  for  the  Militia"  (Philadelphia.  1836).
See  "  Memoir  of  Alexander  Macomb,"  by  George
H.  Richards  (New  York,  1833).— His  son.  Will
iam  Henry,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  16
June,  1818;'  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  12  Aug.,  1872,
entered  the  navy  as  midshipman  in  1834,  and  was
commissioned  lieutenant  in  1847,  commander  in
1862,  captain  in  1866,  and  commodore  in  1870.  He
commanded  the  sloop  •' Portsmouth,"  of  the  East
India  squadron,  in  1856-'8.  with  which  he  was  en
gaged  in  the  capture  of  the  barrier  forts  at  Can
ton,  China,  under  Com.  Andrew  H.  Foote.  on  16-22
Nov.,  1856.  He  had  charge  of  the  '•  Metacomet  "
in  the  Paraguay  expedition  in  1859,  and  the  steam
er  "  Genesee "  in  1862-'3,  attempting  rhe  passage
of  the  Confederate  batteries  at  Port  Hudson  on  14
March  of  the  latter  year,  and  was  in  frequent  ac
tions  in  April  and  June,  1863.  He  commanded
the  "Shamrock."  of  the  North  Atlantic  blockad
ing  squadron,  in  1864-'5,  and  the  naval  force
in  the  capture  of  Plymouth,  N.  C.,  on  30  Oct.,
1864,  and  was  advanced  ten  numbers  in  his  grade
for  gallantry  in  this  action  and  for  that  on  Roan-
oke  river,  near  Poplar  Point.  N.  C.  He  was  as
signed  to  the  steam  sloop  "  Plymouth  "  of  the  Eu
ropean  squadron,  in  1869.  His  last  service  was
that  of  lighthouse-inspector.

MACOMBER.  Eleanor,  missionary,  b.  in  Lake
Pleasant,  Hamilton  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1801 :  d.  in  Maul-
main.  India,  16  April.  1840.  In  1830  she  was  sent
by  the  American  missionary  board  of  the  Baptist
church  as  a  teacher  among  the  Ojibway  Indians  at
Sault  Sainte  Marie.  Mich.  After  four  years'  ser
vice  her  health  failed,  but  she  connected  herself
with  the  Karen  mission  in  1836.  and  in  the  latter
part  of  this  year  arrived  in  Burmah.  She  then
settled  at  Dong-Yahn,  about  thirty-five  miles  from


156


MACON


MACPHERSON


Maulmain,  and,  without  a  companion  of  her  own
race  or  sex,  labored  among  the  adjoining  tribes.
In  less  than  a  year  she  had  established  a  small
school  at  Dong-Yahn,  and  formed  a  church  of
twenty  natives!  Her  death  was  the  result  of  a
jungle  fever  that  she  contracted  while  she  was  on
a  mission  to  a  distant  tribe.

MACON,  Nathaniel,  statesman,  b.  in  Warren
county,  N.  C.,  17  Dec.,  1757;  d.  there,  29  June,
1837.  *  He  was  a  student  at  Princeton  at  the  begin
ning  of  the  Revolution,  but  left  in  1777  to  serve  as
a  private  in  a  company  of  volunteers.  On  his  re
turn  to  North  Carolina  he  began  the  study  of  law,
but  soon  re-enlisted  as  a  volunteer,  and.  although
several  offices  were  urged  on  him,  continued  a  pri
vate  under  his  brother,  Col.  John  Macon,  until  the
provisional  treaty  of  1782,  serving  at  the  surrender
of  Fort  Moultrie,  the  fall  of  Charleston,  the  rout  at
Camden,  and  with  Gen.  Nathaniel  Greene  in  his
retreat  across  Carolina.  During  this  campaign  he
was  elected  without  his  knowledge  to  the  North
Carolina  senate,  but  at  first  declined,  alleging  that
he  "  had  seen  the  faces  of  the  British  many  times,
but  never  their  backs,  and  he  intended  to  stay  in
the  army  until  he  did."  But  being  urged  by  Gen.
Greene  to  accept,  as  the  country  needed  legislators
at  that  time  more  than  private  soldiers,  he  left  the
army,  refusing  a  pension  and  all  pay  for  his  mili
tary  service.  He  continued  in  the  state  senate  till
1785,  was  employed  on  the  most  important  com
mittees,  and  advocated  pledging  the  state  to  re
deem  her  paper  issues.  During  this  period  he  set
tled  on  a  plantation  on  the  Roanoke  river,  in  War
ren  county,  which  remained  his  home  throughout
his  life.  When  the  U.  S.  constitution  was  first
submitted  to  the  vote  of  North  Carolina,  he  op
posed  it  as  conferring  too  much  power  on  the  new
government.  He  was  elected  to  the  2d  congress
as  a  Democrat,  and  was  successively  re-elected
without  opposition,  serving  from  1791  till  1815,
when  he  became  U.  S.  senator,  and  continued  in
that  office  till  1828.  From  1801  till  1806  he  was
speaker  of  the  house,  and  twice  during  the  admin
istration  of  Jefferson  declined  the  office  of  post
master-general.  In  congress  he  voted  for  the  em
bargo  and  for  the  declaration  of  war  against  Great
Britain,  but  held  that  the  war  should  be  defensive
only,  and  refused  to  enlarge  the  naval  force  beyond
what  was  necessary  to  guard  the  coast,  also  op
posing  fortification  and  privateering.  He  voted
against  all  schemes  of  internal  improvement,  spoke
in  1795  against  a  grant  of  lands  to  Count  de  Grasse,
and  in  1824  against  that  to  Lafayette  in  recog
nition  of  his  services  during  the  Revolution.  Al
though  he  was  frequently  offered  high  executive
office,  he  refused  whatever  was  not  the  gift  of  the
people  or  their  immediate  representatives  in  the
legislature.  He  received  the  twenty-four  electoral
votes  of  Virginia  in  1824  for  the  vice-presidency,
and  from  1825  till  1827  was  president  pro  tfrnpore
of  the  senate.  During  his  political  career  of  fifty-
seven  years  he  never  recommended  any  of  his  fam
ily  to  public  office.  His  speeches  were  short  and
to  the  point,  and  Thomas  H.  Benton  says  of  him
that  he  "  spoke  more  good  sense  while  getting  in
his  chair  and  getting  out  of  it  than  many  delivered
in  long  and  elaborate  speeches."  He  was  a  '•  strict,
severe,  and  stringent  "  Democrat  of  the  Jeffersoriian
school.  His  two  last  public  services  were  in  the
Constitutional  convention  of  North  Carolina  in
1835  and  as  presidential  elector  on  the  Van  Buren
and  Johnson  ticket  in  1837.  In  the  former  he  op
posed  giving  the  ballot  to  free  negroes,  a  land
qualification  for  voters,  state  control  of  works  of
internal  improvement,  and  all  religious  tests  as  a


condition  of  holding  office,  and  was  in  favor  of
voting  rira  voce  at  all  elections.  He  believed  that
a  state  could  not  nullify  and  remain  in  the  Union,
but  that  a  state  could  secede.  He  was  the  inti
mate  friend  of  Thomas  Jefferson,  James  Madison,
and  John  Randolph  of  Roanoke.  Randolph  said
of  him  in  his  will :  "  He  is  the  wisest,  the  purest,
and  the  best  man  that  I  ever  knew."  Mr.  Macon
died  after  a  few  hours'  illness,  but  had  already
given  directions  to  a  neighbor  to  make  for  him  a
plain  coffin,  to  be  paid  for  before  his  interment,
had  selected  for  his  grave  a  barren  ridge  where  the
plough  would  never  come,  and  ordered  the  spot  to
be  marked  by  a  pile  of  loose  stones  from  an  ad
joining  field.  His  death-bed  is  described  by  Ben-
ton  as  that  "of  Socrates,  all  but  the  hemlock."
He  was  a  student  of  few  books  but  the  Bible,  and.
though  suspicious  of  reform  and  prejudiced  against
all  innovations,  was  of  singularly  pure  character
and  life.  A  sketch  of  him  was  published  by  Ed
ward  R.  Cotton  (Baltimore,  1840).

McPHEETERS,  William  Marcellns,  physi
cian,  b.  in  Raleigh,  N.  C.,  3  Dec.,  1815.  He  was
educated  at  the  University  of  North  Carolina,  and
in  the  medical  department  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1840.
He  settled  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in  1842,  was  professor
of  therapeutics  and  materia  medica  in  the  medical
college  there  in  1848-'62.  was  surgeon  to  the  U.  S.
marine  hospital  from  1856  till  1861.  and  for  six
teen  years  was  physician  to  the  St.  Louis  hospital
of  the  Sisters  of  Charity.  In  1852  he  was  presi
dent  of  the  Medical  association  of  Missouri.  lie
served  for  three  years  in  the  Confederate  army  as
chief  surgeon  to  Gen.  Thomas  L.  Chare-hell's  di
vision,  and  was  also  medical  director  on  the  staff
of  Gen.  Sterling  Price.  Since  the  war  he  has  prac
tised  his  profession  in  St.  Louis,  and  he  resumed
his  professorship  in  St.  Louis  medical  college  in
1867.  He  was  vice-president  of  the  American
medical  association  in  1873.  He  edited  the  "St.
Louis  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal"  in  1843-'61.
and,  besides  numerous  professional  papers,  has
published  a  "  History  of  the  Cholera  Epidemic  in
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in  1849"  (St.  Louis,  1850).

MACPHERSON,  Sir  David  Lewis,  Canadian
statesman,  b.  in  Inverness,  Scotland,  12  Sept.,  1818.
He  was  educated  at  Inverness  royal  academy,  and
when  seventeen
years  of  age  came
to  Canada.  In
1842  he  became  a
partner  in  the  for
warding  firm  of
Macpherson. Crane
and  Co.,  Montreal,
in  which  his  elder
brother  was  the
chief  member ;  and
in  1851,  together
with  Sir  Alexander
Gait  and  others,
he  secured  a  char
ter  for  a  railway
from  Montreal  to
Kingston,  which
was  the  nucleus  of
the  Grand  Trunk
railway.  After  the  incorporation  of  the  latter
company  Mr.  Macpherson  was  associated  in  the
construction  of  various  railways,  in  the  Toronto
rolling-mills,  and  the  International  bridge  com
pany.  In  1868  he  was  arbitrator  for  the  province
of  Ontario,  under  the  British  North  American  act.
for  the  division  and  adjustment  of  the  debts  and


MACPHERSON


McPHERSON


157


credits  of  Upper  and  Lower  Canada,  and  in  1872
was  president  of  the  Interoceanic  railway  com
pany.  He  represented  the  Saugeen  division  in  the
legislative  council  of  Canada  from  October,  1864,
till  the  union,  and  was  called  to  the  senate  in  May,
1867.  He  was  appointed  speaker  of  the  senate  and
a  member  of  the  cabinet,  without  a  portfolio,  11
Feb.,  1880,  and  on  17  Oct.,  1883.  resigned  the
speakership  and  was  appointed  minister  of  the  in
terior.  He  resigned  the  latter  office  in  August,
1885.  He  has  been  a  member  of  the  corporation
of  Hellmuth  college,  London,  Ont.,  vice-president
of  the  Montreal  board  of  trade,  and  president  of
the  St.  Andrew's  society  of  Toronto.  In  July,
1884,  the  honor  of  knighthood  was  conferred  upon
him.  He  is  the  author  of  a  pamphlet  on  "Bank
ing  and  Currency"  (Toronto,  1809).  and  also  of
pamphlets  on  public  expenditure  and  other  ques
tions,  that  were  published  between  1877  and  1882.
MACPHERSON,  David  Murdoch,  Canadian
dairyman,  b.  in  Lancaster  township,  Glengarry,
17  Nov.,  1847.  He  was  educated  at  Lancaster
high-school,  engaged  in  farming  till  1868,  and  in
1870  began  to  make  cheese  from  the  milk  of  eight
cows.  In  1873  he  established  a  factory,  and  in
1887  he  had  seventy  factories,  receiving  the  milk
of  25,000  cows,  and  "manufactured  about  5,000,000
pounds  of  cheese.  In  1875  Mr.  Macpherson  re
ceived  the  first  prize  as  champion  ploughman  of  the
province  of  Ontario,  in  188G  was  elected  president
of  the  Dairymen's  association  of  eastern  Ontario
and  of  the  Glengarry  fanners'  institute,  and  the
same  year  was  commissioned  by  the  government
of  Ontario  to  represent  the  dairy  interests  of  that

Erovince  at  the  Colonial  industrial  exhibition  in
ondon  in  that  year.  He  has  taken  out  six  patents
for  inventions  in  improved  and  original  cheese-
manufacturing  machinery,  has  made  several  dis
coveries  in  the  process  of  cheese-making,  and  in
1887  constructed  an  improved  model  which,  it  is
claimed,  has  reduced  farm  barn  building  to  a  sci
ence.  He  was  for  a  time  corresponding  editor  of
the  Hamilton  "Live-Stock  Journal."  and  edited
the  "  Cheese-Makers'  Manual "  (Montreal,  188C).

McPHERSON,  Edward,  author,  b.  in  Gettys
burg,  Pa.,  31  July,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at
Pennsylvania  college,  Gettysburg,  in  1848,  studied
law,  and  subsequently  settled  in  that  place  as  a
journalist,  but  was  compelled,  through  the  failure
of  his  health,  to  abandon  literary  work.  He  pub
lished  a  series  of  articles  in  the  Philadelphia  "Bul
letin  "  in  1851,  afterward  printed  in  pamphlet-
form,  in  which  he  advocated  the  sale  by  the  state
of  its  main  line  of  public  improvements.  This,
with  a  similar  series  published  in  1858,  was  instru
mental  in  effecting  that  measure,  and  in  the  same
year  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,
and  served  from  1859  till  1863.  In  the  latter  year
he  was  appointed  deputy  commissioner  of  internal
revenue,  but,  after  a  service  of  six  months,  he  be
came  clerk  of  the  lower  house  of  congress,  and
held  that  office  till  1873.  His  term  of  service  in
this  office  was  the  longest  since  the  beginning  of
the  government.  He  was  chief  of  the  bureau  of
engraving  and  printing  in  1877-'8.  permanent  presi
dent  of  the  Republican  national  convention  in
1876.  and  since  1879  has  been  engaged  in  journal
ism  in  Gettysburg,  Pa.  The  University  of  Penn
sylvania  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.,  and  Prince
ton  that  of  A.  M.,  in  1877.  He  has  published  "  Po
litical  History  of  the  United  States  during  the
Great  Rebellion  "  (Washington,  1865) ;  "  The  Po
litical  History  of  the  United  States  during  Recon
struction  "(1870) ;  and  a  "Hand-Book  of  Politics"
(1872  ;  new  ed.  every  second  year) ;  and  has  edited


the  "  New  York  Tribune  Almanac "  since  1877.
For  several  years  he  has  been  the  American  editor
of  the  "  Almanack  de  Gotha."

McPHERSON,  James  Birdseye,  soldier,  b.  in
Sandusky,  Ohio,  14  Nov.,  1828 ;  d.  near  Atlanta.
Ga.,  22  July,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1853,  first  in  a  class  of  fifty-
two  members,  among  whom  were  Philip  H.  Sheri
dan,  John  M.  Schofield,  and  John  B.  Hood.  He  was
appointed  success
ively  brevet  2d
lieutenant  in  1853.
2d  lieutenant  in
1854,  1st  lieuten
ant  in  1858,  and
captain  in  1861  in
the  corps  of  engi
neers,  and  served
on  fortification
and  other  con
struction  duty  un
til  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war.
He  was  then  sta
tioned  in  Califor
nia,  but  immedi
ately  applied  for
active  duty  with
the  army  in  the
field,  where  his

promotion  was  very  rapid.  He  became  lieuten
ant-colonel,  12  Nov.,  1861 ;  colonel,  1  May,  1862 ;
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  15  May,  1862 ;  and
major-general  of  volunteers,  8  Oct.,  1862.  Gen.
Henry  W.  Halleck  had  known  him  in  California,
and,  on  assuming  command  of  the  Department  of
the  Missouri,  placed  him  on  his  staff.  When  active
operations  began  in  the  spring  of  1862  he  was
transferred  to  the  staff  of  Gen.  Grant,  with  whom
he  served  as  chief  engineer  at  Fort  Henry.  Fort
Donelson,  Shiloh,  the  siege  of  Corinth,  and  luka.
From  June  to  October,  1862,  he  was  in  charge  of
the  railroads  in  western  Tennessee.  On  2  Oct.  he
received  command  of  a  brigade  and  joined  Gen.
William  S.  Rosecrans  just  at  the  close  of  the  battle
of  Corinth,  and  led  the  advance  in  the  pursuit  of
the  Confederate  army,  under  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn,
during  the  following  days.  He  was  promoted  to
the  command  of  a  division  stationed  at  Bolivar,
Tenn.,  on  14  Oct.  In  November  and  December,
1862,  he  commanded  the  right  wing  of  Grant's
army  in  the  advance  along  the  Mississippi  central
railroad,  and  was  engaged  at  Lamar,  Miss.,  12  Nov.,
1862.  and  in  various  skirmishes  during  the  advance
to  and  retreat  from  Oxford,  Miss.  In  the  reorgan
ization  of  Grant's  army  in  January,  1863,  he  was
appointed  to  the  command  of  the  17th  army  corps.
He  endeavored  to  open  a  passage,  via  Lake  Provi
dence  and  Tensas  bayou,  to  the  Mississippi  below
Vicksburg  in  February  and  March,  and  also  to  get
in  rear  of  Vicksburg.  by  the  Yazoo  pass  and  Yazoo
river,  in  April,  1863,  but  in  both  attempts  was  un
successful,  owing  to  the  insuperable  physical  diffi
culties  of  the  route.  In  the  final  campaign  against
Vicksburg  from  the  rear,  McPherson's  corps  bore  a
prominent  part,  although  one  of  his  divisions  did
not  join  him  until  near  its  close.  At  the  battle  of
Port  Gibson,  1  May,  1863,  just  after  crossing  the  Mis
sissippi,  part  of  his  corps,  led  by  McPherson  in  per
son,  turned  the  enemy's  right  flank,  and.  driving
him  from  a  post  that  he  had  held  all  day,  decided
the  battle.  Advancing  into  the  interior,  McPher
son's  corps  constituted  the  right  wing,  and  on  12
May  engaged  part  of  Johnston's  army  at  Raymond
and  completely  routed  it.  On  14  May,  in  conncc-


158


McPHERSON


McPHERSON


tion  with  Sherman's  corps,  MePherson  attacked
Johnston's  army  at  Jackson,  and  defeated  it  with  a
loss  that  was  much  greater  than  their  own.  On  16
May,  Pemberton's  army  was  met  at  Champion's
Hill,  and  a  disastrous  and  decisive  defeat  was  in
flicted  upon  it,  Pemberton's  troops  retiring  in  con
fusion  to  Vicksburg.  The  brunt  of  the  fighting  at
Champion's  Hill  was  borne  by  McPherson's  corps,
which  held  the  right  of  Grant's  line,  and  had
McClernand  on  the"  left  attacked  with  equal  vigor
Pemberton's  army  would  have  been  surrounded
and  captured.  At  the  assaults  on  the  fortifications
of  Vicksburg  on  19  and  22  May,  McPherson's  corps
formed  the  centre  of  Grant's  army,  and  attacked
the  works  at  the  salient  on  the  Jackson  road  with
great  gallantry  and  heavy  losses,  but  without  suc
cess.  Throughout  this  campaign  MePherson  was
constantly  engaged,  and  was  conspicuous  for  his
skill  and  personal  bravery ;  and  at  its  close  Gen.
Grant,  in  a  highly  eulogistic  letter,  recommended
him  to  the  war  department  for  appointment  as
brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army,  which  ap
pointment  was  made  to  date  from  1  Aug.,  1863.
At  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg,  MePherson  was  one
of  the  commissioners  to  fix  the  terms  of  capitula
tion,  and  he  was  then  assigned  to  the  command  of
the  city  and  district,  where  he  remained  until  the
following  spring,  except  during  February.  1864,
when  he  took  part  in  Sherman's  expedition  to
Meridian,  Miss.

When  Sherman  succeeded  Grant  in  command  of
the  western  armies  in  the  spring  of  18C4,  MePher
son  took  the  former's  place  as  commander  of  the
Army  of  the  Tennessee.  This  organization  num
bered  65,000  men  for  duty,  but  much  of  it  was  de
tached  on  Red  river  in  Louisiana  and  elsewhere,  so
that  he  was  unable  to  take  more  than  25,000  into
the  Georgia  campaign.  These  he  assembled  and
organized  at  Huntsville,  Ala.,  in  April,  1864.  The
campaign  was  opened  on  5  May.  Johnston  then
occupied  a  strongly  fortified  position  at  Dalton,
and  Sherman  planned  to  make  a  demonstration  in
his  front  with  the  armies  of  Thomas  and  Schofield,
while  MePherson  was  to  pass  around  Johnston's
left  flank  through  Snake  Creek  gap,  and,  by  throw
ing  himself  across  the  railroad  near  Resaca  in
Johnston's  rear,  cause  Johnston  to  evacuate  Dalton ;
in  the  retreat  Sherman  designed  to  fall  upon  him
with  the  strong  forces  of  Thomas  and  Schofield.
McPherson's  instructions  were  largely  discretion
ary;  he  was  to  destroy  the  railroad,  and  then  to  re
treat  back  into  Snake  Creek  gap,  rejoin  the  main
body,  or  await  developments,  according  to  his  judg
ment  and  the  information  he  might  receive.  lie
passed  through  the  gap  unopposed,  approached  Re
saca,  found  it  too  strongly  fortified  to  justify,  in
his  judgment,  an  assault,  and  then  retired  to  the
gap,  fortified  a  strong  position,  and  remained  there
threatening  the  railroad.  Sherman  was  disap
pointed,  and  in  his  "Memoirs"  says  so  frankly;
and  while  acknowledging  that  MePherson  acted
strictly  within  the  line  of  his  instructions,  yet
thinks  he  missed  an  opportunity  that  does  not
come  twice  in  a  lifetime.  His  idea  was  that  Me
Pherson,  having  23,000  men  with  him,  should  have
attacked  Resaca  vigorously,  knowing  that  Johnston
could  not  detach  against  him  without  exposing
himself  to  instant  attack  from  Thomas  and  Scho
field ;  he  thinks  that  MePherson  would  have
brushed  away  the  two  brigades  that  defended  Re
saca,  and,  by  thus  planting  himself  squarely  on
Johnston's  communications,  would  have  forced  the
latter  to  attempt  a  retreat  eastward,  in  which  he
would  have  lost  a  large  part,  if  not  the  whole,  of
his  army.  He  did  not  claim  that  such  a  course


was  required  by  McPherson's  instructions,  but  that
these  latter  permitted  it,  and  when  the  opportunity
offered,  MePherson  should  have  seized  it.  There
has  been  much  controversy  concerning  this,  the
only  criticism  that  was  ever  made  on  McPherson's
career  by  Sherman,  who  was  always  his  ardent  ad
mirer.  McPherson's  action  was  prudent  rather
than  bold,  but  he  was  on  the  spot,  had  had  large  ex
perience  in  assaults,  was  noted  for  his  courage,  both
moral  and  physical,  and  was  well  qualified  to  judge
of  the  probability  of  success  in  assaulting  Resaca.
As  a  result  of  his  action,  Sherman  brought  his  entire
army  to  Snake  Creek  gap  on  McPherson's  left,  and
the  moment  Johnston  perceived  the  movement  he
abandoned  his  stronghold  at  Dalton  and  retreated
to  Resaca.  This  at  least  raises  the  question  whether
it  would  not  have  been  better  for  Sherman  to  send
a  larger  force  against  Resaca  at  first  (which  was
the  movement  proposed  by  Thomas),  in  which  case
Johnston's  retreat  would  have  been  cut  off  beyond
any  doubt.  As  soon  as  the  rest  of  his  army  had
come  up  on  McPherson's  left,  Sherman  attacked
and  defeated  Johnston  at  Resaca,  and  in  this  en
gagement,  14  and  15  May,  1864,  McPherson's  corps
was  heavily  engaged.

During  the  months  of  May,  June,  and  July  there
was  incessant  skirmishing  between  the  two  armies,
culminating  in  battles  at  New  Hope  church,  26
May,  Dallas,  28  May,  Kenesaw  mountain,  27  June,
and  around  Atlanta,  19-22  July.  The  Confederate
attack  at  Dallas  was  directed  wholly  against  Mc
Pherson's  corps,  and  he  repelled  it.  inflicting  heavy
loss  on  his  assailant.  At  Kenesaw  mountain  he
made  a  gallant  assault  in  connection  with  Thomas's
army,  but  both  were  driven  back.  On  17  July,
Johnston  was  superseded  by  Gen.  John  B.  Hood  in
command  of  the  Confederate  army,  which  was  then
at  Atlanta,  confronted  by  Sherman's  army  on  the
north  and  east.  Sherman  was  extending  his  left
flank  to  envelop  Atlanta,  and  Hood  opposed  this
with  a  series  of  engagements  from  the  19th  to  the
21st  of  July.  On  the  22d  Hood  withdrew  from  the
trenches  in  front  of  Thomas  and  Schofield,  and,
massing  his  entire  army,  made  a  furious  onslaught
on  Sherman's  left  flank,  which  was  commanded  by
MePherson.  The  latter  happened  at  the  moment
to  be  at  Sherman's  headquarters  in  consultation
with  his  chief,  and  he  rode  rapidly  to  the  threat
ened  point,  in  order  to  superintend  personally  the
disposition  of  his  troops  to  meet  this  attack  on  his
flank  and  rear.  While  he  was  thus  engaged,  and
attempting  to  pass  from  one  column  to  another,
he  rode  into  the  enemy's  lines,  and  was  killed.

Gen.  MePherson  died  in  command  of  an  army  of
about  30,000  men,  at  the  age  of  thirty-five,  and
while  his  career  was  one  of  the  highest  distinction,
yet  it  fell  short  of  the  full  measure  it  must  have
attained  had  he  lived  till  the  close  of  the  war.  From
the  first.  Gen.  Grant  was  impressed  with  his  genius
and  courage,  and  he  always  spoke  of  him  in  terms
of  unbounded  praise.  When  Grant  came  to  the
east  to  take  command  of  all  the  armies,  in  March,
1864,  he  wrote  to  Sherman :  "  1  want  to  express  my
thanks  to  you  and  MePherson,  as  the  men  to  whom,
above  all  others,  I  feel  indebted  for  whatever  I
have  had  of  success";  and  on  McPherson's  death
he  wrote  to  the  latter's  aged  grandmother  to  ex
press  '•  the  highest  reverence  for  his  patriotism,  his
zeal,  his  great,  almost  unequalled,  ability,  and  all
the  manly  virtues  that  can  adorn  a  commander."
While  he  did  not  display  the  dashing  qualities  of
Sheridan,  he  was  remarkable  for  his  correct  judg
ment,  coolness  in  danger,  quick  perception,  knowl
edge  of  ground,  and  untiring  energy.  His  statue
in  bronze  has  been  erected  in  one  of  the  public


McPHERSON


159


parks  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  by  his  comrades  of  the
Army  of  the  Tennessee.

McPHERSON,  John  Roderic,  senator,  b.  in

Livingston  county,  X.  Y.,  9  May,  1833.  He  was
educated  in  the  public  schools  and  in  Geneseo
academy,  and  engaged  in  farming  and  stock-rais
ing,  removing  to  Hudson  City,  N.  J.,  in  1858.  He
was  president  of  the  Hudson  City  board  of  alder
men  in  1860-'3,  the  principal  mover  in  the  estab
lishment  of  the  People's  gas  company,  and  served
for  several  years  as  its  president.  He  was  in  the
state  senate  in  1870-'3,  opposed  railroad  monopo
lies,  and  secured  the  enactment  of  the  general  rail
road  law  of  New  Jersey.  He  was  presidential  elec
tor  on  the  Tilden  and  Hendricks  ticket  in  1870,
the  same  year  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  as  a  Demo
crat,  and  was  re-elected  in  1883  for  the  term  that
will  end  in  1889.  His  course  in  the  IT.  S.  senate
has  been  independent  and  conservative,  and  he  has
often  voted  against  his  party  associates  on  finan
cial  and  tariff  issues.  In  finance  he  belongs  to  the
school  known  as  hard-money  men  and  has  no  re
spect  for  a  depreciated  currency,  whether  of  silver
or  paper.  On  the  tariff  issue  he  is  classed  as  a
moderate  protectionist.

McPHERSON,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  in  1751;  d.  near  there,  5  Nov.,  1813.
He  was  appointed  a  cadet  in  the  British  navy  at
thirteen  years  of  age,  became  adjutant,  and  re
signed  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  but  his
resignation  was  not  accepted  until  1779.  At  this
date  he  joined  the  American  army,  with  the  rank
of  brevet-major,  served  as  aide-de-camp  to  Lafay
ette,  and  in  1781  was  appointed  by  Washington  to
command  an  irregular  corps  of  cavalry  in  Vir
ginia.  He  became  surveyor  in  1789,  inspector  of
the  revenue  in  1792,  and  from  the  next  year  until
his  death  was  naval  officer  of  the  port  of  Philadel
phia.  During  the  disturbances  in  the  western
counties  of  Pennsylvania  in  1794  regarding  the
excise  law,  he  commanded  the  "  McPherson  Blues,"
a  battalion  of  militia  that  was  named  in  his  honor.
Before  the  return  of  the  army  he  was  promoted
colonel,  and  subsequently  became  brigadier-general
of  Pennsylvania  militia.  On  the  prospect  of  war
with  France  in  1798,  the  Blues  were  reorganized,
with  additional  companies,  and  formed  into  a  le
gion  under  his  command.  In  1799  he  was  ap
pointed  brigadier-general  of  the  provisional  army,
and  commanded  the  .troops  that  were  sent  to  en
force  the  revenue  laws  in  Northampton  county
during  the  Fries  rebellion.

McPHERSON,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Boone
county,  Ky.,  15  Feb.,  1813 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
in  1872.  He  was  to  a  large  degree  self-educated,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  the
age  of  twenty-one.  After  practising  for  several
years  in  Kentucky  and  Arkansas  he  removed  to  St.
Louis.  The  great  bridge  that  crosses  the  Missis
sippi  at  this  place  was  built  very  largely  through
his  exertions,  and  the  first  railroad  to  St.  Louis
was  constructed  by  his. aid.  He  held  high  offices
in  the  Baptist  denomination,  and  promoted  its  be
nevolent  objects  by  generous  contributions.

McOUAUE,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,
27  April,  1829 :  d.  there,  25  March,  1885.  He  was
educated  in  a  Roman  Catholic  institution  in  Mon
treal,  Canada,  where  he  became  an  excellent  lin
guist.  On  his  return  to  Utica  he  studied  law,
which  he  abandoned  for  banking,  and  subsequent
ly  for  politics.  In  1851-'3  he  was  assistant  clerk
o*f  the  assembly,  and  in  1859  he  served  one  term  in
that  body.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he
was  captain  of  the  Utica  citizens'  corps,  which  en
listed  as  a  company  of  volunteers  at  the  first  call


for  troops,  and  in  April,  1861,  he  became  colonel
of  the  14th  New  York  regiment.  lie  served  at
Malvern  Hill,  and,  in  consequence  of  the  death  of
other  colonels,  took  command  of  his  brigade  for
eighteen  months.  Although  ill  at  the  battle  of
Chancellorsville,  he  insisted  on  doing  duty,  and
participated  in  the  fight  until  he  fell  exhausted
from  his  horse.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-gen
eral  and  major-general  of  volunteers,  13  March.
1865.  After  the  war  he  served  in  various  civic  ca
pacities,  was  an  active  politician,  and  was  de
partment  commander  of  the  Grand  army  of  the
republic  in  New  York  in  1879.  He  published  sev
eral  army  songs,  one  of  the  best  known  of  which  is
"  The  Loyal  Legioner."

McQUAII),  Bernard  John,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
New  York  city,  15  Dec.,  1823.  He  is  of  Irish  par
entage.  After  studying  at  Chambly  college,  near
Montreal,  Canada,  and  at  St.  John's  college,  Ford-
ham,  where  he  finished  his  classical  course  in  1843,
he  was  tutor  at  St.  John's  for  three  years,  until  the
Jesuits  took  charge  of  the  institution.  He  then
studied  theology  under  the  Lazarists  in  a  seminary
that  occupied  the  site  of  the  present  New  York
cathedral,  and  afterward  under  the  Jesuits  at  St.
John's  college.  He  was  ordained  priest,  16  Jan.,
1848,  in  the  cathedral  of  New  York,  by  Archbishop
Hughes,  and  assigned  to  the  mission  of  Madison,
N.  J.  He  built  churches  at  Morristown  and  Spring
field,  and  began  one  at  Mendham ;  but  in  Septem
ber,  1853,  on  the  erection  of  the  new  diocese  of
Newark,  he  was  transferred  to  the  future  cathe
dral  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  incoming  bish
op,  Bayley.  He  conceived  the.  idea  of  founding
Seton  Hall  college  and  seminary,  and  it  was  main
ly  to  his  untiring  efforts  that  the  success  of  the
institution  was  due.  He  was  president  of  it  for
ten  years — at  Madison  and  afterward  at  South
Orange — remaining  for  three  years  of  the  time  rec
tor  of  the  cathedral  at  Newark.  On  12  July,  1808,
he  was  consecrated  first  bishop  of  Rochester.  He
organized  the  diocese  rapidly  and  devoted  himself
to  building  churches,  paying  off  church  debts,
erecting  parochial  residences,  and  founding  paro
chial  schools.  To  secure  teachers  for  these  schools
he  introduced  the  Sisters  of  St.  Joseph  into  the
diocese,  and  the  order  already  numbers  200  mem
bers,  and  has  under  its  care  about  twenty-two
school-houses  and  orphan  asylums.  He  also  found
ed  St.  Andrew's  preparatory  seminary.  He  is  best
known  for  the  part  he  has  taken  in  the  agitation
for  religious  schools.  To  justify  his  course  in
founding  such  schools  and  to  impress  Roman  Catho
lics  with  a  sense  of  obligation  to  support  them,  he
wrote  and  lectured  extensively ;  and  it  is  mainly
to  his  efforts  and  influence  here  and  at  Rome  that
the  old  policy  of  his  church  in  regard  to  education
has  been  revived  and  carried  out  in  this  country.
It  is  commonly  supposed  that  the  movement  which
he  began  tends  toward  a  demand  for  a  share  of
public  money  for  sectarian  schools ;  but  he  main
tains  simply  that  it  is  not  the  business  of  the  state
to  educate  any  children  whose  parents  are  able  to
pay  for  their  education.  At  the  close  of  a  lecture
in 'Boston,  3  Feb.,  1876,  he  declared  his  principles
to  be,  for  "  a  republic  whose  citizens  are  of  differ
ent  religious  beliefs  and  are  voters  needing  intelli
gence  " :  1st,  The  non-interference  of  the  state  in
religious  matters,  in  church  or  in  school ;  2d,  com
pulsory  knowledge,  through  parents'  schools,  under
parents'  control,  and  at  their  cost ;  and  3d,  free
trade  in  education,  or  no  monopoly  of  the  teacher's
profession.  He  was  present  at  the  Vatican  council
in  1869-'70,  and  has  since  visited  Europe.  He  has
lectured  frequently,  delivered  addresses  on  public


160


MCQUEEN


MACREADY


occasions,  and  contributed  articles  to  the  "  North
American  Review"  and  other  periodicals.

McQUEEN,  John,  congressman,  b.  in  Robin
son  county.  N.  C.,  in  1808 ;"d.  in  Society  Hill,  S.  C.,
30  Aug.,  1867.  He  was  educated  at  home,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1828,  and  settled
in  Bennettsville,  S.  C.  He  was  colonel  of  militia
during  the  nullification  excitement  of  1833,  pro
moted  major-general  in  1835,  and  was  in  command
in  the  threatened  disturbances  of  1837.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1848,  re-elect
ed  without  opposition  for  the  next  six  sessions,
and  served  from  1849  until  his  resignation  in  1800.
From  1802  till  1804  he  was  a  member  of  the  Con
federate  congress.

McQUEEN,  Thomas,  Canadian  journalist,  b.  in
Ayrshire,  Scotland,  in  1803 :  d.  in  Goderich,  25
June.  1861.  His  education  was  extremely  limited,
and  he  had  early  to  contribute  toward  the  support
of  the  family.  He  became  a  stone-mason,  em
ployed  his  intervals  of  leisure  in  supplying  the  de
ficiencies  of  his  early  education,  and  became  an
eloquent  advocate  of  the  cause  of  labor.  He  came
to  Canada  in  1842,  and  pursued  his  trade  in  the
county  of  Renfrew  In  1848  he  established  the
"  Huron  Signal "  at  Goderich,  and  became  through
its  columns  a  well-known  advocate  of  responsible
government.  In  1854  he  was  an  unsuccessful  can
didate  to  the  Canadian  parliament  for  Huron  in
the  reform  interest.  He  has  published  several  vol
umes  of  poems.

McOUILLEN,John  Hn&h,  dentist,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  12  Feb.,  1820;  d.  there,  3  March,
1879.  He  was'  the  son  of  Capt.  Hugh  McQuillen,
who  served  during  the  war  of  1812  under  Decatur.
He  studied  in  the  Friends'  schools  in  Philadelphia,
and  became  a  clerk,  but  devoted  his  leisure  to
study.  In  1847  he  began  the  study  of  medicine
and  dentistry,  beginning  the  practice  of  the  latter
in  1849,  receiving  the  degree  of  M.  D.  at  Jefferson
medical  college  in  1852,  and  that  of  D.  D.  S.  at
the  Philadelphia  college  of  dental  surgery  in  1853.
In  1857  he  accepted  the  chair  of  operative  dentistry
and  dental  physiology  in  the  Pennsylvania  college
of  dental  surgery,  which  he  held  until  1862,  and  in
1859  he  originated  the  idea  of  the  American  dental
association.  In  1863,  principally  through  the  ef
forts  of  Dr.  McQuillen,  a  charter  was  obtained  for
the  Philadelphia  dental  college,  and  he  was  made
dean,  and  professor  of  physiology,  which  offices  he
held  until  his  death.  For  several  years  he  was
president  of  the  American  dental  association,  the
Pennsylvania  dental  society,  and  the  state  odonto-
graphic  society,  and  corresponding  secretary  of  the
biological  and  microscopical  section  of  the  Phila
delphia  academy  of  natural  sciences.  From  1859
till  1871  he  was  an  editor  of  the  •'  Dental  Cosmos,"
a  monthly  journal,  to  which  he  contributed  various
articles,  including  a  monograph  upon  "  The  Action
of  Anaesthetics  on  the  Blood-Corpuscles,"  which
was  widely  copied  and  translated.  He  has  written
much  on  the  principles  and  practice  of  dentistry
and  dental  education,  and  also  in  exposition  and
discussion  of  histology  and  microscopy.

McRAE,  John  J.,  senator,  b.  in  Wayne  county,
Miss.,  about  1810;  d.  in  Balize,  Honduras,  30  May,
1808.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Mississippi  in  1834,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  served  in  both  houses  of  the  legisla
ture,  officiating  as  speaker  for  two  sessions.  He
was  appointed  U.  S.  senator  from  Mississippi  as  a
state-rights  Democrat,  in  place  of  Jefferson  Davis,
resigned,  and  served  from  19  Dec.,  1851.  till  1
March,  1852.  From  1854  till  1858  he  was  governor
of  Mississippi.  He  was  then  elected  a  representative


to  congress  in  place  of  John  A.  Quitman,  and  was
re-elected  to  the  succeeding  congress,  in  which  he
served  on  the  committee  on  military  affairs,  his
term  extending  from  7  Dec.,  1858,  till  12  Jan.,  1802,
when  he  retired.  He  was  a  representative  from
Mississippi  to  the  first  Confederate  congress,  serving
from  22  Feb.,  1802,  till  21  Feb.,  1864.

MacREA,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  1767;  d.  near
Shawneetown,  111.,  3  Nov.,  1832.  In  1791  he  was
appointed  from  Virginia  lieutenant  of  levies,  and
was  wounded  at  Gen.  Arthur  St.  Clair's  defeat  by
the  Miami  Indians  on  4  Nov.,  1791.  He  became
captain  in  December,  1794,  was  transferred  to  the
artillery  in  June,  1798,  and  promoted  major,  2d
regiment  of  artillerists  and  engineers,  31  July,
1800,  and  lieutenant-colonel,  19  April.  1814.  lie
did  good  service  in  the  action  near  New  Orleans,
23  Dec.,  1814,  and  was  brevetted  colonel  "for  ten
years'  faithful  service,"  19  April,  1824.

MACREADY,  William  Charles,  English  act
or,  b.  in  London,  3  March,  1793;  d.  in  Weston,
Super-Mare.  England,  29  April,  1873.  He  was  the
son  of  an  Irish  actor  and  theatre-manager,  and  re
ceived  a  thorough  education  at  Rugby,  prepara
tory  to  his  admission  to  a  course  of  study  in  the
ology.  But  family  circumstances  changed  his
course,  and  on  10  June,  1810,  he  appeared,  under
his  father's  management,  at  the  Birmingham  thea
tre,  as  Romeo  in  "Romeo  and  Juliet."  Here  he
remained  until  1814  as  leading  juvenile  performer
and  stage-manager,  making  occasional  visits  to
other  large  cities.  On  16  Sept..  1816,  he  played  at
Co  vent  Garden  theatre  in  London,  as  Orestes  in
"The  Distressed  Mother,"  and  achieved  an  imme
diate  success.  He  was  connected  for  many  vcars
with  Covent  Garden,  Drury  Lane,  and  the  Hay-
market  theatres  of  the  metropolis,  and  performed
in  most  of  the  large  playhouses  of  Great  Britain
and  Ireland.  During  his  career  he  created  several
original  characters,  and  constantly  advanced  in
favor  with  his  audiences.  Among  these  special
ties  were  the  roles  of  Orestes,  William  Tell,  Vir-
ginius,  Werner,  Rob  Roy,  and  Richelieu.  He  also
made  several  short  visits  to  Paris,  and  in  1844
played  Hamlet  before  the  royal  family  at  the  Tuil-
eries.  In  1837  and  1838  Mac-ready  managed  Co-
vent  Garden  theatre,  and  in  1842' and  1843  cast
his  lot  with  Drury  Lane.  On  both  occasions  he
produced  sterling  plays,  with  unequalled  splendor
and  historic  truthfulness.  From  these  undertak
ings,  however,  came  no  pecuniary  reward,  and  he
retired  from  the  control  of  Drury  Lane  with  heavy
loss.  In  1850  and  1851  Mac-ready  gave  a  series  of
farewell  performances  in  the  principal  cities  of  the
United  Kingdom,  closing  at  the  Haymarket  thea
tre  in  London  with  an  extended  round  of  his  best
characters.  His  last  incidental  appearance  was
on  26  Feb.,  1851,  at  Drury  Lane  theatre,  in  Mac
beth.  Thereafter  he  resided  in  Sherborne,  occa
sionally  giving  readings  to  London  audiences,  and
occupying  his  leisure  with  schemes  for  the  educa
tion  of  the  poor.  Macready  made  three  visits  to
the  United  States— in  1820,  1843,  and  1848— and
was  always  received  with  much  favor.  Plis  last  ap
pearance  here  was  on  7  May,  1849,  at  the  Astor  place
opera-house,  in  "  Macbeth',"  on  the  evening  of  the
Forrest-Macready  riot.  (See  FORREST,  EDWIX.)
This  event  terminated  Macrcady's  engagement,
and  forever  destroyed  Forrest's  popularity.  The
breach  between  the  two  actors  had  been  caused  by
Macready's  refusal  to  permit  the  American  trage'-
dian  to  appear  in  London  in  the  plays  of  "  Virgin-
ins  "  and  "  Richelieu,"  both  of  which,  by  purchase,
had  become  Macready's  property.  Macready's  pri
vate  life  was  without  blemish."  At  all  times  he


McREE


McSPARRAN


161


sought  to  elevate  and  dignify  his  profession. On
his  retirement  Tennyson  addressed  to  him  these
grateful  lines :
"  Farewell,  Macready,  since  to-night  we  part :

Full-handed  thunders  often  have  confest

Thy  power  well  used  to  move  the  public  breast.
We  thank  thee  with  one  voice,  and  from  the  heart.
Farewell.  Macready,  since  this  night  we  part.

Go  take  thine  honors  home ;  rank  with  the  best ;

Garrick,  and  statelier  Kemble.  and  the  rest,
Who  made  a  nation  purer  through  their  art.
Thine  is  it  that  the  drama  did  not  die,

Xor  flicker  down  to  brainless  pantomime.

And  those  gilt  gauds  rnen-children  swarm  to  see.
Farewell,  Macready,  moral,  grave,  sublime.
Our  Shakespeare's  bland  and  universal  eye

Dwells  pleased,  thro'  twice  a  hundred  years  on
thee."

McREE.  Griffith  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Bladen
county.  X.  C..  in  1758 ;  d.  in  Smithville.  X.  C.,  30
Oct.,  1801.  He  was  the  son  of  Samuel  McRee,
who  emigrated  in  1740  from  County  Down,  Ireland,
to  Xorth  Carolina,  and  became  a  magistrate  in
Bladen  county.  The  son  became  major  and  brevet
lieutenant-colonel  in  the  Revolutionary  army,  was
appointed  captain  of  artillery  and  engineers,  2
June,  1794.  and  resigned  on  24  April,  1798,  being
appointed  in  that  year  collector  of  revenue  for  the
district  of  Wilmington,  X.  C. — His  son,  William.
soldier,  b.  in  Wilmington,  X.  C.,  13  Dec.,  1787;  d.
in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in  May,  1833,  was  appointed
to  the  army  as  a  cadet  on  14  April,  1803.  He
became  2d  lieutenant  of  engineers,  1  July,  1805, 1st
lieutenant  in  October,  1806,  captain  in  1808,  and
major,  31  July.  1812,  and  participated  in  the  war
with  Great  Britain,  being  engaged  on  the  northern
border.  He  became  chief  engineer  of  the  army
under  Gen.  Jacob  Brown  in  1814,  was  brevetted
lieutenant-colonel  for  gallant  conduct  in  the  battle
of  Xiagara,  25  July.  1814.  and  colonel  for  dis
tinguished  and  meritorious  service  in  defence  of
Fort  Erie,  15  Aug.,  1814,  and  became  lieutenant-
colonel  on  12  Xov.,  1818.  In  1815  he  was  sent  to
Europe  by  the  government  to  examine  military
schools  and  fortifications,  and  on  his  return  made
an  able  report.  Indignant  that  a  foreigner.  Gen.
Simon  Bernard,  should  be  appointed  to  an  office  in
the  engineer  corps,  he  resigned  on  31  March,  1819,
and  from  1825  till  1832  he  was  U.  S.  surveyor-
general  of  public  lands  in  Illinois,  Missouri  and
Arkansas  territories.  Fort  McRee,  Pensacola,  Fla.,
was  named  in  his  honor. — Another  son,  Sam
uel,  soldier,  b.  in  Wilmington,  X.  C.,  6  Oct.,
1801 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  15  July,  1849,  was  ap
pointed  a  cadet  in  1815.  He  became  2d  lieutenant
in  the  8th  infantry,  1  July,  1820,  assistant  instruc
tor  of  infantry  tactics  in  the  military  academy  in
1820,  1st  lieutenant,  September,  1823.  and  captain
in  December,  1831.  He  served  in  the  Black  Hawk
war.  was  assistant  quartermaster  with  the  rank  of
captain  in  July.  1838,  and  relinquished  rank  in  line
in  Xovember,  1839.  He  was  made  quartermaster
with  the  rank  of  major  on  8  X'ov.,  1839,  and  bre
vetted  lieutenant-colonel  for  meritorious  conduct
while  serving  in  the  enemy's  country,  30  May,
1848. — Samuel's  nephew,  Griffith  John,  lawyer,
b.  in  Wilmington.  X.  C.,  20  Sept.,  1820;  d.  there
29  April,  1872,  was  the  son  of  James  Fergus
McRee.  He  was  educated  at  Princeton,  admitted
to  the  bar  of  Wilmington  in  1841,  arid  practised
there  until  his  death.  He  was  a  member  of  the
X'ew  York  and  Massachusetts  and  other  historical
societies.  He  married  Penelope,  daughter  of  Gov.
James  Iredell.  and  was  the  author  of  the  "  Life  of
James  Iredell"  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1857).

VOL. IV. — 11


McROBERTS,  Samuel,  senator,  b.  in  Illinois
about  1800:  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  27  March.
1843.  He  was  graduated  at  Transylvania,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  began  practice  in
Danville,  Ky.,  and  afterward  removing  to  Illinois
became  judge  of  one  of  the  higher  courts  of  that
state.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  state  senate
and  became  U.  S.  district  attorney  for  Illinois.  At
the  time  of  his  death  he  was 'a  U.  S.  senator,
having  been  elected  from  Illinois  as  a  Democrat,
from  31  May.  1841.

McSHERRY,  James,  author,  b.  in  Frederick
county.  Md.,29  July.  1819;  d.  there,  13  July,  1869.
His  father,  James)  1776-1849),  was  member'of  con
gress  in  1821-'3,  having  been  chosen  a  Federalist.
The  son  was  graduated  at  St.  Mary's  college.  Em-
mettsburg.  Md.,  in  1828,  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1840.  and  began  practice  in  Gettys
burg,  Pa.  In  1841  he  removed  to  Frederick  City,
Md.,  where  he  practised  his  profession  until  his
death.  He  was  an  active  member  of  the  Roman
Catholic  church,  a  regular  contributor  to  the
"  United  States  Catholic  Magazine  "  and  other  pe
riodicals,  and  was  the  author  of  "  History  of  Mary
land.  1634-1848"  (Baltimore.  1849;  smaller  ed.,
1852) ; "  Pere  Jean,  or  the  Jesuit  Missionary  "  (1849) ;
and  "  Willitoft,  or  the  Davs  of  James  the  First,  a
Tale "  (1851 ;  republished  in  German,  Frankfort-
on-the-Main.  1858).

McSHERRY,  Richard,  physician,  b.  in  Mar-
tinsburg,  W.  Va..  21  Xov.,  1817;  d.  in  Baltimore.
Md.,  7  Oct.,  1885.  His  father  was  a  physician  of
high  repute  in  Martinsburg,  Va.,  where  he  prac
tised  medicine  and  surgery  for  nearly  sixty  years.
On  his  mother's  side  he  was  descended  from  the
early  colonial  settlers  of  Maryland  and  from  the
first  Lord  Baltimore.  He  was  educated  at  George
town  college,  D.  C.,  and  at  the  University  of  Mary
land,  and  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1841.  Entering  the
I  medical  corps  of  the  army,  he  served  under  Gen.
I  Zachary  Taylor  in  the  Seminole  war.  but  resigned
I  his  commission  in  1843,  became  assistant  surgeon
:  in  the  navy,  and  made  a  cruise  around  the  world
in  the  U.  S.  frigate  "  Constitution  "  in  1844—'6.  He
served  in  Gen.  Winfield  Scott's  campaign  in  Mexi
co  as  surgeon  to  a  battalion  of  marines,  and  in
1851  retired  from  the  navy  and  began  practice
in  Baltimore.  Md.  From  1863  till  1865  he  was
professor  of  materia  medica  and  therapeutics  in
the  University  of  Maryland,  and  then  succeeded
Dr.  Samuel  Chew  as  professor  of  the  principals
and  practice  of  medicine.  In  1883  he  became
president  of  the  medical  and  chirurgical  faculty
of  Maryland,  and  he  was  a  founder  and  first  presi
dent  of  the  Baltimore  academy  of  medicine.  At
I  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  president  of  the  Mary
land  state  board  of  health.  In  his  early  life  he
wrote  much  on  surgical  subjects,  and  in  his  later
life  contributed  largely  to  sanitary  science.  He
was  the  author  of  "  El  Puchero,  or  a  Mixed  Dish
from  Mexico  "  (Philadelphia.  1850) ;  and  a  volume
of  miscellaneous  "  Essays  "  (Baltimore.  1869) :  and
"  Health  and  How  to  Promote  it  "  (Xew  York.  1883).
McSPARRAX.  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ire
land  about  1680:  d.  in  South  Kingston,  R.  I.,  1
Pec.,  1757.  He  was  educated  at  the  University  of
Glasgow,  and  received  the  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1709.
He  was  made  deacon,  21  Aug.,  1720,  by  the  bishop
of  London,  and  priest,  25  Sept.,  1720,  by  the  arch
bishop  of  Canterbury.  The  next  year  he  was  sent
by  the  Society  for  propagating  the  gospel  as  a  mis
sionary  to  B'ristol,  R.  I.,  and  neighboring  towns.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Oxford  in
1731.  He  visited  England  twice  in  1736  and  1754,


162


McTAVISII


McVICKAR


and  was  for  thirty-seven  years  minister  of  St.
Paul's  church,  Narragansett,  whicli  is  shown  in  the
illustration.  Dr.  McSparran  was  an  energetic  de
fender  of  his  church.  He  published  numerous  ser
mons,  of  which
that  on  "  The
Sacred  Dignity
of  the  Christian
Priesthood  Vin
dicated  "  is  note
worthy,  and  ex
cited  much  oppo
sition.  His  chief
work  is  entitled
"  America  Dis
sected,  being  a
Full  and  True
Account  of  the
American  Col
onies"  (Dublin.
1752).  His  aim  was
to  warn  poor  peo
ple  against  emi
grating  to  Amer
ica,  on  account
of  bad  climate,
bad  money,  dan
ger  from  enemies,

pestilent  heresies  prevailing,  and  the  like.  This
curious  work  was  reprinted  in  an  appendix  to
Wilkins  Updike's  "  History  of  the  Episcopal  Church
in  Narragansett  "  (New  York,  1847).

McTAVISH,  Donald,  Canadian  explorer,  b.  in
Stratherick,  Scotland,  about  1755;  d.  near  Cape  Dis
appointment,  North  Pacific  ocean,  22  May,  1815.
He  emigrated  to  Canada,  and  became  a  partner  in
the  Northwest  company.  For  about  a  quarter  of
a  century  he  was  employed  in  the  wilds  of  Upper
Canada  and  the  interior  of  the  northwestern  re
gions  of  America.  He  was  very  successful  in  pro
moting  the  interests  of  the  company,  and  was  re
ceived  by  the  Indians  as  one  of  themselves.  He
organized  and  had  command  of  an  expedition
that  crossed  the  continent  of  North  America,  and,
after  escaping  innumerable  perils,  he  and  six  of
his  companions  were  lost  near  Cape  Disappoint
ment,  at  the  mouth  of  Columbia  river.  The  object
of  their  expedition  was  to  establish  a  connection
with  China,  a  project  that  was  accomplished  more
than  seventy  years  after  McTavish's  death.

McTYEIRE,  Holland  Nimmons,  M.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Barnwell  county,  S.  C.,  28  July,  1824.  He
was  graduated  at  Randolph-Macon  college,  Va.,  in
1844,  joined  the  Virginia  conference  in  1845,  and
in  1846  took  charge  of  St.  Francis  street  church,
Mobile,  Ala.  He  then  served  the  churches  at
Demopolis,  Ala.,  and  Columbus,  Miss.,  and  after
ward  was  transferred  from  the  Alabama  to  the
Louisiana  conference  and  stationed  in  New  Orleans.
He  was  elected  editor  of  the  New  Orleans  "  Chris
tian  Advocate"  in  1851,  and  of  the  Nashville
"  Christian  Advocate  "  in  1858.  During  the  civil
war  he  was  transferred  to  the  Montgomery  con
ference  and  was  pastor  in  Montgomery,  Ala.  In
18GO  he  was  elected  to  the  episcopate,  and  in  1873,
by  the  terms  of  the  gift  of  Cornelius  Vanderbilt,  he
was  made  president  of  the  board  of  Vanderbilt  uni
versity.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Duties  of  Christian
Masters,"  a  prize  essay  (Nashville,  1851) ;  "  Cate
chism  on  Church  Government "  (1869) ;  "  Catechism
on  Bible  History  "  (1869) ;  "  Manual  of  Discipline  "
(1870);  and  "History  of  Methodism"  (1884).

MacVEAGH,  Wayne,  lawyer,  b.  in  Phcenixville,
Chester  co.,  Pa.,  19  April,  1833.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1853,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the


bar  in  1856,  and  served  as  district  attorney  for
Chester  county  from  1859  till  1864.  In  1862  he  was
captain  of  cavalry,  when  the  invasion  of  Pennsyl
vania  was  threatened,  and  in  1863  he  was  chairman
of  the  Republican  central  committee  of  Pennsyl
vania.  In  1870-'!  he  was  U.  S.  minister  to  Turkey,
and  in  1872-'3  was  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania
constitutional  convention.  He  was  the  chief  mem
ber  of  the  "  MacVeagh  commission  "  that  was  sent
to  Louisiana  in  1877  by  President  Hayes  to  repre
sent  him  unofficially,  and  to  endeavor  to  bring  the
conflicting  parties  in  that  state  to  an  understand
ing.  In  1881  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  attorney-gen
eral  in  the  cabinet  of  President  Garfield,  but  re
signed,  witli  the  other  members,  on  the  accession  of
President  Arthur,  and  resumed  his  law  practice  in
Philadelphia,  He  received  the  degree  ol  LL.  I),
from  Amherst  in  1881.  He  has  been  chairman  of
the  civil  service  reform  association  of  Philadelphia,
and  also  chairman  of  the  Indian  rights  association
of  that  city  for  several  years.

Mac  VICAR,  Malcolm,  educator,  b.  in  Dung-
lass,  Argyleshire,  Scotland,  30  Sept.,  1829.  When
he  was  very  young  his  parents  came  to  Canada  and
settled  in  the  county  of  Kent.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Rochester  in  1859,  and  in  that
year  became  professor  of  mathematics  in  Brock-
port  collegiate  institute,  N.  Y.,  of  which  he  was
principal  in  1863-'7.  He  then  accepted  a  similar
place  in  the  State  normal  school  in  Brockport.  He
became  superintendent  of  public  schools  in  Leaven-
worth,  Kan.,  in  1868,  principal  of  the  State  normal
school,  Potsdam,  N.  V.,  in  1869,  and  principal  of
the  State  normal  school,  Ypsilanti,  Mich.,  in  1880 ;
and  since  1881  he  has  been  professor  of  apologetics
and  biblical  interpretation  in  English  in  the  Bap
tist  college,  Toronto,  Canada.  He  was  the  princi
pal  mover  in  securing  a  law  to  establish  four  new
normal  schools  in  New  York  state  in  18(5(5.  In
1870  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  I),  from  the
University  of  the  state  of  New  York,  and  that  of
LL.  D.  from  the  University  of  Rochester.  He  is
the  inventor  of  the  Mac  Vicar  tellurian  globe,  and
of  various  devices  to  illustrate  principles  in  arith
metic,  astronomy,  and  geography,  and  is  the  author
of  text-books  in  arithmetic. — His  brother,  Donald
Harvey,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in  Dunglass,  Ar
gyleshire,  Scotland,  29  Nov.,  1831,  was  graduated
at  Knox  college,  Toronto,  in  1858.  He  became  pas
tor  of  Knox  church,  Guelph,  in  1859,  of  Cote  street
church,  Montreal,  in  January,  1861,  and  in  1868
professor  of  divinity  in  the  newly  established  Pres
byterian  college  in  that  city.  During  four  years  he
was  the  only  professor,  but  was  afterward  appointed
principal,  with  a  strong  staff  of  professors  and  lec
turers.  He  was  lecturer  on  logic  in  McGill  uni
versity  in  1871,  in  1876  and  1884  delivered  courses
of  lectures  upon  applied  logic,  and  in  1878  a  course
on  ethics  before  the  Ladies'  educational  association
of  Montreal.  In  1881  he  was  chosen  moderator  of
the  general  assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  church
in  Canada,  and  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Presby
terian  councils  that  met  in  Edinburgh  in  1877,  in
Philadelphia  in  1880,  m  Belfast  in  1884,  and  in
London  in  1887.  In  1881  he  received  the  diploma
of  membership  of  the  Athc-nee  orientale  of  Paris.
He  also  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  McGill
university,  and  that  of  D.  D.  from  Knox  college,
Toronto.  He  has  been  a  member  of  the  Protest
ant  school  commission,  and  is  a  leader  in  the  work
of  French  evangelization  in  Canada.  He  is  the
author  of  a  primary  and  advanced  text-book  on
arithmetic,  and  numerous  articles  in  periodicals.

McVHJKAR,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  York
city,  10  Aug.,  1787 ;  d.  there,  29  Oct.,  1868.  He


McVICKER


MACY


163


was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1804,  and  spent
some  time  in  England  with  his  father,  who  was  one
of  the  rich  merchants  of  New  York.  In  1811  he
took  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,
and  became  rector  of  St.  James's  church,  Hyde
Park,  N.  Y.  In  1817  he  was  appointed  professor
of  moral  philosophy,  rhetoric,  and  belles-lettres  (to
which  was  afterward  added  the  evidences  of  Chris
tianity)  in  Columbia,  the  duties  of  which  office  he
discharged  for  nearly  half  a  century.  Dr.  Mc-
Vickar  was  superintendent  of  the  Society  for  pro
moting  religion  and  learning  in  New  York,  and
from  1856  onward  labored  diligently  toward  secur
ing  a  training-school  for  that  diocese.  The  result
was  the  establishment  of  St.  Stephen's  college,  An-
nandale.  From  1844  till  1862  he  was  chaplain  to
the  U.  S.  forces  at  Fort  Columbus,  Governor's  isl
and,  N.  Y.  In  1864  he  retired  from  active  duty  in
the  college,  and  was  honored  with  the  title  of
emeritus  professor.  Columbia  gave  him  the  de
grees  of  A.  M.  in  1818  and  S.  T.  D.  in  1825.  Be
sides  numerous  occasional  essays  and  addresses,
etc.,  he  published  •'  Narrative  of  the  Life  of  Dr.
Samuel  Bard  "  (1822) ;  "  First  Lessons  in  Political
Economy "  (New  York,  1825) ;  "  Memoir  of  the
Rev.  Edmund  I).  Griffin,1"  appended  to  the  "  Re
mains  "  of  the  latter  (1831) ;  "  Early  Years  of  Bishop
Hobart  "  (1834) ;  and  "  Professional  Years  of  Bishop
Hobart"  (1836).— His  son,  William  Augustus,
clergyman,  b.  in  New  York  city,  24  April,  1827 ;  d.
there,  24  Sept..  1877,  was  graduated  at  Columbia
in  1846,  studied  in  the  General  theological  semi
nary  of  New  York,  and  became  rector  of  St.  Bar
nabas,  Irvington,  N.  Y.,  and  subsequently  of  the
American  chapel  in  Nice,  France.  Columbia  gave
him  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  in  1870,  and  in  1876  he
was  made  rector  of  Christ  church,  New  York.  He
was  the  author  of  the  "  Life  of  John  McVickar,"
his  father,  in  which  there  is  an  interesting  account
of  Mr.  McVickar's  visit  to  Sir  Walter  Scott  at  Ab-
botsford  in  1830  (New  York,  1872).

McVICKER,  James  Hubert,  theatrical  mana
ger,  b.  in  New  York  city,  14  Feb.,  1822.  After  the
age  of  ten  he  engaged  in  various  work  in  Haver-
straw,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1837  removed  to  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  where  he  learned  the  printer's  trade,  employ
ing  his  leisure  in  study.  He  first  appeared  in  St.
Charles  theatre,  New  Orleans,  in  1843,  and  in  1845
became  principal  comedian  in  Rice's  theatre,  Chi
cago,  remaining  there  until  1852,  when  he  made  a
tour  through  the  country,  appearing  in  Yankee
characters.  In  1857  he  built  McVicker's  theatre
in  Chicago,  111.,  which  was  rebuilt  after  the  fire  of
1871,  and  remodelled  in  1887,  and  which  he  has
managed  successfully  for  thirty  years. — His  daugh
ter,  Mary  Frances,  married  Edwin  Booth  on  7
June,  1869,  and  died  13  Nov.,  1881.

McWHORTER,  Alexander,  clergyman,  b.  in
Newcastle,  Del.,  26  July,  1734 ;  d.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,
20  July,  1807.  His  parents,  who  were  of  Scotch
descent,  removed  to  this  country  from  Ireland  in
1730,  and  settled  in  Newcastle,  where  his  father,
formerly  a  linen-merchant,  became  a  farmer  and
an  active  member  of  the  Presbyterian  church.  The
son  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1757,  studied
theology  with  William  Tennent,  was  licensed  to
preach  in  1758,  and  in  the  following  year  became
pastor  of  a  church  in  Newark,  N.  J.  In  1764  he
was  appointed  by  the  synod  of  New  York  and
Philadelphia  to  a'mission  in  North  Carolina,  where
his  friends  were  settled,  returning  to  Newark  in
1766  after  a  visit  to  Boston.  In  1775  he  was  sent
by  congress  to  western  North  Carolina  to  persuade
the  royalists  to  unite  with  the  patriot  cause,  and  in
1776  lie  visited  the  American  army  in  its  camp  op


posite  Trenton,  to  confer  with  regard  to  measures
for  protecting  the  state,  and  was  present  at  the
passage  of  the  Delaware  and  the  surprise  of  the
Hessians.  In  1778,  at  the  solicitation  of  Gen.
Henry  Knos,  he  acted  as  chaplain  of  Knox's  artil
lery  brigade.  In  1779  he  accepted  a  pastorate  and
the  presidency  of  Charlotte  academy  in  Mecklen
burg  county,  N.  C.,  from  which  place  he  was  com
pelled  to  flee  before  the  approach  of  Cornwallis's
army,  losing  his  library  and  other  possessions.  He
was  recalled  to  Newark  in  1781.  where  he  remained
until  his  death.  In  1788  he  aided  in  forming  the
constitution  of  the  Presbyterian  church  of  the
United  States,  and  was  a  trustee  of  the  general
assembly.  He  was  also  a  trustee  of  Princeton  col
lege  for  thirty-five  years,  and  took  an  active  part
in  soliciting  funds  in  New  England  for  rebuilding
the  college  after  the  fire  of  1802.  Yale  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1776.  He  published  a  "  Cen
tury  Sermon  "  describing  the  settlement  and  prog
ress  of  Newark  (1800).  and  a  collection  of  sermons
(2  vols.,  Newark,  1803). — His  grandson,  Alexan
der,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  1  Jan.,  1822 ;
d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  28  J\me.  1880,  was  gradu
ated  at  Yale  in  1842,  studied  three  years  in  the
theological  department  there,  and  was  licensed  to
preach  in  1844.  In  1859-'60  he  was  professor  of
metaphysics  and  English  literature  in  Troy  uni
versity.  He  received  deacon's  orders  in  the  Prot
estant  Episcopal  church  in  1863.  He  was  a  pro
found  Hebrew  scholar,  and,  in  addition  to  maga
zine  articles  upon  metaphysics  and  theology,  was
the  author  of  "  Yahveh  Christ,  or  the  Memorial
Name,"  with  an  introductory  letter  by  Nathaniel
W.  Taylor,  D.  D.  (Boston,  1857).  The  object  of
this  work  is  to  prove  that  the  Hebrew  word  Jeho
vah  should  be  Yahveh,  denoting  Christ.

McWILLIE,  William,  governor  of  Mississippi,
b.  near  Liberty  Hill,  Kershaw  district,  S.  C.,  17
Nov.,  1795  ;  d.  in  Kirkwood,  Miss.,  3  March,  1869.
He  was  preparing  for  college  when  the  regiment
commanded  by  his  father,  Col.  Adam  McWillie,
was  ordered  to  HaddrelPs  point  during  the  war  of
1812.  He  became  adjutant,  and  served  until  the
close  of  the  campaign,  when  he  entered  South
Carolina  college,  and  was  graduated  there  in  1817.
He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1818,
and  practised  with  success  in  Camden,  and  was
elected  president  of  a  bank  in  that  city  in  1836.
From  1836  till  1840  he  served  successively  in  each
branch  of  the  South  Carolina  legislature.  In  1845
he  removed  to  Mississippi,  where  he  had  established
a  plantation  ten  years  before.  He  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  3  Dec.,  1849,
till  3  March,  1851,  and  in  1858  became  governor  of
Mississippi,  which  office  he  held  until  1860.  Al
though  advanced  in  years,  he  took  an  active  part
in  the  political  agitations  of  the  secession  period.

MACY,  Josiah,  sea-captain,  b.  in  Nantucket,
Mass.,  25  Feb.,  1785  :  d.  in  Rye,  N.  Y.,  15  May,
1872.  He  received  a  common-school  education,
and  was  brought  up  to  a  seafaring  life.  \Vhile  yet
a  young  man  he  was  one  of  the  best  known  among
the  Nantucket  sea-captains.  In  1812  he  brought
to  New  York  in  the  "  Prudence,"  of  which  he  was
joint-owner,  the  first  news  of  the  declaration  of
war  between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain.
In  1828  he  joined  his  son,  William  H.,  in  the  com
mission  business  in  New  York  city,  which  was
henceforth  his  residence  until  he  retired  to  a  coun
try  life  at  Rye,  Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.— His  son,
William  H.,"  banker,  b.  in  Nantucket,  Mass.,  4
Nov.,  1805 :  d.  in  New  York  city,  19  May,  1887,
received  a  common-school  education,  and  at  the
age  of  eighteen  went  to  New  York  city  and  en-


164


MACY


MADISON


tered  the  counting-room  of  ;i  shipping-merchant.
As  soon  as  he  reached  his  majority  he  began  busi
ness  on  his  own  account.  After  his  father  joined
him  in  the  business  the  firm  was  called  Josiah
Macy  and  Son.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the
Chamber  of  commerce  in  1834,  and  soon  became
its  vice-president.  In  1845  he  was  made  a  director
of  the  Leather  manufacturers'  bank,  of  which  he
became  vice-president  ten  years  later.  He  was
chosen  a  trustee  of  the  Seamen's  bank  for  savings
in  1848,  vice-president  in  1851,  and  president  in
1863.  lie  was  an  officer  or  trustee  in  many  insti
tutions,  held  the  presidency  of  the  New  York  hos
pital,  the  Society  for  the  "relief  of  the  ruptured
and  crippled,  and  of  the  Seamen's  cemetery  asso
ciation,  and  was  often  selected  by  business  ac
quaintances  to  be  the  executor  of  their  estates.

MACY,  William  Starlmck,  artist,  b.  in  New
Bedford,  Mass.,  11  Sept.,  1853.  He  studied  art  in
the  National  academy  and  at  Munich.  Mr.  Macy
has  taken  numerous  studies  in  the  far  west,  but  his
finished  works  chiefly  represent  familiar  Xew  Eng
land  effects.  He  has  studios  both  in  New  York
and  New  Bedford.  His  chief  works  include  "  Edge
of  the  Forest"  (1881);  "Old  Forest  in  Winter";
"  Old  Mill  "  (1885) ;  "  Winter  Sunset "  (1884) ;  and
"January  in  Bermuda''  (1886).

MADDEN,  Richard  Robert,  Irish  author,  b.
in  Dublin  in  1798;  d.  there,  5  Feb.,  1880.  lie
studied  medicine  in  Paris,  Naples,  and  Erlangen.
where  he  took  his  degree,  and,  after  practising  in
various  parts  of  Europe  and  the  Levant,  settled  in
Itmdon,  where  he  became  a  fellow  of  the  Royal
college  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in  1829.  He
was  appointed  a  special  magistrate  for  Jamaica  in
1833,  and  spent  three  years  in  that  island,  during
which  time  he  did  much  for  the  emancipation  of
the  slaves,  and  was  bitterly  attacked  by  the  up
holders  of  the  system  in  England.  He  went  to
Cuba  in  1836  as  superintendent  of  liberated  Afri
cans  for  the  British  government,  under  the  treaty
between  Great  Britain  and  Spain  for  the  suppres
sion  of  the  slave-trade.  In  1839  he  was  appointed
judge-advocate  of  Jamaica,  and  he  held  the  office
till  1841,  when  he  was  stationed  for  two  years  on
the  west  coast  of  Africa  as  a  commissioner  for  in
vestigating  the  slave  traffic.  He  held  various  other
posts  under  the  British  government,  returned  to
Ireland  in  1850,  and  during  the  remainder  of  his
life  held  the  office  of  secretary  to  the  loan  fund
board  in  Dublin  Castle.  Besides  works  on  eastern
countries  and  other  subjects,  he  was  the  author  of
"  Twelve  Months'  Residence  in  the  West  Indies,
during  the  Transition  from  Slavery  to  Apprentice
ship  "  (Philadelphia.  1835) ;  two  volumes  of  "  Trav
els  in  the  West  Indies"  ( 1838-' 40) ;  "Poems  by  a
Slave,"  see  CASTRO,  JUAN  (1840) ;  "  The  Slave-
Trade  and  Slavery  "  (1843),  a  work  that  excited  an
tagonism  among  English  Conservatives  on  account
of  the  light  it  threw  on  the  connection  between
British  maritime  and  manufacturing  interests  and
slavery  in  the  English  colonies  ;  "  Connection  of
the  Kingdom  of  Ireland  with  the  Crown  of  Eng
land"  (1845);  "  History  of  the  Penal  Laws  enacted
against  Roman  Catholics"  (1845);  "The  Island  of
Cuba :  its  Resources,  Progress,  and  Prospects "
(London,  1849) :  "  Shrines  and  Sepulchres  of  the  Old
and  New  World  "  (1851) :  "  The  Lives  and  Times  of
the  United  Irishmen,"  giving  in  detail  the  causes
and  events  that  led  to  the  rebellion  of  1798
(1842-'6;  new  ed.,  1874):  and  "Historical  Notice
of  the  Operations  and  Relaxations  of  the  Penal
Laws  against  Roman  Catholics"  (1865).

MADISON,  James,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  near  Port
Republic,  Augusta  co.,  Va.,  27  Aug.,  1749 ;  d.  in


Williamshurg,  Va.,  5  March,  1812. He  was  gradu

ated  at  William  and  Mary  in  1772,  studied  law,

and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but,  not  liking  the

profession, he en

tered  upon  a  theo

logical course pre

paratory  to taking

orders.  '  In  1773  he

was  appointed  pro

fessor of natural

philosophy  and  af

terward of  mathe

matics in William

and  Mary  ;  in  1775

leave  was  given  him

to go to England

for  ordination. He

was  made  deacon  in

the  chapel  of  Ful-

ham  palace,  29  Sept..

1775, by Bishop

Terrick.  of  London,


/?
(SCtd  '.


and  priest,  in  the
same  chapel,  1  Oct.,
1775,  by  the  same  bishop.  On  his  return  home
he  resumed  his  labors  as  professor,  and  in  177T
he  became  president  of  the  college.  The  latter
office  he  held  until  his  death,  and  he  succeeded
in  keeping  the  college  in  operation  during  the
Revolution,  save  for  a  few  months  just  before  and
after  the  siege  of  Yorktown.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.I),  from  the  University  of  Pennsyl
vania  in  1785,  and  from  William  and  Marvin  1796.
He  was  president  of  the  first  convention  of  the
Episcopal  church  in  Virginia  in  May,  1785,  and  in
1790  was  chosen  to  be  the  first  bishop,  lie  was
consecrated  in  the  chapel  of  Lambeth  palace,  19
Sept.,  1790,  by  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  and
other  bishops.  lie  made  his  first  visitation  in  1792,
and  was  diligent  in  his  efforts  to  raise  the  Episco
pal  church  in  Virginia  from  the  deep  depression
into  which  it  had  fallen.  But,  as  his  college  duties
were  pressing,  and  his  health  never  very  vigorous,
he  was  unable  to  accomplish  much  in  the  way  of
elevating  and  strengthening  the  church.  Bishop
Madison's  publications  were  several  sermons  that
he  preached  on  special  occasions,  a  "  Eulogy  on
Washington"  (1800),  papers  in  "  Barton's  Journal,''
and  a  large  map  of  Virginia. — Bishop  Madison's
brother,  (ieorire,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1763;
d.  in  Paris.  Ky.,  14  Oct.,  1816,  removed  to  Kentucky
at  a  very  early  age  and  served  as  a  soldier  on  the
western  frontier  when  seventeen  years  old,  partici
pating  in  several  engagements  with  the  Indians.
During  the  campaigns  in  the  northwest  he  com
manded  a  company  under  Gen.  Arthur  St.  Clair.
and  later  was  lieutenant  of  a  company  of  mounted
volunteer  cavalry  under  Maj.  John  Adair,  being
wounded  in  the  action  with  the  Indians  near  Fort
St.  Clair  on  6  Nov.,  1792.  Subsequently  he  attained
the  rank  of  major  in  the  Kentucky  volunteers,  and
was  attached  to  the  northwestern  army  under  Gen.
James  Winchester.  In  this  capacity  he  was  present
in  the  battle  with  the  British  and  Indians  near
Frenchtown  on  18  Jan.,  1813,  and  was  taken  pris
oner  in  the  defeat  on  the  river  Raisin  on  22  Jan.,
1813,  when  he  was  sent  to  Quebec ;  but  he  was  re
leased  in  1814.  For  more  than  twenty  years  he
held  the  office  of  auditor  of  public  accounts  in
Kentucky,  and  in  1816  he  was  nominated  for  gov
ernor.  He  was  so  popular  and  beloved  by  the  peo
ple  that  his  opponent  withdrew  in  the  heat  of  the
canvass  and  Madison  was  elected  for  four  years,
but  he  died  a  few  weeks  af forward  before  entering
on  the  duties  of  his  office.


MADISON


MADISON


165


MADISON,  James,  fourth  president  of  the
United  States,  b.  in  Port  Conway,  Va.,  16  March,
1751 ;  cl.  at  Montpelier,  Orange  co.,  Va.,  28  June,
1836.  His  earliest  paternal  ancestor  in  Virginia
seems  to  have  been  John  Madison,  who,  in  1653,  took
out  a  patent  for  land  between  the  North  and  York
rivers  on  Chesapeake  bay.  There  was  a  Capt.  Isaac
Madison  in  Virginia  in  1623-'o,  but  his  relation
ship  to  John  Madison  is  matter  of  doubt.  John's
son,  named  also  John,  was  father  of  Ambrose
Madison,  who  married,  24  Aug.,  1721,  Frances,
daughter  of  James  Taylor,  of  Orange  county,  Va.
Frances  had  four  brothers,  one  of  whom,  Zachary,
was  grandfather  of  Zachary  Taylor,  twelfth  presi
dent  of  the  United  States.  The  eldest  child  of
Ambrose  and  Frances  was  James  Madison,  b.  27
March,  1723,  who  married,  15  Sept.,  1749,  Nelly
Conway,  of  Port  Conway.  The  eldest  child  of
James  and  Nelly  was  James,  the  subject  of  this
article,  who  was  the  first  of  twelve  children.  His
ancestors,  as  he  says  himself  in  a  note  furnished  to
Dr.  Lyman  C.  Draper  in  1834.  "  were  not  among
the  most  wealthy  of  the  country,  but  in  independ
ent  and  comfortable  circumstances."  James's  edu
cation  was  begun  at  an  excellent  school  kept  by  a
Scotchman  named  Donald  Robertson,  and  his
studies,  preparatory  for  college,  were  completed  at
home  under  the  care  of  the  Rev.  Thomas  Martin,
clergyman  of  the  parish.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1772,  and  remained  there  another
year,  devoting  himself  to  the  study  of  Hebrew.
On  returning  home,  he  occupied  himself  with  his
tory,  law,  and  theology,  while  teaching  his  broth
ers  and  sisters.  Of  the  details  of  his  youthful
studies  little  is  known,  but  his  industry  must  have
been  very  great ;  for,  in  spite  of  the  early  age  at
which  he  became  absorbed  in  the  duties  o'f  public-
life,  the  range  and  solidity  of  his  acquirements
were  extraordinary.  For  minute  and  thorough
knowledge  of  ancient  and  modern  history  and  of
constitutional  law  he  was  unequalled  among  the
Americans  of  the  Revolutionary  period ;  only
Hamilton,  and  perhaps  Ellsworth  and  Marshall,
approached  him  in  this  regard.  For  precocity  of
mental  development  he  resembled  Hamilton  and
the  younger  Pitt,  and,  like  Washington,  he  was
distinguished  in  youth  for  soundness  of  judgment,
keenness  of  perception,  and  rare  capacity  for
work.  Along  with  these  admirable  qualities,  his
lofty  integrity  and  his  warm  interest  in  public  af
fairs  were  well  known  to  the  people  of  Orange,  so
that  when,  in  the  autumn  of  1774,  it  was  thought
necessary  to  appoint  a  committee  of  safety,  Madi
son  was  its  youngest  member.  Early  in  1776  he
was  chosen  a  delegate  to  the  State  convention,
which  met  at  Williamsburg  in  May.  The  first
business  of  the  convention  was  to  instruct  the
Virginia  delegation  in  the  Continental  congress
with  regard  to  an  immediate  declaration  of  inde
pendence.  Next  came  the  work  of  making  a  con
stitution  for  the  state,  and  Madison  was  one  of  the
special  committee  appointed  to  deal  with  this
problem.  Here  one  of  his  first  acts  was  highly
characteristic.  Religious  liberty  was  a  matter  that
strongly  enlisted  his  feelings.  When  it  was  pro
posed  that,  under  the  new  constitution,  "  all  men
should  enjoy  the  fullest  toleration  in  the  exercise
of  religion,  according  to  the  dictates  of  conscience,"
Madison' pointed  out  that  this  provision  did  not  go
to  the  root  of  the  matter.  The  free  exercise  of  re
ligion,  according  to  the  dictates  of  conscience,  is
something  which  every  man  may  demand  as  a
right,  not  something  for  which  he  must  ask  as  a
privilege.  To  grant  to  the  state  the  power  of  tol
erating  is  implicitly  to  grant  it  to  the  power  of


prohibiting,  whereas  Madison  would  deny  to  it  anv
jurisdiction  whatever  in  the  matter  of  religion
The  clause  in  the  bill  of  rights,  as  finally  adopted
at  his  suggestion,  accordingly  declares  "that  "  all
men  are  equally  entitled  to  the  free  exercise  of  re
ligion,  according  to  the  dictates  of  conscience."
The  incident  illustrates  not  only  Madison's  liber
ality  of  spirit,  but  also  his  precision  and  fore
thought  in  so  drawing  up  an  instrument  as  to  make
it  mean  all  that  it  was  intended  to  mean.  In  his
later  career  these  qualities  were  especially  brilliant
and  useful.  Madison  was  elected  a  member  of  the
first  legislature  under  the  new  state  constitution,
but  he  failed  of  re-election  because  he  refused  to
solicit  votes  or  to  furnish  whiskey  for  thirsty
voters.  The  new  legislature  then  elected  him  a
member  of  the  governor's  council,  and  in  1780  he
was  sent  as  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress.
The  high  consideration  in  which  he  was  held
showed  itself  in  the  number  of  important  commit
tees  to  which  he  was  appointed.  As  chairman  of
a  committee  for  drawing  up  instructions  for  John
Jay,  then  minister  at  the  court  of  Madrid,  he  in
sisted  that,  in  making  a  treaty  with  Spain,  our
right  to  the  free  navigation  of  the  Mississippi
river  should  on  no  account  be  surrendered.  Mr.
Jay  was  instructed  accordingly,  but  toward  the
end  of  1780  the  pressure  of  the  war  upon  the
southern  states  increased  the  desire  for  an  alliance
with  Spain  to  such  a  point  that  they  seemed  ready
to  purchase  it  at  any  price.  Virginia,  therefore,
proposed  that  the  surrender  of  our  rights  upon  the
Mississippi  should  be  offered  to  Spain  as  the  con
dition  of  an  offensive  and  defensive  alliance.  Such
a  proposal  was  no  doubt  ill-advised.  Since  Spain
was  already,  on  her  own  account  and  to  the  best  of
her  ability,  waging  war  upon  Great  Britain  in  the
West  Indies  and  Florida,  to  say  nothing  of  Gib
raltar,  it  is  doubtful  if  she  could  have  done  much
more  for  the  United  States,  even  if  we  had  offered
her  the  whole  Mississippi  valley.  The  offer  of  a
permanent  and  invaluable  right  in  exchange  for  a
temporary  and  questionable  advantage  seemed  to
Mr.  Madison  very  unwise ;  but  as  it  was  then  gen
erally  held  that  in  such  matters  representatives
must  be  bound  by  the  wishes  of  their  constituents,
he  yielded,  though  under  protest.  But  hardly  had
the  fresh  instructions  been  despatched  to  Mr.  Jay
when  the  overthrow  of  Cornwallis  again  turned
the  scale,  and  Spain  was  informed  that,  as  con
cerned  the  Mississippi  question,  congress  was  im
movable.  The  foresight  and  sound  judgment
shown  by  Mr.  Madison  in  this  discussion  added
much  to  his  reputation.

His  next  prominent  action  related  to  the  impost
law  proposed  in  1783.  This  was.  in  some  respects,
the  most  important  question  of  the  day.  The
chief  source  of  the  weakness  of  the  United  States
during  the  Revolutionary  war  had  been  the  im
possibility  of  raising  money  by  means  of  Federal
taxation.  As  long  as  money  could  be  raised  only
through  requisitions  upon  the  state  governments,
and  the  different  states  could  not  be  brought  to
agree  upon  any  method  of  enforcing  the  requisi
tions,  the  state  governments  were  sure  to  prove
delinquent.  Finding  it  impossible  to  obtain  money
for  carrying  on  the  war,  congress  had  resorted  to
the  issue  of  large  quantities  of  inconvertible  paper,
with  the  natural  results.  There  had  been  a  rapid
inflation  of  values,  followed  by  sudden  bankruptcy
and  the  prostration  of  national  credit.  In  1783  it
had  become  difficult  to  obtain  foreign  loans,  and
at  home  the  government  could  not  raise  nearly
enough  money  to  defray  its  current  expenses.  To
remedy  the  evil  a  tariff  of  five  per  cent,  upon  sun-


166


MADISON


MADISON


dry  imports,  with  a  specific  duty  upon  others,  was  j
proposed  in  congress  and  offered to  the  several  I
states  for  approval. To  weaken  as  much  as  possible
the  objections  to  such  a
law,  its operation was
limited to twenty-five
years.  Even  in  this  mild
form, however, it  was
impossible  to  persuade
the  several  states  to  sub
mit  to  Federal  taxation.
Virginia  at  first  assent
ed  to  the  impost  law,
but  afterward  revoked
her  action.  On  this  occa
sion  Mr.  Madison,  feel
ing  that  the  very  exist
ence  of  the  nation  was
at  stake,  refused  to  be
controlled  by  the  action
J«.m*j Mut£u*H of  his  constituents. He
persisted  in  urging  the
necessity  of  such  an  im
post  law,  and  eventually  had  the  satisfaction  of
seeing  Virginia  adopt  his  view  of  the  matter.

The  discussion  of  the  impost  law  in  congress  re
vealed  the  antagonism  that  existed  between  the
slave-states  and  those  states  which  had  eman
cipated  their  slaves.  In  endeavoring  to  appor
tion  equitably  the  quotas  of  revenue  to  be  required
of  the  several  states,  it  was  observed  that,  if  taxa
tion  were  to  be  distributed  according  to  popula
tion,  it  made  a  great  difference  whether  or  not
slaves  were  to  be  counted  as  population.  If  slaves
were  to  be  counted,  the  southern  states  would
have  to  pay  more  than  their  equitable  share  into
the  treasury  of  the  general  government :  if  slaves
were  not  to  be  counted,  it  was  argued  at  the  north
that  they  would  be  paying  less  than  their  equita
ble  share.  Consequently  at  that  time  the  north
ern  states  were  inclined  to  maintain  that  the  slaves
were  population,  while  the  south  preferred  to  re
gard  them  as  chattels.  The  question  was  settled
by  a  compromise  that  was  proposed  by  Mr.  Madi
son  ;  according  to  this  arrangement  the  slaves
were  rated  as  population,  but  in  such  wise  that  five
of  them  were  counted  as  three  persons.

In  1784  Mr.  Madison  was  again  elected  to  the
Virginia  legislature,  an  office  then  scarcely  infe
rior  in  dignity,  and  superior  in  influence,  to  that
of  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress.  His  ef
forts  were  steadfastly  devoted  to  the  preparation
and  advocacy  of  measures  that  were  calculated  to
increase  the  strength  of  the  Federal  government.
He  supported  the  proposed  amendment  to  the
articles  of  confederation,  giving  to  congress  con
trol  over  the  foreign  trade  of  the  states :  and,
pending  the  adoption  of  such  a  measure,  he  se
cured  in  that  body  the  passage  of  a  port  bill  re
stricting  the  entry  of  foreign  ships  to  certain  speci
fied  ports.  The  purpose  of  this  was  to  facilitate  the
collection  of  revenue,  but  it  was  partially  defeated
in  its  operation  by  successive  amendments  in
creasing  the  number  of  ports.  While  the  weak
ness  of  the  general  government  and  the  need  for
strengthening  it  were  daily  growing  more  ap
parent,  the  question  of  religious  liberty  was  the
subject  of  earnest  discussion  in  the  Virginia  legis
lature.  An  attempt  was  made  to  lay  a  tax  upon
all  the  people  of  that  state  "  for  the  support  of
teachers  of  the  Christian  religion."  At  first  Madi
son  was  almost  the  only  one  to  see  clearly  the  seri
ous  danger  lurking  in  such  a  tax ;  that  it  would  be
likely  to  erect  a  state  church  and  curtail  men's
freedom  of  belief  and  worship.  Mr.  Madison's  po


sition  here  well  illustrated  the  remark  that  intelli
gent  persistence  is  capable  of  making  one  person
a  majority.  His  energetic  opposition  resulted  at
first  in  postponing  the  measure.  Then  he  wrote  a
"  Memorial  and  Remonstrance,"  setting  forth  its
dangerous  character  with  wonderful  clearness  and
cogency.  He  sent  this  paper  all  over  the  state  for
signatures,  and  in  the  course  of  a  twelvemonth
had  so  educated  the  people  that,  in  the  election  of
1785,  the  question  of  religious  freedom  was  made
a  test  question,  and  in  the  ensuing  session  the  dan
gerous  bill  was  defeated,  and  in  place  thereof  it
was  enacted  "  that  no  man  shall  be  compelled  to
frequent  or  support  any  religious  worship,  place,
or  ministry  whatsoever,  nor  shall  be  enforced,  re
strained,  molested,  or  burthened  in  his  body  or
goods,  nor  shall  otherwise  suffer  on  account  of  his
religious  opinions  or  belief ;  but  that  all  men  shall
be  free  to  profess  and,  by  argument,  maintain  their
opinions  in  matters  of  religion,  and  that  the  same
shall  in  nowise  diminish,  enlarge,  or  affect  their
civil  capacities."  In  thus  abolishing  religious
tests  Virginia  came  to  the  front  among  all  the
American  states,  as  Massachusetts  had  come  to  the
front  in  the  abolition  of  negro  slavery.  Nearly  all
the  states  still  imposed  religious  tests  upon  civil
office-holders,  from  simply  declaring  a  general  be
lief  in  the  infallibleness  of  the  Bible,  to  accepting
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  Madison's  "  Religious
Freedom  Act "  was  translated  into  French  and
Italian,  and  was  widely  read  and  commented  upon
in  Europe.  In  our  OWB  history  it  set  a  most  valu
able  precedent  for  other  states  to  follow.

The  attitude  of  Mr.  Madison  with  regard  to  pa
per  money  was  also  very  important.  The  several
states  had  then  the  power  of  issuing  promissory
notes  and  making  them  a  legal  tender,  and  many
of  them  shamefully  abused  this  power.  The  year
1786  witnessed  perhaps  the  most  virulent  craze  for
paper  money  that  has  ever  attacked  the  American
people.  In  Virginia  the  masterly  reasoning  and
the  resolute  attitude  of  a  few  great  political  lead-
el's  saved  the  state  from  yielding  to  the  delusion,
and  among  these  leaders  Mr.  Madison  was  fore
most.  But  his  most  important  work  in  the  Vir
ginia  legislature  was  that  which  led  directly  to  the
Annapolis  convention,  and  thus  ultimately  to  the
framing  of  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.
The  source  from  which  such  vast  results  were  to
flow  was  the  necessity  of  an  agreement  between
Maryland  and  Virginia  with  regard  to  the  naviga
tion  of  the  Potomac  river,  and  the  collection  of
duties  at  ports  on  its  banks.  Commissioners,  ap
pointed  by  the  two  states  to  discuss  this  question,
met  early  in  1785  and  recommended  that  a  uniform
tariff  should  be  adopted  and  enforced  upon  both
banks.  But  a  further  question,  also  closely  con
nected  with  the  navigation  of  the  Potomac,  now
came  up  for  discussion.  The  tide  of  westward
migration  had  for  some  time  been  pouring  over
the  Alleghanies,  and,  owing  to  complications  with
the  Spanish  power  in  the  Mississippi  valley,  there
was  some  danger  that  the  United  States  might
not  be  able  to  keep  its  hold  upon  the  new  settle
ments.  It  was  necessary  to  strengthen  the  com
mercial  ties  between  east  and  west,  and  to  this  end
the  Potomac  company  was  formed  for  the  purpose
of  improving  the  navigation  of  the  upper  waters
of  the  Potomac  and  connecting  them  by  good
roads  and  canals  with  the  upper  waters  of  the
Ohio  at  Pit^sburg — an  enterprise  which,  in  due
course  of  time,  resulted  in  the  Chesapeake  and
Ohio  canal.  The  first  president  of  the  Potomac-
company  was  George  Washington,  who  well  under
stood  that  the  undertaking  was  quite  as  iinpor-


MADISON


MADISON


167


tant  in  its  political  as  in  its  commercial  bearings.
At  the  same  time  it  was  proposed  to  connect  the
Potomac  and  Delaware  rivers  with  a  canal,  and  a
company  was  organized  for  this  purpose.  This
made  it  desirable  that  the  four  states — Virginia,
Maryland,  Delaware,  and  Pennsylvania — should
agree  upon  the  laws  for  regulating  interstate  traf
fic  through  this  system  of  water-ways.  But  from
this  it  was  but  a  short  step  to  the  conclusion  that,
since  the  whole  commercial  system  of  the  United
States  confessedly  needed  overhauling,  it  might
perhaps  be  as  well  for  all  the  thirteen  states  to
hold  a  convention  for  considering  the  matter.
When  such  a  suggestion  was  communicated  from
the  legislature  of  Maryland  to  that  of  Virginia,  it
afforded  Mr.  Madison  the  opportunity  for  which
he  had  been  eagerly  waiting.  Some  time  before
he  had  prepared  a  resolution  for  the  appointment
of  commissioners  to  confer  with  commissioners
from  the  other  states  concerning  the  trade  of  the
country  and  the  advisableness  of  intrusting  its
regulation  to  the  Federal  government.  This  reso
lution  Mr.  Madison  left  to  be  offered  to  the  assem
bly  by  some  one  less  conspicuously  identified  with
federalist  opinions  than  himself:  and  it  was  ac
cordingly  presented  by  Mr.  Tyler,  father  of  the
future  president  of  that  name.  The  motion  was
unfavorably  received  and  was  laid  upon  the  table,
but  when  the  message  came  from  Maryland  the
matter  was  reconsidered  and  the  resolution  passed.
Annapolis  was  selected  as  the  place  for  the  con
vention,  which  assembled  on  11  Sept.,  1786.  Only
five  states — Virginia,  Delaware,  Pennsylvania,  New
Jersey,  and  New  York — were  represented  at  the
meeting.  Maryland,  which  had  first  suggested  the
convention,  had  seen  the  appointed  time  arrive
without  even  taking  the  trouble  to  select  commis
sioners.  As  the  representation  was  so  inadequate,
the  convention  thought  it  best  to  defer  action,  and
accordingly  adjourned  after  adopting  an  address
to  the  states,  which  was  prepared  by  Alexander
Hamilton.  The  address  incorporated  a  suggestion
from  New  Jersey,  which  indefinitely  enlarged  the
business  to  be  treated  by  such  a  convention ;  it
was  to  deal  not  only  with  the  regulation  of  com
merce,  but  with  "  other  important  matters."  Act
ing  upon  this  cautious  hint,  the  address  recom
mended  the  calling  of  a  second  convention,  to  be
held  at  Philadelphia  on  the  second  Monday  of
May,  1787.  Mr.  Madison  was  one  of  the  commis
sioners  at  Annapolis,  and  was  very  soon  appointed
a  delegate  to  the  new  convention,  along  with
Washington,  Randolph,  Mason,  and  others.  The
avowed  purpose  of  the  new  convention  was  to  "  de
vise  such  provisions  as  shall  appear  necessary  to
render  the  constitution  of  the  Federal  government
adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  the  Union,  and  to
report  to  congress  such  an  act  as.  when  agreed  to
by  them  and  confirmed  by  the  legislatures  of  every
state,  would  effectually  provide  for  the  same."  The
report  of  the  Annapolis  commissioners  was  brought
before  congress  in  October,  in  the  hope  that  con
gress  would  earnestly  recommend  to  the  several
states  the  course  of  action  therein  suggested.  At
first  the  objections  to  the  plan  prevailed  in  con
gress,  but  the  events  of  the  winter 'went  far  toward
persuading  men  in  all  parts  of  the  country  that
the  only  hope  of  escaping  anarchy  lay  in  a  thor
ough  revision  of  the  imperfect  scheme  of  govern
ment  under  which  we  were  then  living.  The  pa
per-money  craze  in  so  many  of  the  states,  the  vio
lent  proceedings  in  the  Rhode  Island  legislature,
the  riots  in  Vermont  and  New  Hampshire,  the
Shays  rebellion  in  Massachusetts,  the  dispute  with
Spain  about  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi,  and


the  consequent  imminent  danger  of  separation  be
tween  north  and  south,  had  all  come  together;
and  now  the  last  ounce  was  laid  upon  the  camel's
back  in  the  failure  of  the  impost  amendment.  In
February,  1787,  just  as  Mr.  Madison,  who  had  been
|  chosen  a  delegate  to  congress,  arrived  in  New  York,
!  the  legislature  of  that  state  refused  its  assent  to
the  amendment,  which  was  thus  defeated.  Thus,
only  three  months  before  the  time  designated  for
the  meeting  of  the  Philadelphia  convention,  con-
I  gress  was  decisively  informed  that  it  would  not  be
allowed  to  take  any  effectual  measures  for  raising
a  revenue.  This  accumulation  of  difficulties  made
congress  more  ready  to  listen  to  the  arguments  of
Mr.  Madison,  and  presently  congress  itself  proposed
a  convention  at  Philadelphia  identical  with  the  one
recommended  by  the  Annapolis  commissioners,  and
thus  in  its  own  way  sanctioned  their  action.

The  assembling'of  the  convention  at  Philadel
phia  was  an  event  to  which  Mr.  Madison,  by  persist
ent  energy  and  skill,  had  contributed  more  than
any  other  man  in  the  country,  with  the  possible
exception  of  Alexander  Hamilton.  For  the  noble
political  structure  reared  by  the  convention,  it  was
Madison  that  furnished  the  basis.  Before  the  con
vention  met  he  laid  before  his  colleagues  of  the
Virginia  delegation  the  outlines  of  the  scheme  that
was  presented  to  the  convention  as  the  "  Virginia
plan."  Of  the  delegates,  Edmund  Randolph  was
then  governor  of  Virginia,  and  it  was  he  that  pre
sented  the  plan,  and  made  the  opening  speech  in
defence  of  it,  but  its  chief  author  was  Madison.
This  "  Virginia  plan  "  struck  directly  at  the  root
of  the  evils  from  which  our  Federal  government
had  suffered  under  the  articles  of  confederation.
The  weakness  of  that  government  had  consisted  in
the  fact  that  it  operated  only  upon  states  and  not
upon  individuals.  Only  states,  not  individuals,
were  represented  in  the  Continental  congress,
which  accordingly  resembled  a  European  congress
rather  than  an  English  parliament.  The  delegates
to  the  Continental  congress  were  more  like  envoys
from  sovereign  states  than  like  members  of  a  legis
lative  body.  They  might  deliberate  and  advise,  but
had  no  means  of  enforcing  their  will  upon  the  sev
eral  state  governments ;  and  hence  they  could
neither  raise  a  revenue  nor  preserve  ord'er.  In
forming  the  new  government,  this  fundamental
difficulty  was  met  first  by  the  creation  of  a  legis
lative  body  representing  population  instead  of
states,  and  secondly  by  the  creation  of  a  Federal
executive  and  a  Federal  judiciary.  Thus  arose
that  peculiar  state  of  things  so  familiar  to  Ameri
cans,  but  so  strange  to  Europeans  that  they  find
it  hard  to  comprehend  it :  the  state  of  things  in
which  every  individual  lives  under  two  complete
and  well-rounded  systems  of  laws — the  state  law
and  the  Federal  law — each  with  its  legislature,  its
executive,  and  its  judiciary,  moving  one  within  the
other.  It  was  one  of  the  longest  reaches  of  con
structive  statesmanship  ever  known  in  the  world,
and  the  credit  of  it  is  due  to  Madison  more  than
to  any  other  one  man.  To  him  we  chiefly  owe  the
luminous  conception  of  the  two  coexisting  and  har
monious  spheres  of  government,  although  the  con
stitution,  as  actually  framed,  was  the  result  of  skil
ful  compromises  by  which  the  Virginia  plan  was
modified  and  improved  in  many  important  points.
In  its  original  shape  that  plan  went  further  toward
national  consolidation  than  the  constitution  as
adopted.  It  contemplated  a  national  legislature
to  be  composed  of  two  houses,  but  both  the  upper
and  the  lower  house  were  to  represent  population
instead  of  states.  Here  it  encountered  fierce  op
position  from  the  smaller  states,  under  the  lead  of


168


MADISON


MADISON


New  Jersey,  until  the  matter  was  settled  by  the
famous  Connecticut  compromise,  according  to
which  the  upper  house  was  to  represent  states,
while  the  lower  house  represented  population.
Madison's  original  scheme,  moreover,  would  have
allowed  the  national  legislature  to  set  aside  at
discretion  such  state  laws  as  it  might  deem  uncon
stitutional.  It  seems  strange  to  find  Madison,
who  afterward  drafted  the  Virginia  resolutions  of
1798,  now  suggesting  and  defending  a  provision
so  destructive  of  state  rights.  It  shows  how
strongly  he  was  influenced  at  the  time  by  the  de
sire  to  put  an  end  to  the  prevailing  anarchy.  The
discussion  of  this  matter  in  the  convention,  as  we
read  it  to-day,  brings  out  in  a  very  strong  light
the  excellence  of  the  arrangement  finally  adopted,
by  which  the  constitutionality  of  state  laws  is  left
to  be  determined  through  the  decisions  of  the  Fed
eral  supreme  court.

In  all  the  discussions  in  the  Federal  convention
Mr.  Madison  naturally  took  a  leading  part.  Besides
the  work  of  cardinal  importance  which  he  achieved
as  principal  author  of  the  Virginia  plan,  especial
mention  must  be  made  of  the  famous  compromise
that  adjusted  the  distribution  of  representatives
between  the  northern'and  the  southern  states.  We
have  seen  that  in  the  congress  of  1783,  when  it  was
a  question  of  taxation,  the  south  was  inclined  to
regard  slaves  as  chattels,  while  the  north  preferred
to  regard  them  as  population.  Now,  when  it  had
come  to  be  a  question  of  the  apportionment  of
representation,  the  case  was  reversed  :  it  was  the
south  that  wished  to  count  slaves  as  population,
while  the  north  insisted  that  they  should  be  classed
as  chattels.  Here  Mr.  Madison  proposed  the  same
compromise  that  had  succeeded  in  congress  four
years  before;  and  Mr.  Kutledge,  of  South  Carolina,
who  had  supported  him  on  the  former  occasion,
could  hardly  do  otherwise  than  come  again  to  his
side.  It  was  agreed  that  in  counting  population,
whether  for  direct  taxation  or  for  representation  in
the  lower  house  of  congress,  five  slaves  should  be
reckoned  as  three  individuals.  In  the  history  of
the  formation  of  our  Federal  Union  this  compromise
was  of  cardinal  importance.  Without  it  the  Union
would  undoubtedly  have  gone  to  pieces  at  the  out
set,  and  it  was  for  this  reason  that  the  northern
abolitionists,  Gouverneur  Morris  and  Rufus  King,
joined  with  Washington  and  Madison  and  with  the
pro-slavery  Pinckneys  in  subscribing  to  it.  Some  of
the  evils  resulting  from  this  compromise  have  led
historians,  writing  from  the  abolitionist  point  of
view,  to  condemn  it  utterly.  Nothing  can  be  clearer,
however,  than  that,  in  order  to  secure  the  adoption
of  the  constitution,  it  was  absolutely  necessary
to  satisfy  South  Carolina.  This  was  proved  by  the
course  of  events  in  1788,  when  there  was  a  strong
party  in  Virginia  in  favor  of  a  separate  confed
eracy  of  southern  states.  By  South  Carolina's
prompt  ratification  of  the  constitution  this  scheme
was  completely  defeated,  and  a  most  formidable
obstacle  to  the  formation  of  a  more  perfect  union
was  removed.  Of  all  the  compromises  in  American
history,  this  of  the  so-called  "three-fifths  rule"
was  probably  the  most  important :  until  the  begin
ning  of  the  civil  war  there  was  hardly  a  political
movement  of  any  consequence  not  affected  by  it.

Mr.  Madison's  services  in  connection  with  the
founding  of  our  Federal  government  were  thus,  up
to  this  point,  of  the  most  transcendent  kind.  We
have  seen  that  lie  played  a  leading  part  in  the  diffi
cult  work  of  getting  a  convention  to  assemble ;  the
merit  of  this  he  shares  with  other  eminent  men,
and  notably  with  Washington  and  Hamilton.  Then
he  was  chief  author  of  the  most  fundamental  fea


tures  in  the  constitution,  those  which  transformed
our  government  from  a  loose  confederacy  of  states
into  a  Federal  nation  ;  and  to  him  is  due  the  prin
cipal  credit  for  the  compromise  that  made  the
adoption  of  the  constitution  possible  for  all  the
states.  After  the  adjournment  of  the  convention
his  services  did  not  cease.  Among  those  whose
influence  in  bringing  about  the  ratification  of  the
constitution  was  felt  all  over  the  country,  he  shares
with  Hamilton  the  foremost  place.  The  "Federal
ist,"'  their  joint  production,  is  probably  the  greatest
treatise  on  political  science  that  has  ever  appeared
in  the  world,  at  once  the  most  practical  and  the
most  profound.  The  evenness  with  which  the
merits  of  this  work  are  shared  between  Madison
and  Hamilton  is  well  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  it
is  not  always  easy  to  distinguish  between  the  two,
so  that  there  has  been  considerable  controversy  as
to  the  number  of  papers  contributed  by  each.  Ac
cording  to  Madison's  own  memorandum,  he  was  the
author  of  twenty-nine  of  the  papers,  while  fifty-one
were  written  by  Hamilton,  and  five  by  Jay.  (See
HAMILTON,  ALEXANDER.)  The  question  is  not  of
great  importance.  Very  probably  Mr.  Madison
would  have  had  a  larger  share  in  the  work  had  lie
not  been  obliged,  in  March,  1788,  to  return  to  Vir
ginia,  in  order  to  take  part  in  the  State  convention
for  deciding  upon  the  ratification  of  the  constitu
tion.  The  opposition  in  Virginia  was  strong  ami
well  organized,  and  had  for  leaders  such  eminent
patriots  as  Patrick  Henry  and  Richard  Henry  Lee.
The  debates  in  the  convention  lasted  nearly  a
month,  and  for  a  considerable  part  of  this  time  the
outlook  was  not  promising.  The  discussion  was
conducted  mainly  between  Madison  and  Henry,  the
former  being  chiefly  assisted  by  Marshall,  Wylhe,
Randolph,  Pendleton,  and  Henry  Lee.  the  latter
by  Mason,  Monroe,  Harrison,  and  Tyler.  To  Mr.
Madison,  more  than  to  any  one  else,  it  was  due  that
the  constitution  was  at  length  ratified,  while  the
narrowness  of  the  majority — 89  to  79 — bore  witness
to  the  severity  of  the  contest.  It  did  not  appear
that  the  people  of  Virginia  were  even  yet  convinced
by  the  arguments  that  had  prevailed  in  the  con
vention.  The  assembly  that  met  in  the  following
October  showed  a  heavy  majority  of  anti-Federalists,
and  under  Henry's  leadership  it  called  upon  con
gress  for  a  second  National  convention  to  reconsider
the  work  done  by  the  first.  Senators  were  now  to
be  chosen  for  the  first  U.  S.  senate,  and  Henry,  in
naming  Richard  Henry  Lee  and  William  Grayson,
both  anti-Federalists,  as  the  two  men  who  ought  to
be  chosen,  took  pains  to  mention  James  Madison
as  the  one  man  who  on  no  account  whatever  ought
to  be  elected  senator.  Henry  was  successful  in
carrying  this  point.  The  next  tiling  was  to  keep
Mr.  Madison  out  of  congress,  and  Henry's  friends
sought  to  accomplish  this  by  means  of  the  device
afterward  known  as  "gerrymandering";  but  the
attempt  failed,  and  Madison  was  elected  to  the  first
national  house  of  representatives.  His  great  knowl
edge,  and  the  part  he  had  played  in  building  up
the  framework  of  the  government,  made  him  from
the  outset  the  leading  member  of  the  house.  His
first  motion  was  one  for  raising  a  revenue  by
tariff  and  tonnage  duties.  I  le  offered  the  resolutions
for  creating  the  executive  departments  of  foreign
affairs,  of  the  treasury,  and  of  war.  He  proposed
twelve  amendments  to  the  constitution,  in  order  to
meet  the  objection,  urged  in  many  quarters,  that
that  instrument  did  not  contain  a  bill  of  rights.
The  first  ten  of  these  amendments  were  adopted
and  became  part  of  the  constitution  in  1791.

The  first  division  of  political  parties  under  the
constitution  began  to  show  itself  in  the  debates


MADISON


MADISON


169


upon  Hamilton's  financial  measures  as  secretary  of
the  treasury,  and  in  this  division  we  see  Madison
acting  as  leader  of  the  opposition.  By  many  writers  j
this  has  been  regarded  as  indicating  a  radical
change  of  attitude  on  his  part,  and  sundry  explana
tions  have  been  offered  to  account  for  the  presumed  !
inconsistency.  He  has  been  supposed  to  have  sue-  I
cumbed  to  the  personal  influence  of  Jefferson,  and
to  have  yielded  his  own  convictions  to  the  desires
and  prejudices  of  his  constituents.  Such  explana
tions  are  hardly  borne  out  by  what  we  know  of  Mr.
Madison's  career  up  to  this  point :  and,  moreover,
they  are  uncalled  for.  If  we  consider  carefully  the
circumstances  of  the  time,  the  presumed  inconsist
ency  in  his  conduct  disappears.  The  new  Repub
lican  party,  of  which  he  soon  became  one  of  the
leaders,  was  something  quite  different  in  its  atti
tude  from  the  anti-Federalist  party  of  1787-'90.
There  was  ample  room  in  it  for  men  who  in  these
critical  years  had  been  stanch  Federalists,  and  as
time  passed  this  came  to  be  more  and  more  the
case,  until  after  a  quarter  of  a  century  the  entire
Federalist  party,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  in
flexible  men  in  Xew  England,  h>d  been  absorbed
by  the  Republican  party.  In  1790,  since  the  Fed
eral  constitution  had  been  actually  adopted,  and  was
going  into  operation,  and  since  the  extent  of  power
that  it  granted  to  the  general  government  must  be
gradually  tested  by  the  discussion  of  specific  meas
ures,  it  followed  that  the  only  natural  and  healthful
division  of  parties  must  be  the  division  between
strict  and  loose  constructionists.  It  was  to  be  ex
pected  that  anti-Federalists  would  become  strict
constructionists,  and  so  most  of  them  did.  though
examples  were  not  wanting  of  such  men  swinging
to  the  opposite  extreme  of  politics,  and  advocating
an  extension  of  the  powers  of  the  Federal  govern
ment.  But  there  was  no  reason  in  the  world  why
a  Federalist  of  1787-'90  must  thereafter,  in  order
to  preserve  his  consistency,  become  a  loose  con-
structionist.  It  was  entirely  consistent  for  a  states
man  to  advocate  the  adoption  of  the  constitution,
while  convinced  that  the  powers  specifically  granted
therein  to  the  general  government  were  ample,  and
that  great  care  should  be  taken  not  to  add  indefi
nitely  to  such  powers  through  rash  and  loose
methods  of  interpretation.  Not  only  is  such  an
attitude  perfectly  reasonable  in  itself,"  but  it  is,  in
particular,  the  one  that  a  principal  author  of  the
constitution  would  have  been  very  likely  to  take ;
and  no  doubt  it  was  just  this  attitude  that  Mr.
Madison  took  in  the  early  sessions  of  congress.
The  occasions  on  which  he  assumed  it  were,  more
over,  eminently  proper,  and  afford  an  admirable
illustration  of  the  difference  in  temper  and  mental
habit  between  himself  and  Hamilton.  The  latter
had  always  more  faith  in  the  heroic  treatment  of
political  questions  than  Madison.  The  restoration
of  American  credit  in  1790  was  a  task  that  de
manded  heroic  measures,  and  it  was  fortunate  that
we  had  such  a  man  as  Hamilton  to  undertake  it.
But  undoubtedly  the  assumption  of  state  debts  by
the  Federal  government,  however  admirably  it  met
the  emergency  of  the  moment,  was  such  a  measure
as  might  easily  create  a  dangerous  precedent,  and
there  was  certainly  nothing  strange  or  inconsistent
in  Madison's  opposition  to  it.  A  similar  explana
tion  will  cover  his  opposition  to  Hamilton's  national
bank ;  and  indeed,  with  the  considerations  here

fiven  as  a  clew,  there  is  little  or  nothing  in  Mr.
^ladison's  career  in  congress  that  is  not  thoroughly
intelligible.  At  the  time,  however,  the  Federalists,
disappointed  at  losing  a  man  of  so  much  power,
misunderstood  his  acts  and  misrepresented  his
motives,  and  the  old  friendship  between  him  and


Hamilton  gave  way  to  mutual  distrust  and  dislike.
Mr.  Madison  sympathized  with  the  French  revolu
tionists,  though  he  did  not  go  so  far  in  this  direc
tion  as  Jefferson.  In  the  debates  upon  Jay's  treaty
with  Great  Britain  he  led  the  opposition,  and  sup"-
ported  the  resolution  asking  President  Washington
to  submit  to  the  house  of  representatives  copies  of
the  papers  relating  to  the  negotiation.  The  reso
lution  was  passed,  but  Washington  refused  on  the
ground  that  the  making  of  treaties  was  intrusted
by  the  constitution  to  the  president  and  the  senate,
and  that  the  lower  house  was  not  entitled  to  med
dle  with  their  work.

At  the  close  of  Washington's  second  administra
tion  Mr.  Madison  retired  for  a  brief  season  from
public  life.  During  this  difficult  period  the  coun
try  had  been  fortunate  in  having,  as  leader  of  the
opposition  in  congress,  a  man  so  wise  in  counsel,  so
temperate  in  spirit,  and  so  courteous  in  demeanor.
Whatever  else  might  be  said  of  Madison's  conduct
in  opposition,  it  could  never  be  called  factious  ;  it
was  calm,  generous,  and  disinterested.  About  two
years  before  the  close  of  his  career  in  congress  he
married  Mrs.  Dolly  Payne  Todd,  a  beautiful  widow,
much  younger  than  himself :  and  about  this  time
he  seems  to  have  built  the  house  at  Montpelier


which  was  to  be  his  home  during  his  later  years.
But  retirement  from  public  life,  in  any  real  sense
of  the  phrase,  was  not  yet  possible  for  such  a  man.
The  wrath  of  the  French  government  over  Jay's
treaty  led  to  depredations  upon  American  shipping,
to  the  sending  of  commissioners  to  Paris,  and  to
the  blackmailing  attempts  of  Talleyrand,  as  shown
up  in  the  X.  Y.  Z.  despatches.  (See  ADAMS.  JOHN.)
In  the  fierce  outburst  of  indignation  that  in  Ameri
ca  greeted  these  disclosures,  in  the  sudden  desire
for  war  with  France,  which  went  so  far  as  to  vent
itself  in  actual  fighting  on  the  sea,  though  war  was
never  declared,  the  Federalist  party  believed  itself
to  be  so  strong  that  it  proceeded  at  once  to  make
one  of  the  greatest  blunders  ever  made  by  a  politi
cal  party,  in  passing  the  alien  and  sedition  acts.
This  high-handed  legislation  caused  a  sudden
revulsion  of  feeling  in  favor  of  the  Republicans,
and  called  forth  vigorous  remonstrance.  Party
feeling  has,  perhaps,  never  in  this  country  been  so
bitter,  except  just  before  the  civil  war.  A  series
of  resolutions,  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Madison,  was
adopted  in  1798  by  the  legislature  of  Virginia,
while  a  similar  series,  still  more  pronounced,  drawn
up  by  Mr.  Jefferson,  was  adopted  in  the  same  year
by  the  legislature  of  Kentucky.  The  Virginia
resolutions  asserted  with  truth  that,  in  adopting
the  Federal  constitution,  the  states  had  surren
dered  only  a  limited  portion  of  their  powers ;  and
went  on  "to  declare  that,  whenever  the  Federal
government  should  exceed  its  constitutional  au
thority,  it  was  the  business  of  the  state  govern
ments  to  interfere  and  pronounce  such  action  un
constitutional.  Accordingly,  Virginia  declared  the


170


MADISON


MADISON


alien  and  sedition  laws  unconstitutional,  and  in
vited  the  other  states  to  join  in  the  declaration.
Not  meeting  with  a  favorable  response,  Virginia
renewed  these  resolutions  the  next  year.  There
was  nothing  necessarily  seditious,  or  tending  toward
secession,  in  the  Virginia  resolutions ;  but  the  atti
tude  assumed  in  them  was  uncalled  for  on  the  part
of  any  state,  inasmuch  as  there  existed,  in  the  Fed
eral  supreme  court,  a  tribunal  competent  to  decide
upon  the  constitutionality  of  acts  of  congress.  The
Kentucky  resolutions  went  further.  They  declared
that  our  Federal  constitution  was  a  compact,  to
which  the  several  states  were  the  one  party  and
the  Federal  government  was  the  other,  and  each
party  must  decide  for  itself  as  to  when  the  com
pact  was  infringed,  and  as  to  the  proper  remedy  to
be  adopted.  When  the  resolutions  were  repeated
in  1799,  a  clause  was  added,  which  went  still  fur
ther  and  mentioned  "  nullification  "  as  the  suitable
remedy,  and  one  that  any  state  might  employ.  In
the  Virginia  resolutions  there  was  neither  mention
nor  intention  of  nullification  as  a  remedy.  Mr.
Madison  lived  to  witness  South  Carolina's  attempt
at  nullification  in  1832,  and  in  a  very  able  paper,
written  in  the  last  year  of  his  life,  he  conclusively
refuted  the  idea  that  his  resolutions  of  1798  afforded
any  justification  for  such  an  attempt,  and  showed
that  what  they  really  contemplated  was  a  protest
on  the  part  of  all  the  state  governments  in  com
mon.  Doubtless  such  a  remedy  was  clumsy  and
impracticable,  and  the  suggestion  of  it  does  not  de
serve  to  be  ranked  along  with  Mr.  Madison's  best
work  in  constructive  statesmanship;  but  it  cer
tainly  contained  no  logical  basis  for  what  its  author
unsparingly  denounced  as  the  "  twin  heresies  "  of
nullification  and  secession.

In  1799  Mr.  Madison  was  again  elected  a  mem
ber  of  the  Virginia  assembly,  and  in  1801,  at  Mr.
Jefferson's  urgent  desire,  he  became  secretary  of
state.  In  accepting  this  appointment,  he  entered
upon  a  new  career,  in  many  respects  different  from
that  which  he  had  hitherto  followed.  His  work  as
a  constructive  statesman,  which  was  so  great  as  to
place  him  in  the  foremost  rank  among  the  men  that
have  built  up  nations,  was  by  this  time  substantial
ly  completed.  During  the  next  few  years  the  con
stitutional  questions  that  had  hitherto  occupied
him  played  a  part  subordinate  to  that  played  by
questions  of  foreign  policy,  and  in  this  new  sphere
Mr.  Madison  was  not,  by  nature  or  ti'aining,  fitted
to  exercise  such  a  controlling  influence  as  he  had
formerly  brought  to  bear  in  the  framing  of  our
Federal  government.  As  secretary  of  state,  he  was
an  able  lieutenant  to  Mr.  Jefferson,  but  his  genius
was  not  that  of  an  executive  officer  so  much  as  that
of  a  law-giver.  He  brought  his  great  historical
and  legal  learning  to  bear  in  a  paper  entitled  "  An
Examination  of  the  British  Doctrine  which  subjects
to  Capture  a  Neutral  Trade  not  open  in  the  Time  of
Peace.''  But  the  troubled  period  that  followed  the
rupture  of  the  treaty  of  Amiens  was  not  one  in
which  legal  arguments,  however  masterly,  counted
for  much  in  bringing  angry  and  insolent  combat
ants  to  terms.  In  the  gigantic  struggle  between
England  and  Napoleon  the  commerce  of  the  United
States  was  ground  to  pieces  as  between  the  upper
and  the  nether  millstone,  and  in  some  respects
there  is  no  chapter  in  American  history  more  pain
ful  for  an  American  citizen  to  read.  The  outrage
ous  affair  of  the  "  Leopard  "  and  the  "  Chesapeake  "
was  but  the  most  flagrant  of  a  series  of  wrongs  and
insults,  against  which  Jefferson's  embargo  was
doubtless  an  absurd  and  feeble  protest,  but  per
haps  at  the  same  time  pardonable  as  the  only
weapon  left  us  in  that  period  of  national  weakness.


Affairs  were  drawing  slowly  toward  some  kind  of
crisis  when,  at  the  expiration  of  Jefferson's  second
term,  Mr.  Madison  was  elected  president  of  the
United  States  by  122  electoral  votes  against  47  for
Cotesworth  Pinckney,  and  (5  for  George  Clinton,
who  received  113  votes  for  the  vice-presidency,  and
was  elected  to  that  office.  The  opposition  of  the
New  England  states  to  the  embargo  had  by  this
time  brought  about  its  repeal,  and  the  substitution
for  it  of  the  act  declaring  non-intercourse  with
England  and  France.  By  this  time  many  of  the
most  intelligent  Federalists,  including  John  Quincy
Adams,  had  gone  over  to  the  Republicans.  In  1810
congress  repealed  the  non-intercourse  act.  which,
as  a  measure  of  intimidation,  had  proved  ineffec
tual.  Congress  now  sought  to  use  the  threat  of  non-
intercourse  as  a  kind  of  bribe,  and  informed  Eng
land  and  France  that  if  either  nation  would  repeal
its  obnoxious  edicts,  the  non-intercourse  act  would
be  revived  against  the  other.  Napoleon  took
prompt  advantage  of  this,  and  informed  Mr.  Madi
son's  government  that  he  had  revoked  his  Berlin
and  Milan  decrees  as  far  as  American  ships  were
concerned ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  gave  secret
orders  by  which  the  decrees  were  to  be  practically
enforced  as  harshly  as  ever.  The  lie  served  its
purpose,  and  congress  revived  the  non-intercourse
act  as  against  Great  Britain  alone.  In  1811  hos
tilities  began  on  sea  and  land,  in  the  affair  of  Tip-
pecanoe  and  of  the  "  President "  and  "  Little  Belt."
The  growing  desire  for  war  was  shown  in  the
choice  of  Henry  Clay  for  speaker  of  the  house  of
representatives,  and  Mr.  Madison  was  nominated
for  a  second  term,  on  condition  of  adopting  the
war  policy.  On  18  June,  1812,  war  was  declared,
and  before  the  autumn  election  a  series  of  re
markable  naval  victories  had  made  it  popular.
Mr.  Madison  was  re-elected  by  128  electoral  votes
against  89  for  DeWitt  Clinton',  of  New  York.  The
one  absorbing  event,  which  filled  the  greater  part
of  his  second  term,  was  the  war  with  Great  Britain,
which  was  marked  by  some  brilliant  victories  and
some  grave  disasters,  including  the  capture  of
Washington  by  British  troops,  and  the  flight  of
the  government  from  the  national  capital.  What
ever  opinion  may  be  held  as  to  the  character  of  the
war  and  its  results,  there  is  a  general  agreement
that  its  management,  on  the  part  of  the  United
States,  was  feeble.  Mr.  Madison  was  essentially  a
man  of  peace,  and  as  the  manager  of  a  great  war
he  was  conspicuously  out  of  his  element.  The  his
tory  of  that  war  plays  a  great  part  in  the  biogra
phies  of  the  military  and  naval  heroes  that  figured
in  it;  it  is  a  cardinal  event  in  the  career  of  Andrew
Jackson  or  Isaac  Hull.  In  the  biography  of  Madi
son  it  is  an  episode  which  may  be  passed  over
briefly.  The  greatest  part  of  his  career  was  fin
ished  before  he  held  the  highest  offices ;  his  re
nown  will  rest  chiefly  or  entirely  tipon  what  he
did  before  the  beginning  of  the  19th  century.

After  the  close  of  his  second  term  in  1817,  Mr.
Madison  retired  to  his  estate  at  Montpelier,  where
he  spent  nearly  twenty  happy  years  with  books
and  friends.  This  sweet  and  tranquil  old  age  ho
had  well  earned  by  services  to  his  fellow-creatures
such  as  it  is  given  to  but  few  men  to  render.
Among  the  founders  of  our  nation,  his  place  is  be
side  that  of  Washington,  Hamilton,  Jefferson,  and
Marshall ;  but  his  part  was  peculiar.  He  was  pre
eminently  the  scholar,  the  profound,  constructive
thinker,  and  his  limitations  were  such  as  belong  to
that  character.  He  was  modest,  quiet,  and  re
served  in  manner,  small  in  stature,  neat  and  re
fined,  courteous  and  amiable.  In  rough  party
strife  there  were  many  who  could  for  the  moment


MADOCKAWANDO


MAELZL


171


outshine  him.  lie  was  not  the  sort  of  hero  for
whom  people  throw  up  their  caps  and  shout  them
selves  hoarse,  like  Andrew  Jackson,  for  example.
But  his  work  was  of  a  kind  that  will  be  powerful
for  good  in  the  world  long  after  the  work  of  the
men  of  Jackson's  type  shall  have  been  forgotten.
The  portrait  on  steel  is  from  a  painting  by  Gilbert
Stuart,  and  the  vignette  is  copied  from  a  draw
ing  by  Longacre  made  at  Montpelier  in  July,  1833,
when  Mr.  Madison  was  in  his  eighty-third  year.
The  view  on  page  169  represents  his  residence.

A  satisfactory  biography  of  Madison  and  a  com
plete  edition  of  his  writings  are  things  still  to  be
desired.  His  interesting  account  of  the  Federal
convention  is  published  in  Eliot's  "  Debates."  See
also  the  "Madison  Papers"  (3  vols.,  Washington,
1840).  For  biographies  there  is  the  cumbrous  work
of  William  C.  Rives  (3  vols..  Boston,  1859-'68)  and
the  sketch  by  Sydney  Howard  Gay  in  the  "  Ameri
can  Statesmen  "  series  (Boston,  1884). — His  wife,
Dorothy  Payne,  b.  in  Xorth  Carolina,  20  May,
1772 ;  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C.,  12  July,  1849.  was
a  granddaughter  of  John  Payne,  an  English  gen
tleman  who  migrated
to  Virginia  early  in
the  18th  century.  He
married  Anna  Flem
ing,  granddaughter  of
Sir  Thomas  Fleming,
one  of  the  early  set
tlers  of  Jamestown.
His  son,  the  second
John  Payne,  Dorothy's
father,  married  Mary
Coles,  first  cousin  to
Patrick  Henry.  Doro
thy  was  brought  up  as
a  Quaker,  and  at  the
age  of  nineteen  mar-  j
ried  John  Todd.  a
Pennsylvania  lawyer
and  member  of  the
Society  of  Friends.
Mr.  Todd  died  in  the  dreadful  yellow-fever  pes
tilence  at  Philadelphia  in  1793.  Some  time  in  1 794
Mrs.  Todd  met  Mr.  Madison,  and  in  September  of
that  year  they  were  married,  to  the  delight  of
President  Washington  and  his  wife,  who  felt  a
keen  interest  in  both.  Their  married  life  of  forty-
two  years  was  one  of  unclouded  happiness.  Mrs.
Madison  was  a  lady  of  extraordinary  beauty  and
rare  accomplishments.  Her  "  Memoirs  and"  Let
ters  "  (Boston,  1887)  make  a  very  interesting  book.
MADOCKAWANDO,  Indian  chief,  b.  in  Maine
about  1630.  He  was  the  adopted  son  of  Assamin-
asqua,  whom  he  succeeded  as  sachem  of  the  Penob-
scot  Indians.  Their  lands,  lying  east  of  Penobscot
river,  were  a  part  of  Acadia,  which  was  given  back
to  France  in  1667  by  the  treaty  of  Breda,  though
the  English  claimed  that  the  country  between  the
Penobscot  and  the  St.  Croix  was  included  in  the
Duke  of  York's  patent.  The  Indians  were  brought
under  French  influence  by  the  Baron  de  St.  Cas-
tine,  called  in  New  England  chronicles  Castin  (q.  v.),
who  settled  among  them,  and  married  a  daughter
of  Madockawando.  When  King  Philip's  confed
eracy  rose  against  Plymouth  colony,  the  eastern
Indians  and  the  English  settlers  in  Maine  and  New
Hampshire  became  involved  in  war.  The  Penob-
scots  were  the  first  to  treat  for  peace  among  the
Indian  tribes,  and  offered  to  enter  into  an  alliance
with  the  English.  Articles  were  drawn  and  sub
scribed  at  Boston  on  6  Nov.,  1676,  and  the  peace
was  ratified  by  Madockawando.  The  English,  how
ever,  found  a  pretext  for  renewing  hostilities.  The


Indians  were  successful,  and  destroyed  all  the  Eng
lish  settlements  in  that  part  of  Maine.  In  1678  a
treaty  was  made  at  Casco  whereby  the  English
were  permitted  to  return  to  their  farms  on  the  con
dition  of  paying  rent  to  the  Indians.  The  peace
was  kept  until  the  territorial  dispute  with  France
was  brought  to  an  issue  in  1688  by  Gov.  Andros,
who  went  to  Penobscot  in  a  frigate,  plundered
Castin's  house,  and  destroyed  his  fort.  The  In
dian  chiefs  took  up  the  quarrel,  being  abundant
ly  supplied  with  arms  by  Castin.  attacked  the
white  settlements,  and  thus  began  King  William's
war.  In  the  atrocities  committed  on  this  border
Madockawando  took  a  prominent  part.  When  the
English  built  Fort  William  Henry  at  Pemaquid
he  hastened  to  Quebec  to  carry  the  intelligence  to
Frontenac,  but  divulged  it  to  John  Nelson,  whose
messengers  warned  the  authorities  in  Boston  of
Iberville's  expedition.  In  1693  the  English  gained
Madockawando's  consent  to  a  treaty  of  peace,  yet
he  was  unable  to  persuade  the  chiefs  whe  were  un
der  the  influence  of  French  Jesuit  emissaries,  and
was  compelled  to  recommence  hostilities.  The  In
dian  war  continued  for  more  than  a  year  after  the
peace  of  Ryswick  had  been  concluded  between
France  and  England,  and  until  by  the  treaty  of
Casco  the  Penobscots,  on  7  Jan.,  1699,  acknowl
edged  subjection  to  the  crown  of  England.  In  the
later  operations  Castin  was  their  leader,  Madocka
wando  having  been,  perhaps,  one  of  the  chiefs
treacherously  slain  by  Capt.  Pascho  Chubb  at  a
conference  at  Pemaquid  in  February,  1696.

MAELZL,  John  Nepoinuk,  inventor,  b.  in
Regensburg,  Germany,  15  Aug.,  1772 :  d.  at  sea,
21  July,  1838.  Of  his  early  life  little  has  been  re
corded.  In  1792  Maelzl  settled  in  Vienna,  where
he  taught  music  and  devoted  his  attention  to
musical  mechanism.  After  several  years  of  study
and  experiment  he  produced  an  orchestrion  instru
ment,  which  was  publicly  exhibited,  and  afterward
sold  for  3,000  florins,  "in  1804  he  made  known
an  improved  musical  instrument,  which  he  called
the  "  panharmonicon,"  and  which  was  worked  by
weights  that  acted  on  cylinders.  This  attracted
universal  attention ;  the'  inventor  became  noted
throughout  Europe,  was  appointed  imperial  court-
mechanician,  and  drew  the  admiration  of  Beetho
ven  and  other  noted  composers.  This  instrument
was  sold  to  a  Parisian  admirer  for  120,000  francs.
In  1805  Maelzl  purchased  von  Kempelen's  half-
forgotten  "  automaton  chess-player,'  took  it  to
Paris,  and  sold  it  to  Eugene  Beauharnais  at  a  large
profit.  Returning  to  Vienna,  he  gave  his  atten
tion  to  the  construction  of  an  "  automaton  trump
eter,"  which,  with  life-like  movements  and  sudden
changes  of  attire,  performed  French  and  Austrian
field-signals  and  military  airs.  In  1808  he  in
vented  an  improved  ear-trumpet,  and  a  musical
chronometer.  In  1813  Maelzl  and  Beethoven  were
on  familiar  terms.  Maelzl  conceived  and  musical
ly  sketched  "The  Battle  of  Vittoria,"  for  which
Beethoven  composed  the  music ;  they  also  gave
several  concerts,  at  which  Beethoven's  sympho
nies  were  interspersed  with  the  performances  of
Maelzl's  automatons.  In  1816  he  became  estab
lished  in  Paris  as  manufacturer  of  his  newly  in
vented  "  metronome."  an  instrument  of  enduring
value.  In  1817  he  left  Paris  for  Munich,  and  again
took  up  his  abode  in  Vienna.  At  this  time  he
found  means  to  repurchase  von  Kempelen's  chess
player,  and,  after  spending  several  preparatory
years  in  constructing  and  improving  a  number  of
interesting  and  effective  mechanical  inventions,
he  formed  the  enterprise  of  exhibiting  his  cabinet
of  mechanical  wonders  in  the  New  World.  He


172


MAES


MAGALTIAENS


arrived  in  New  York  city  with  his  chess-player,
trumpeter,  panharmonicon,  rope-dancers,  mini
ature  song  -  birds  (that  sprang  from  the  lids  of
snuff-boxes),  speaking-dolls,  and  the  "Conflagration
of  Moscow."  The  history  of  the  chess-player  needs
not  to  be  repeated  here.  At  the  time,  Poe,  among
others,  conclusively  proved  that  the  movements  of
the  so-called  automaton  must  have  been  directly
controlled  by  human  intelligence.  The  moving
panorama  of  Moscow  was  wonderfully  realistic
and  effective,  with  its  music  and  cannonry.  The
smaller  objects  were  genuine  automatons,  and
marvels  of  beauty  and  ingenuity.  Abortive  imi
tations  of  the  "  Conflagration  "  in  after-years  be
came  adjuncts  to  most  of  the  museums  and  shows
in  the  large  cities  of  the  Union,  and  may  still
occasionally  be  met  with  in  remote  localities.  Not
seldom,  when  Maelzl's  exhibition  opened  with  the
performance  of  the  chess-player,  would  he  call  on
the  audience  in  vain  for  an  opposite  player,  so  little
at  that  time  was  the  game  in  practice.  For  many
years  Maelzl  journeyed  in  this  country  from  place
to  place,  repeating  his  exhibitions  with  unvarying
success,  and  he  also  twice  visited  the  West  Indies.
His  display  of  mechanical  figures  has  probably  ;
never  been  equalled.  It  is  said  he  had  the  faculty
of  seizing  on  the  crude  inspirations  of  others  and
perfecting  them  to  his  own  advantage.

MAES,  Camillas  Paul,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Courtrai,  Belgium,  13  March,  1846.  He  received
his  preparatory  education  in  the  College  of  Cour-  i
trai,  and,  after  graduation,  studied  philosophy  and  j
theology  in  the  seminary  of  Bruges.  With  the  ob-  !
ject  of  preparing  himself  for  missionary  work  in
the  United  States,  he  finished  his  theological  stud
ies  in  the  American  college  of  Louvain.  He  was
ordained  priest  on  18  Dec.,  1868.  and  sailed  for  the
United  States  shortly  afterward.  He  had  been
affiliated  to  the  diocese  of  Detroit,  and  on  his  ar
rival  in  Michigan  he  was  appointed  pastor  of  St.
Peter's  church,  Mount  Clemens.  lie  was  trans
ferred  to  Monroe  city,  where  he  was  successively
pastor  of  St.  Mary's  church  in  1871,  and  of  St.
John's  in  1873.  He  was  appointed  secretary  of
Bishop  Burgess  in  1880,  nominated  for  the  see  of
Covington  in  1884,  and  consecrated  bishop  on  25
Jan.,  1885.  Bishop  Maes  has  given  much  atten
tion  to  the  early  history  of  the  Roman  Catholic
church  in  the  western  states,  He  has  published
"  Life  of  Rev.  Charles  Nerinckx  "  (Cincinnati,  1880),
and  is  a  contributor  to  Roman  Catholic  periodicals.

MAFFITT,  John  Newland,  clergyman,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland,  28  Dec.,  1795 ;  d.  near  Mobile.  Ala.,
28  May,  1850.  He  was  destined  for  mercantile  life
by  his  parents,  who  belonged  to  the  Established
church  :  but  embracing  the  Wesleyan  doctrines  in
1813,  he  determined  to  become  a  minister,  and,
meeting  with  opposition  at  home,  emigrated  to  the
United  States  in  1819,  and  in  1822  entered  the
New  England  conference  of  the  Methodist  Epis
copal  church.  After  preaching  for  twelve  years
as  an  itinerant  in  various  cities  of  the  eastern
states,  he  became  a  local  preacher  in  New  York
city  in  1832,  and  thereafter  travelled,  preached,
and  lectured  at  his  own  discretion.  In  1833,  in
conjunction  with  Rev.  Lewis  Garrett,  he  estab
lished  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  the  "  Western  Meth
odist,"  which  was  subsequently  transformed  into
the  "  Christian  Advocate."  and  adopted  as  the
central  organ  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,
south.  Great  numbers  assembled  to  listen  to  his
sermons  in  the  south  and  southwest,  and  many
converts  were  added  to  the  church.  He.  was  agent
for  La  Grange  college,  Ala.,  in  1836-'7,  and  was
subsequently  for  a  short  time  professor  of  elocu


tion  and  belles-lettres  in  that  institution,  but  re
sided  chiefly  in  the  Atlantic  cities.  In  1841  he
was  chaplain  to  the  National  house  of  representa
tives.  In  1845-'(i  he  edited  a  literary  and  religious
monthly,  called  the  "  Calvary  Token,"  that  he  had
established  at  Auburn,  N.  Y.  In  1847,  on  the  oc
casion  of  a  second  marriage,  charges  were  brought
against  his  moral  character,  in  consequence  of
which  he  removed  from  New  York  to  Arkansas.
He  preached  in  various  cities,  but  his  popularity
was  affected  and  his  mind  troubled  by  the  sus
picions  he  had  incurred,  and  his  power  as  a  pulpit
orator  was  gone.  Mr.  Maffitt  was  the  author  of
"Tears  of  Contrition,"  a  recountal  of  his  religious
experiences  (1821);  "Pulpit  Sketches"  (Boston,
1828) ;  and  a  volume  of  "  Poems  "  (1839).  He  left
an  "  Oratorical  Dictionary  "  and  an  "  Autobiogra
phy." — His  son.  John  Newland,  naval  officer,  b.
at  sea.  22  Feb..  1819 ;  d.  in  Wilmington,  N.  C.,  15
May,  1886,  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  a  midship
man  on  25  Feb.,  1832,  became  a  lieutenant  on  25
June,  1848.  and  was  placed  on  the  reserved  list  on
14  Sept.,  1855.  He  resigned  on  2  May,  1861,  and
entered  the  service  of  the  Confederacy.  In  the
early  part  of  1862  he  took  a  cargo  of  cotton  to
England,  and  while  there  received  instructions  to
take  charge  of  the  steamer  "Oreto,"  which  had
been  clandestinely  constructed  for  the  Confederate
government  at  Liverpool.  She  had  been  seized  on
representations  made  by  the  American  minister,
but  was  released,  and  allowed  to  sail.  On  arriving
at  Nassau.  28  April,  1862,  she  was  again  detained,
but  was  discharged  by  a  court  of  admiralty,  after
which  Capt.  Maffitt  took  her  to  the  island  of  Green
Kay,  received  on  board  the  guns  and  armaments,
and  rechristened  her  the  "  Florida."  The  captain
and  crew  were  prostrated  by  yellow  fever,  and
repaired  to  Havana  for  medical  attention.  lie
sailed  from  that  port  on  1  Sept..  1862.  ran  tin-
blockade  at  Mobile,  refitted  his  vessel  and  com
pleted  her  armaments,  and  steamed  out  again  in  a
dark  and  stormy  night.  The  National  squadron
gave  chase,  but  Capt.  Maffitt  stopped  his  engines
and  took  in  his  sails,  and  the  pursuing  vessels
passed  the  low  hull  unobserved.  The  "  Florida  "
began  her  captures  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  cruised
up  to  New  York,  then  southward  to  beyond  the
equator,  and  back  again  to  the  latitude  of  New
York.  With  the  "Florida"  and  captured  ships
that  he  fitted  out  as  tenders,  Capt.  Maffitt  took
about  fifty-five  prizes,  including  many  large  and
richly  laden  vessels.  The  machinery  of  the  lightly
built  cruiser  having  become  deranged,  Maffitt,  with
the  permission  of  the  French  government,  had  his
vessel  repaired  in  the  docks  of  the  navy-yard  at
Brest.  The  effects  of  yellow  fever  and  the  fatigues
of  service  had  so  exhausted  his  strength  that  he
asked  to  be  relieved,  and  the  "  Florida  "  put  to  sea
again  under  the  command  of  Capt.  C.  M.  Morris.
His  last  years  were  spent  in  Wilmington,  N.  C.

MAGALHAENS,  Domingo  Jos£  Uoii^ulve*
(le  (rnah-gal-yah'-ens),  Brazilian  poet,  b.  in  Rio
Janeiro  in  1811.  He  was  graduated  as  a  surgeon
in  his  native  city  in  1832,  and  in  1836  attached  to
the  Brazilian  embassy  in  Paris.  In  1838  he  was
appointed  professor  of  philosophy  in  the  College
of  Rio  Janeiro,  and  in  1840  elected  deputy  by  that
city.  From  1845  till  1867  he  was  Brazilian  min
ister  to  Dresden,  Naples,  Turin,  and  Vienna,  and
returned  in  the  latter  year  to  Rio,  where  he  has
since  lived.  He  is  a  popular  lyric  poet,  and
relates  in  his  works  the  feats  of  the  early  con
querors.  His  books  include  "  Poesias  "  (Rio  Ja
neiro,  1832) ;  "  Mysterios  "  (1839) ;  "  Urania  "  (Vi
enna,  1862) ;  "  Antonio  Jose  "  and  "  Olgiato,"  two


MAGALIIAENS DE GANDAVO


MAGENS


173


dramas  which  had  great  success,  and  in  Spanish,
French,  and  English  translations  have  been  repre
sented  in  several  cities  of  the  Old  and  New  World.
(Rio  Janeiro,  1838-'9) ;  "  A  confederacao  dos  Ta-
rnoyos,"  an  epic  poem  on  national  history  (185?) :
and  "  Ensaio  sob  re  a  historia  litteraria  do  Brazil  "
(1858).  He  is  also  the  editor  of  the  magazine
"  Brazil  litteraria,"  which  has  been  published  in
Rio  Janeiro  since  1863.

MAGALHAENS  DE  GANDAYO,  Pedro  de,
Portuguese  author,  b.  in  Prado,  Portugal,  in  1540 :
d.  late  in  the  16th  century.  He  lived  in  Brazil  for
several  years,  and  on  his  return  published  "  His
toria  da  provincia  da  Santa  Cruz,  chamada  com-
mummente  o  Brazil "  (Lisbon.  1576).  A  notable
feature  of  the  work  of  Magalhaens  is  the  entire
absence  of  the  marvellous  and  absurd  stories  so
numerous  in  the  writings  of  those  who  gave  an  ac
count  of  distant  countries  at  the  time.  In  spite  of
the  favor  with  which  this  history  was  received  on
its  appearance,  it  was  not  reprinted  and  became
very  rare.  It  was  translated  into  French  by  Ter-
naux-Compans,  and  published  in  his  "  Voyages,
relations,  et  mcmoires."

MAGAW,  Samuel,  educator,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  about  1740;  d.  there,  1  Dec.,  1812.  He  was  a
member  of  the  first  class  in  the  University  of  Penn
sylvania,  and  was  graduated  in  1757.  He  went  to
England  for  orders  in  1767,  and  on  his  return  was
a  missionary  of  the  Venerable  society  for  propa
gating  the  gospel  at  Dover  creek,  Del.  He  became
rector  of  St.  Paul's  church,  Philadelphia,  in  1781,
which  office  he  held  until  1804.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of  Pennsyl
vania  in  1783,  and  was  vice-provost  of  that  insti
tution  from  1782  till  1791.  Dr.  Magaw  aided  in
establishing  the  Philadelphia  academy,  and  was
secretary  of  the  convention  of  Pennsylvania  for
heveral  years.  He  published  numerous  sermons
that  he  preached  on  special  occasions.  Bishop
White,  in  his  '•  Memoirs  of  the  Protestant  Episco
pal  Church,"  makes  honorable  mention  of  the
part  that  was  taken  byfDr.  Magaw  in  1784  in  the
early  movements  toward  the  organization  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  the  United  States.
MAGELLAN,  Fernando  (ma-gel-yan'),  Portu
guese  navigator,  b.  in  Oporto,  Portugal,  in  1470 ;  d.
in  Mactan,  one  of  the  Philippine  islands,  17  April,

1521.  His  real
name  was  Ma
galhaens.  which
the  Spaniards
changed  to  Ma-
gallanes.  He  ap
pears  to  have  de
voted  himself  to
the  study  of  navi
gation,  cosmogra
phy,  and  astrono
my  at  a  very  early
age,  and,  after
spending  some
time  at  the  court
of  Portugal,

served  with  suc
cess  in  the  East
Indies.  Thinking
that  his  services
were  ill-requited
by  his  native  land,  he  turned  his  steps  to  Spain.  He
arrived  in  1517  at  Valladolid,  where  Charles  V.  was
then  residing,  and  was  well  received  by  Cardinal
Jimenez,  before  whom  he  laid  his  plan  for  finding
a  passage  to  the  Moluccas  around  the  southern
coast  of  America,  instead  of  the  usual  route


;  around  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  He  inspired  both
the  emperor  and  cardinal  with  his  own  conviction,
and  met  with  every  encouragement  from  the  royal
council.  An  agreement  was  drawn  up  according
to  which  Magellan  was  to  be  admiral  of  the  ex
ploring  fleet  and  governor  of  all  the  lands  he
might  discover.  The  fleet  of  which  he  was  given
command  consisted  of  five  vessels  and  carried
eighty  cannon.  Magellan's  flag-ship  was  named
the  "  Trinidad."  Juan  de  Cartagena  commanded
the  "  San  Antonio  "  ;  Luis  de  Mendoza  the  "  Vic
toria  "  ;  .  Gaspar  de  Quesada  the  "  Concepcion,"
\«th  Sebastian  del  Cano  second  in  command,  who
brought  the  "Victoria  "  to  Spain  after  sailing  around
the  globe  :  and  Rodriguez  Serrano  the  "  Santiago."
Antonio  Pigafetta,  who  afterward  wrote  an  ac
count  of  the  voyage,  Elcano.  a  noted  pilot  (q.  v.),
and  several  priests  accompanied  the  expedition.
The  squadron  set  sail  from  San  Lucar,  20  Sept.,
1519,  and  after  a  rough  passage  of  about  two
months  reached  what  is  now  the  the  Bay  of  Rio
Janeiro,  where  it  took  in  fresh  provisions.  The
admiral  then  skirted  the  coast,  keeping  a  careful
watch  for  every  bay  and  inlet.  He  entered  the
Rio  de  la  Plata,  12  Jan..  1520.  but,  after  sailing  up
the  river  for  some  days,  he  concluded  that  it  was  not
the  strait  of  which  he  was  in  search,  and  continued
his  course  southward.  He  reached  the  port  of  San
Julian  on  31  March.  Here  his  captains  rebelled,
and  a  conspiracy  was  organized  against  him.  The
crews,  excited  by  the  malcontents,  complained  of
the  rigor  of  the  climate  and  the  privations  they
had  to  endure  in  such  a  barren  country,  and  finally
insisted  on  Magellan's  returning  to  Spain.  He
temporized  for  some  days,  and  then,  knowing  that
|  most  of  the  sailors  were  really  devoted  to  him,  he
1  sent  a  resolute  follower  on  board  the  "  Victoria,"
j  who  stabbed  Mendoza  in  the  midst  of  his  crew.
!  The  body  of  the  latter  was  quartered  by  Magel
lan's  orders,  and  Quesada,  who  shortly  afterward
fell  into  his  hands,  was  visited  with  the  same  pun
ishment.  Not  venturing  to  put  Cartagena  to  death
!  on  account  of  his  rank,  he  set  him  on  shore  with  a
priest  who  had  taken  part  in  the  revolt.  These
misfortunes  were  followed  by  the  loss  of  the
"Santiago,"  but  her  crew  escaped,  and  was  dis
tributed  among  the  other  vessels.  The  fleet  left
the  Bay  of  San  Julian  about  the  middle  of  Octo
ber,  and,  following  the  coast  very  closely,  reached
the  cape  on  the  northeast  of  the  strait  on  21  Oct.
This  being  the  festival-day  of  St.  Ursula  and  her
eleven  thousand  virgins,  the  cape  was  named  Cape
Virgins  by  Magellan.  He  then  cautiously  crept
along  the  unknown  channel,  and  on  27  Nov.
doubled  Cape  Victory,  so  named  after  one  of  his
ships,  and  entered  the  Pacific  ocean.  The  '•  San
Antonio  "  had  abandoned  him  in  the  middle  of  the
strait  and  gone  in  search  of  Juan  de  Cartagena.
After  a  Te  Deum  had  been  chanted  and  the  vessels
were  refitted,  Magellan  steered  toward  the  north
west,  determined  to  push  on  for  the  Moluccas.  He
was  for  three  months  and  twenty  days  without  dis
covering  land,  and  his  stock  of  provisions  was  almost
exhausted  when  he  came  in  sight  of  the  Ladrones,
on  6  March,  1521.  He  discovered  on  16  March  the
group  of  islands  now  known  as  the  Philippines,
where  his  zeal  for  the  conversion  of  the  inha'bi-
tants  to  Christianity  led  to  his  assassination.

MAGENS,  Joachim  Melchior  (mah -gains'),
j  Danish  author,  b.  in  St.  Thomas,  W.  I.,  about
'  1715:  d.  there  in  1783.  When  he  was  young  his
j  parents  sent  him  to  Copenhagen,  Denmark,  and
'  there  he  studied  law  in  the  university.  The  Danish
i  government  appointed  him  chief  of  the  adminis-
i  tration  of  St.  Thomas,  which  place  he  held  until


174


MAG  IE


MAGOON


his  death.  He  was  the  first  author  that  wrote  in
the  Creole  language.  His  works  include  "  Gram-
inaire  de  la  larigue  Creole  parlee  dans  les  Antilles
danoiscs"  (Copenhagen,  1770),  and  "Nouveau  Tes
tament  traduit  en  Creole  "  (1781).

MA(iIE,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Elizabeth,
N.  J.,  13  March,  1795 ;  d.  there.  10  May,  1865.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1817,  and  while
pursuing  the  theological  course  in  the  seminary
was  tutor  in  the  college  in  1818-'19.  On  24  April,
1821,  he  was  installed  as  pastor  of  a  newly  organ
ized  Presbyterian  church  in  Elizabeth,  with  which
he  remained  connected  until  his  death.  In  1846
he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Amherst.
Dr.  Magie  was  a  director  in  the  American  board
of  commissioners  for  foreign  missions,  of  the  Amer
ican  tract  society,  and  of  the  Theological  seminary
at  Princeton.  He  was  the  author  of  "  The  Spring
time  of  Life  "  (New  York,  1855),  and  of  a  tract  en
titled  "The  Citizen  Soldier,"  of  which  250,000
copies  were  distributed  during  the  civil  war.

MAGILL,  Edward  Hicks,  educator,  b.  in  Sole-
bury,  Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  24  Sept.,  1825.  He  was  edu
cated  at  Yale  and  at  Brown,  where  he  was  gradu
ated  in  1852.  He  was  principal  of  the  classical
department  of  Providence  high-school  in  1852-'9,
and  then  submaster  of  the  Boston  Latin-school
till  1867,  when  he  resigned,  and  spent  some  time
in  travel  and  study  in  Europe  while  waiting  for
the  opening  of  Swarthmore  college.  In  1869  he
became  principal  of  the  Swarthmore  preparatory
school,  and  in  1871  president  of  the  Friends'  col
lege  at  Swarthmore,  Delaware  co.,  Pa.  The  col
lege  has  prospered  under  his  management,  and
presents  an  example  of  successful  coeducation  of
the  sexes,  of  which  President  Magill  is  a  strong
advocate.  While  connected  with  the  Boston  Latin-
school  he  published  a  "  French  Grammar  "  (Bos
ton,  1865),  with  a  key ;  also  two  French  readers.

MAGILL,  Mary  tucker,  author,  b.  in  Jeffer
son  county,  Va.,  21  Aug.,  1882.  She  was  educated
at  Richmond  and  at  the  University  of  Virginia,
where  her  father,  Dr.  Alfred  T.  Magill,  was  pro
fessor  of  medicine.  After  the  war  she  established,
with  her  mother,  who  was  a  daughter  of  Judge
Henry  St.  G.  Tucker,  a  boarding-school  at  Win
chester,  Va.  Miss  Magill  has  contributed  sketches
to  periodicals  and  corresponded  with  various  news
papers,  and  is  the  author  of  "  The  Holcombes,"  a
story  of  Virginia  home  life  (Philadelphia,  1868);
"  Women,  or  Chronicles  of  the  Late  War  "  (1870) ;  a
"  School  History  of  Virginia,"  generally  used  in  the
public  schools  of  the  state  (Baltimore,  1877) ;  and
"  Pantomimes,  or  Wordless  Poems  "  (Boston,  1882).

MAGINNIS,  John  Sharp,  clergyman,  b.  in
Butler  county,  Pa.,  13  June,  1805  ;  d.  in  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  15  Oct.,  1852.  His  parents,  who  came  origi
nally  from  the  north  of  Ireland,  removed  to  Trum-
bull  county,  Ohio,  when  he  was  three  years  old.
At  the  age  of  twelve  he  learned  the  carpenter's
trade,  but  on  25  May,  1827,  was  licensed  to  preach
as  a  Baptist.  He  then  went  to  Waterville  college,
Me.,  and  to  Brown,  but  left  at  the  end  of  his  sec
ond  year  on  account  of  failing  health.  He  after
ward  studied  theology  at  Newton  seminary,  Mass.,
and  was  pastor  of  churches  in  Portland,  Me.,  and
Providence,  R.  I.  He  then  accepted  the  profes
sorship  of  biblical  and  pastoral  theology  at  the
Literary  and  theological  institution  (now  Madison
university)  in  Hamilton.  N.  Y.  In  1851  he  became
professor  of  the  same  branches  in  the  new  Theo
logical  seminary  at  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  and  of  phi
losophy  in  Rochester  university.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Brown  in  1844.  He  was  a
contributor  to  religious  quarterlies.


MAGOFFIN,  Beriah,  governor  of  Kentucky,
b.  in  Harrodsburg,  Ky.,  18  April,  1815;  d.  there,
28  Feb.,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at  Center  college,
Danville,  Ky.,  in  1835,  and  at  the  law  department
of  Transylvania  university  in  1838,  began  practising
law  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  in  1839,  and  was  elected  read
ing-clerk  of  the  Mississippi  senate,  but  returned  to
Harrodsburg  the  same  year,  and  practised  until
he  was  appointed  police  judge  in  1840.  In  1850  he
was  elected  to  the  Kentucky  senate.  He  was  a
presidential  elector  in  1844,  1848,  1852,  and  1856,
and  a  delegate  to  the  National  Democratic  conven
tions  of  1848,  1856,  and  1860.  He  was  defeated
in  1855  as  a  candidate  for  lieutenant-governor,  but
was  elected  governor  for  the  term  of  four  years
beginning  1  Sept.,  1859.  In  a  correspondence  with
commissioners  from  Alabama  relative  to  co-opera
tion  with  the  southern  states,  he  proposed  in  1860
that  the  slave  states  should  agree  on  amendments
to  the  LI.  S.  constitution  that  would  meet  with  the
approbation  of  Democrats  at  the  north.  In  his  mes
sage  in  February,  1861,  he  recommended  a  conven
tion  of  the  border  states.  He  replied  on  15  April,
1861,  to  the  president's  call  for  75,000  men,  that
Kentucky  would  •'  furnish  no  troops  for  the  wicked
purpose  of  subduing  her  sister  southern  states."
In  May  he  issued  a  proclamation  forbidding  either
the  United  States  or  the  Confederate  government
to  undertake  any  movement  of  troops  or  occupy
any  post  on  Kentucky  soil,  and  warning  the  citi
zens  of  the  state  against  taking  part  in  hostilities.
In  August  he  sent  letters  to  President  Lincoln
and  to  Jefferson  Davis  declaring  the  neutrality  of
Kentucky,  and  requesting  the  former  to  withdraw
National  troops  from  the  state.  When  Gen.  Leoni-
das  Polk  occupied  Columbus,  the  legislature  passed
a  resolution  directing  the  governor  to  demand  by
proclamation  the  evacuation  of  Kentucky  soil  by
the  Confederate  forces.  He  vetoed  this  resolution,
but  it  was  passed  over  his  veto,  and  he  issued  the
proclamation.  Resolutions  inviting  Gen.  Robert
Anderson  to  enroll  a  volunteer  force  and  expel  the
invaders,  and  requesting  the  governor  to  call  out
the  militia  and  place  Gen.  Thomas  L.  Crittenden
in  command,  were  likewise  carried  in  spite  of  his
veto.  In  1862  he  vetoed  an  act  to  disfranchise  citi
zens  that  entered  the  Confederate  service,  and  other
measures,  and  in  August,  calling  an  extra  session
of  the  legislature,  resigned  his  office.  In  1867  he
was  elected  to  the  State  house  of  representatives.

MAGOON,  Elias  Lyman,  clergyman,  b.  in
Lebanon.  N.  II.,  20  Oct.,  1810;  d.  in  Philadelphia.
Pa.,  25  Nov.,  1886.  He  was  the  grandson  of  a
Baptist  minister,  and  the  son  of  an  architect  who
was  successful  in  his  profession,  but  was  long  an
invalid.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  was  apprenticed
to  a  bricklayer,  but  he  prepared  himself  by  even
ing  study  for  college,  and  entered  Waterville  col
lege  (now  Colby  university).  During  his  vacations
he  followed  his  trade.  He  entered  Newton  theo
logical  seminary  in  1836,  and  in  1839  was  ordained
as  a  Baptist  minister,  and  settled  over  a  church  in
Richmond,  Va.  After  a  pastorate  of  six  years,  in
consequence  of  a  division  of  his  church  on  the
question  of  slavery  he  resigned,  and  was  called  to
a  pastorate  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  where  he  remained
for  four  years.  In  1849  he  took  charge  of  a  church
in  New  York  city,  where  he  preached  for  eight
years.  He  next  held  a  pastorate  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
for  ten  years,  and  was  then  pastor  of  the  Broad
street  church  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  till  April,
1884,  when  he  retired  from  the  pulpit.  He  subse
quently  delivered  lectures  in  various  parts  of  the
country.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Rochester  university  in  1853.  He  was  a  collector


MAGRATH


MAHAM


175


of  books  and  objects  of  art,  and  was  well  known
as  a  connoisseur.  Before  his  death  he  sold  his
paintings  to  Vassar  college,  and  presented  his
Protestant  theological  works  to  Newton  seminary,
his  Roman  Catholic  collection  to  Cardinal  John
McCloskey,  miscellaneous  books  to  Colby  univer
sity  and  Bates  college,  Me.,  illustrated  art  works
to  Rochester  university,  and  water-color  drawings
to  the  New  York  metropolitan  museum  of  art.  Dr.
Magoon  was  an  eloquent  preacher  and  lecturer,
and  made  himself  popular  by  the  bold  enunciation
of  broad  humanitarian  views.  He  was  the  only
clergyman  in  Philadelphia  who  advocated  opening
the  permanent  exhibition  to  the  public  on  Sun
days.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Eloquence  of  the
Colonial  Times "  (Cincinnati,  1847) ;  "  Orators  of
the  American  Revolution "  (New  York,  1848) ;
"  Proverbs  for  the  People  "  (Boston,  1848) ;  "  Liv
ing  Orators  in  America  "  (New  York,  1849) :  "  Re
publican  Christianity  "  (Boston,  1849) ;  and  "  West
ward  Empire  "  (Xew  York,  1856).

MAGRATH,  William  (mag-rah'),  artist,  b.  in
Cork,  Ireland,  20  March,  1838.  After  attending
the  Cork  school  of  art  he  came  to  this  country,
and  opened  a  studio  in  New  York  city.  He  was
one  of  the  earlier  members  of  the  American  society
of  painters  in  water-colors,  and  was  elected  an  as
sociate  member  of  the  National  academy  in  1874,
and  a  National  academician  in  1876.  He  moved
to  England  in  1879,  but  returned  to  this  country
in  1883  and  established  his  studio  in  Washington.
He  has  executed  many  strong  and  original  works,
of  which  "  On  the  Old  Sod  "  (1879)  attracted  much
attention  for  its  technical  merits  and  the  fine  sen
timent  that  it  suggested.  Other  works  from  his
hand  are  "Irish  Peasantry  returning  from  the
Fair"  (1869):  "Empty  Flagon"  (1873):  "Court
yard  with  Donkey  " ;  '•  Irish  Interior  "  ;  "  Dairy
Maid  "  ;  "  Mussel  Gatherers  "  and  "  Nora,"  in  wa
ter-colors  ;  "  Ranen  "  (1884) ;  "  Recreation  "  (1885) ;
"  Ah !  Rory,  be  aisey,  don't  taze  me  no  more ! ''
(1886);  and  "Meditation"  (1887).

MAGRUDER,  Allan  Bowie,  senator,  b.  in
Kentucky  about  1775;  d.  in  Opelousas,  La.,  16
April,  1822.  He  received  an  academic  education,
studied  law  in  Lexington.  Ky.,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  removed  to  Louisiana,  where  he  was
a  member  of  the  state  house  of  representatives  and
was  subsequently  elected  a  U.  S.  senator  as  a
Democrat,  serving  from  18  Nov.,  1812,  till  3  March,
1813.  He  was  the  author  of  "Reflections  on  the
Cession  of  Louisiana "  (Lexington,  1803),  and
"  Character  of  Mr.  Jefferson,"  and  had  collected
material  for  a  general  history  of  the  North  Ameri
can  Indians,  which  was  left  unfinished.

MAGRUDER,  John  Bankhead,  soldier,  b.  in
Winchester,  Va.,  15  Aug..  1810;  d.  in  Houston,
Tex.,  19  Feb.,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1830,  assigned  to  the  ar
tillery,  and  served  in  the  west,  in  Maine,  and  at
Fort  McHenry,  Baltimore.  In  the  Mexican  war
he  commanded  the  light  battery  of  Gen.  Pil
low's  division,  and  was  brevetted  major  for  gallant
ry  at  Cerro  Gordo,  and  lieutenant-colonel  for  Cha-
pultepec,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.  After
the  war  he  served  in  Maryland,  California,  and
Newport,  R.  I.,  where  he  was  in  command  of  Fort
Adams.  While  holding  this  last  post  he  added
greatly  to  the  gayety  of  Newport  by  the  splen
did  entertainments  that  he  gave  at  the  fort  during
the  fashionable  season.  When  Virginia  seceded,
he  resigned  his  commission,  that  of  captain  of  ar
tillery,  and  entered  the  Confederate  army.  After
gaining  the  battle  of  Big  Bethel,  he  was  made
brigadier-general  and  placed  in  command  of  the


Confederate  forces  on  the  peninsula,  with  his  head
quarters  at  Yorktown,  where  for  several  weeks  he
opposed  the  advance  of  the  National  army.  He
was  then  promoted  major-general  and  took  part
in  the  seven  days'  fighting  around  Richmond,  espe
cially  in  the  battle
of  Malvern  Hill.
On  16  Oct.,  1862,
he  was  placed  in
command  of  the
Department  of
Texas,  and  on  1
Jan.,  1863,  he  re
covered  Galveston
from  the  National
forces,  capturing
the  steamer  "  Har
riet  Lane,"  and
dispersing  for  a
time  the  blockad
ing  squadron.  He
remained  in  com
mand  in  Texas  un
til  the  close  of  the
war,  when  he  en
tered  the  army  of  Maximilian  in  Mexico,  with  the
rank  of  major-general,  serving  until  the  emperor's
downfall  and  execution.  He  then  returned  to  the
United  States  and  lectured,  in  Baltimore  and  other
cities,  on  Mexico.  In  1869  he  settled  in  Houston,
where  he  remained  until  his  death. — His  niece,
Julia,  author,  b.  in  Charlottesville,  Va.,  14  Sept.,
1854,  has  published  "  Across  the  Chasm,"  anony
mous  (New  York,  1885):  "At  Anchor"  (Philadel
phia,  1887) ;  and  "  A  Magnificent  Plebeian ''  (New
York,  1887).

MAGUIRE,  Thomas,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.
in  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  about  1776;  d.  in  Quebec
in  1854.  He  was  ordained  priest  in  1800,  and  after
several  years  was  made  vicar-general  of  the  diocese
of  Quebec.  In  1820  he  was  appointed  bishop  in
partibus,  and  coadjutor  vicar-apostolic  of  Nova
Scotia,  but  declined.  In  1826  he  went  to  London
to  oppose,  on  behalf  of  the  Canadian  secular  clergy,
an  arrangement  between  the  Sulpitians  of  Montreal
and  the  British  government  regarding  the  seign
iorial  rights  of  the  former.  He  afterward  went
to  Rome,  where  he  obtained  a  decision  from  the
propaganda  against  the  Sulpitians.  In  1833  he
was  again  charged  with  a  mission  to  Rome.
Dr.  Maguire  published  numerous  works  dealing
with  educational  and  polemical  questions,  among
them  "Recueil  des  locutions  vicieuses ":"  Obser
vations  d'un  Catholique  sur  1'histoire  du  Canada
par  1'Honorable  M.  Smith  "  (Quebec,  1827) ;  "  Clerge
canadien  venge  par  les  ennemis,  ou  observations
sur  un  ouvrage  recent,  intitule :  Tableau  statist  ique
et  politique  des  deux  Canadas "  (1835) ;  "Manuel
de  jurisprudence  a  1'usage  des  ecclesiastiques "  ;
"  Recueil  de  notes  diverses  sur  le  gouvernement
d'une  paroisse,  Fadministration  d'une  paroisse,  etc.,
adresse  a  un  jeune  cure  de  campagne"  (1845) ;  and
"  Doctrine  de  1'Eglise  catholique  concernant  la
soumission  aux  autorites  civiles."

MAHAM,  Hezekiah,  soldier,  b.  in  St.  Stephen's
parish,  S.  C.,  26  June,  1739;  d.  there  in  1789.  He
was  elected  a  member  of  the  first  Provincial  con
gress  of  South  Carolina,  and  in  other  ways  actively
promoted  the  cause  of  American  freedom.  In  1776
he  was  elected  a  captain  in  the  first  rifle  regiment,
under  Col.  Isaac  Huger,  and  served  during  the
siege  of  Savannah  and  in  the  battle  of  Stono.  He
was  then  made  a  commander  of  horse  in  Gen.
Francis  Marion's  brigade,  and  in  the  attack  on  Fort
Watson,  in  April,  1781,  he  suggested  the  erection


17(3


MAIIAN


MAIIAN


of  a  rude  tower  sufficiently  tall  to  overlook  the
stockade.  This  was  accomplished  by  night,  and
on  the  following  morning  the  garrison  was  awak
ened  by  a  shower  of  balls  from  a  company  of
marksmen  on  the  tower,  in  consequence  of  which
it  soon  surrendered.  Later  lie  participated  in  the
engagement  of  Quiinby  Bridge  Creek,  and  became
lieutenant-colonel  of  an  independent  corps  of  cav
alry,  performing  many  daring  exploits  in  the  low
country  of  the  Carolinas.  Illness  compelled  his
retirement  at  the  close  of  the  campaign  of  1781,
and  while  at  home  he  was  made  a  prisoner  and
paroled,  in  consequence  of  which  he  was  unable  to
enter  the  army  again  during  the  war.  A  monu
ment  was  erected  to  his  memory  in  1845  in  the
cemetery  near  his  home.

MAHAN,  Asa,  clergyman,  b.  in  Vernon,  N.  Y.,
9  Nov.,  1800.  He  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  col
lege  in  1824,  and  at  Andover  theological  semi
nary  in  1827.  On  10  Nov.,  182!),  he  was  ordained
pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  Pittsford,
N.  Y.,  and  in  1831  he  was  called  to  the  pastorate  of
a  Presbyterian  church  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  lie
accepted  the  presidency  of  Oberlin  in  1835,  with
the  chair  of  intellectual  and  moral  philosophy,  and
the  assistant  professorship  of  theology,  but  after
fifteen  years  was  chosen  president  of  Cleveland  uni
versity,"  Cleveland,  Ohio,  and  professor  of  mental
and  moral  philosophy  there.  In  1855  he  resumed
pastoral  work,  and  had  charge  of  Congregational
parishes  at  Jackson  in  1855-'7  and  at  Adrian  in
1857-' 60.  'He  was  president  of  Adrian  college,
Mich.,  in  1860-71,  and  since  then  has  resided  in
England.  President  Mahan  has  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Hillsdale  in  1858,  and  that  of  LL.  D.
from  Adrian  in  1877.  He  has,been  an  active  advo
cate  of  the  religious  views  that  are  known  as  Per
fectionist,  and  has  published  "  Scripture  Doctrine
of  Christian  Perfection  "  (Boston,  1839).  His  other
works  include  "  System  of  Intellectual  Philosophy  "
(New  York,  1845'):  "The  Doctrine  of  the  Will"
(Oberlin,  1846):  "The  True  Believer:  his  Charac
ter,  Duties,  and  Privileges"  (New  York,  1847);
"The  Science  of  Moral  Philosophy"  (Oberlin,  1848) ;
"  Election  and  the  Influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit"
(New  York,  1851) ;  "  Modern  Mysteries  Explained
and  Exposed"  (Boston,  1855);  "The  Science  of
Logic"  (New  York,  1857);  "Science  of  Natural
Theology "  (Boston,  1867) ;  "  Theism  and  Anti-
Theism  in  their  Relations  to  Science  "  (Cleveland,
1872);  "  The  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism  scientifi
cally  Explained  and  Exposed  "  (New  York,  1876) ;
"Critical  History  of  the  late  American  War"
(1877);  "A  System  of  Mental  Philosophy"  (Chi
cago,  1882) ;  and  "  Critical  History  of  Philosophy  "
(New  York,  1883).

MAHAN,  Dennis  Hart,  engineer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  2  April,  1802 ;  d.  near  Stony  Point,
N.  Y..  16  Sept.,  1871.  He  spent  his  boyhood  in
Norfolk,  Va.,  and  was  appointed  from  that  state  to
the  (J.  S.  military  academy,  where  he  was  gradu
ated  in  1824,  at  the  head  of  his  class.  During  his
third  year  he  was  appointed  acting  assistant  pro
fessor  of  mathematics  at  the  academy,  and  he
continued  as  such  after  his  promotion  as  2d  lieu
tenant  into  the  corps  of  engineers  until  1825,  when
he  became  principal  assistant  professor  of  engi
neering.  In  1826  he  was  sent  abroad,  by  order
of  the  war  department,  to  study  public  engineering
works  and  military  institutions,  and  he  spent  some
time,  by  special  favor  of  the  French  government,  at
the  Military  school  of  application  for  engineers
and  artillerists  in  Metz.  While  in  Paris  he  was
frequently  the  guest  of  Lafayette.  He  returned
to  West  Point  in  1830,  and  resumed  his  duties  as


acting  professor  of  engineering,  which  chair  he
accepted  permanently  in  1832,  vacating  his  com
mission  in  the  corps  of  engineers.  This  office  he
continued  to  hold,  with  that  of  dean,  after  1838,
until  his  death,  which  was  by  suicide  during  a
fit  of  insanity  that  resulted  from  his  distress  on
learning  that  the  Board  of  visitors  had  recommend
ed  that  he  be  put  on  the  retired  list,  although  as
sured  by  the  president  that  he  should  be  retained.
Prof.  Mahan  was  appointed  in  1850  by  the  gover
nor  of  Virginia  a  member  of  the  board  of  engi
neers  to  decide  the  controversy  between  the  city
of  Wheeling  and  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad
company  as  to  the  proper  route  of  the  railroad
to  Wheeling.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  I),
from  William  and  Mary  in  1852,  from  Brown  in
1852,  and  from  Dartmouth  in  1867,  and,  besides
being  a  member  of  many  scientific  societies  in  the
United  States,  was  one  of  the  corporate  members
of  the  National  academy  of  sciences  in  1863.  As
an  engineer  he  acquired  a  world-wide  reputation
by  his  text-books,  which  were  used  in  the  military
academy  and  in  many  universities.  They  include
"  Treatise  on  Field  Fortifications "  (New  York,
1836) ;  "  Elementary  Course  of  Civil  Engineering"
(1837 ;  rewritten  in  1868) ;  "  Elementary  Treatise  on
Advanced  Guard,  Outposts,  and  Detachment  Ser
vice  of  Troops"  (1847;  improved  ed.,  1862);  "Ele
mentary  Treatise  on  Industrial  Drawing"  (1853):
"Descriptive  Geometry,  as  applied  to  the  Drawing
of  Fortifications  and  Stereometry"  (1864);  and
"  Military  Engineering,"  including  "  Field  Forti
fications,  Military  Mining,  and  Siege  Operations"
(1865);  and  "Permanent  Fortifications"  (1867).
He  also  edited,  with  additions,  an  American  re
print  of  Mosely's  "Mechanical  Principles  of  Engi
neering  and  Architecture  "  (1856).  See  the  sketch
by  Gen.  Henry  L.  Abbot  in  vol.  ii.  of  the  "  Bio
graphical  Memoirs  "  of  National  academy  of  sci
ences  (Washington,  1886).  His  portrait,  painted  by
Robert  W.  Weir,  is  included  in  the  collection  of
professors  to  be  seen  in  the  library  of  the  U.  S.  mili
tary  academy. — His  son,  Frederick  Augustus,
engineer,  b.  in  West  Point,  N.  Y.,  28  March,  1847.
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1867,  and  promoted  into  the  corps  of  engineers  as
2d  lieutenant,  becoming  1st  lieutenant  in  1869  and
captain  in  1881.  He  has  served  principally  on  en
gineering  work  and  on  duty  as  instructor  at  the
military  academy.  C'apt.  Mahan  was  associated
in  the  editorship  of  the  latest  edition  of  his
father's  "Civil  Engineering"  (1880),  and  has
translated  from  the  French  Krantz's  "  Study  on
Reservoir- Walls"  (New  York,  1882). — Dennis  Hart's
brother,  Milo,  clergyman,  b.  in  Suffolk,  Va.,  24
May,  1819;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,3  Sept.,  1870,  was
educated  at  St.  Paul's  college,  Flushing,  L.  L,  and
took  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in
1845.  He  became  rector  of  Grace  church,  Jersey
City,  N.  J.,  in  1848.  and  two  years  later  assistant  in
St.  Mark's  church,  Philadelphia.  He  was  professor
of  ecclesiastical  history  in  the  General  theological
seminary,  New  York  city,  from  1857  till  1864,  and
was  then  called  to  the  rectorship  of  St.  Paul's
church,  Baltimore,  Md.,  where  he  remained  until
his  death.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  I),  from
William  and  Mary  in  1852.  Dr.  Mahan  published
"The  Exercise  of  Faith"  (Philadelphia,  1851);
"  History  of  the  Church  during  the  First  Three
Centuries "  (New  York,  1860 ;  new  ed.,  enlarged
to  include  seven  centuries,  1872);  "Reply  to  Co-
lonso"  (1863);  "  Palmoni,  a  Free  Inquiry'"  (1864) ;
and  "  Comedy  of  Canonization  "  (1868).  His  works
have  been  collected,  with  a  memoir,  by  the  Rev.
John  II.  Hopkins,  Jr.  (3  vols.,  New  York,  1872-'5).


MAHONE


MAISONNEUVE


177


MAHONE,  William,  senator,  b.  in  Southamp
ton  county,  Va.,  1  Dec.,  1826.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Virginia  military  institute  in  1847,  and
until  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  engaged  in
engineering,  and  was  the  constructor  of  the  Nor
folk  and  Petersburg  railroad.  He  joined  the  Con
federate  army  in  1801,  took  part  in  the  capture  of
Norfolk  navy-yard  in  April  of  that  year,  raised  and
commanded  the  6th  Virginia  regiment,  was  en
gaged  in  most  of  the  battles  of  the  peninsular
campaign,  those  on  the  Kappahannock,  and  those
around  Petersburg,  where  he  won  the  sobriquet  of
the  "hero  of  the  Crater,"  and  was  throughout  his
career  noted  as  a  fighting  commander.  He  was
commissioned  brigadier-general  in  March,  1864,
and  major-general  in  August  of  the  same  year.
He  subsequently  led  a  division  in  Ambrose  P.
Hill's  corps,  and  at  Lee's  surrender  was  at  Bermu
da  Hundred.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  returned
to  engineering,  and  became  president  of  the  Nor
folk  and  Tennessee  railroad.  He  also  engaged  in
politics,  was  the  leader  of  the  movement  that
elected  Gilbert  C.  Walker  governor  of  Virginia,
and,  after  failing  to  secure  the  nomination  for  that
office  in  1878,  organized  and  became  the  leader  of
the  Readjuster  party,  which  advocated  conditional
repudiation  of  the  state  debt.  He  was  elected  U.  S.
senator  in  1880,  served  till  March,  1887,  and  was
defeated  at  the  next  election.

MAILLARI),  Abbe,  b.  in  France  late  in  the
17th  century;  d.  in  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  in  1768.
He  was  a  priest  of  the  Society  of  foreign  missions
of  Paris,  and  was  sent  to  Canada  about  1738.  He
was  afterward  appointed  vicar-general  of  Acadia.
After  the  capture  of  Louisburg  in  1758  he  re
mained  in  the  neighborhood,  hiding  in  the  woods
during  the  daytime,  and  at  night  attending  to  the
religious  needs  of  the  fishermen  that  were  allowed
to  stay  in  the  country.  On  the  conclusion  of  peace
in  1760  he  left  his  retreat,  and  labored  among  the
Indian  tribes  and  in  the  few  Acadian  villages  in
Cape  Breton  and  on  the  coast  of  Miramichi.  The
Micmack  Indians,  a  partially  converted  tribe,  at
this  time  inflicted  considerable  losses  on  the  Eng
lish  colonists,  who  found  it  impossible  to  reach
them.  The  Abbe  Maillard  was  requested  by  the
governor  of  Halifax  to  use  his  influence  to  stop
their  cruelties,  and  was  entirely  successful.  He
was  then  invited  to  settle  in  Halifax,  and  a  church
was  built  for  him  by  order  of  the  English  govern
ment,  to  which  the  Micmacks  and  scattered  Acadi-
ans  came  to  worship.  He  was  buried  at  the  ex
pense  of  the  English  authorities.

31  AIR.  Charles,  Canadian  poet,  b.  in  Lanark.
Canada,  21  Sept..  1840.  His  father,  James,  emi
grated  from  Scotland  about  1780,  and  was  one  of
the  pioneers  of  the  square  timber  trade  in  the
tributaries  of  the  Ottawa.  The  son  was  educated
in  Perth  grammar-school  and  at  Queen's  college.
Kingston,  and  studied  medicine  until  he  was
called  to  make  researches  in  the  parliamentary
library  in  reference  to  the  question  that  was  then
pending  about  the  transfer  of  the  northwest  terri
tories  to  Canada.  In  1868  he  was  appointed  by
the  government  paymaster  of  the  party  that  was
sent  to  Red  river  to  open  communication  with  the
Lake  of  the  Woods.  During  the  first  northwestern
rebellion  in  1869  he  was  taken  prisoner,  and  told
by  Louis  Riel  that  he  would  be  executed,  but  made
his  escape,  and  raised  a  force  at  Portage  La  Prairie,
which  inarched  to  Fort  Garry  and  forced  Riel  to  I
surrender  the  other  prisoners.  Through  treachery
other  captures  were  made  by  the  insurgents,  but
Mair  escaped,  and,  walking  about  400  miles  on  j
snow-shoes,  reached  Ontario.  Subsequently  he  re-  ;

VOL.  IV. 12


turned  to  the  northwest  to  recover  his  scattered
manuscripts,  but  was  unsuccessful,  and.  disheart
ened  by  the  loss,  he  abandoned  literature  and
entered  into  the  fur-trade  at  Portage  La  Prairie,
remaining  there  until  1876,  when  he  removed  to
Prince  Albert  to  conduct  the  same  business.  Dur
ing  this  period  he  contributed  to  the  "  Canadian
Monthly."  About  1883  he  foresaw  the  trouble  that
culminated  in  the  northwest  rebellion  of  1885,
and  withdrew  to  Windsor.  At  the  opening  of  the
rebellion  he  attached  himself  to  the  governor-
general's  body-guard  as  quartermaster,  and  served
with  that  corps  during  the  entire  campaign,  re
turning  afterward  to  Toronto,  and  receiving  a
medal  for  his  services.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Dream
land  and  other  Poems "  (Ottawa,  1868),  and  a
drama  entitled  "  Tecumseh  "  (Toronto,  1886).

MAIR,  Hugh,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  Milns,
Ayrshire,  Scotland,  16  July,  1797;  d.  in  Fergus,
Waterloo  co.,  Canada,  1  Nov.,  1854.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Glasgow  in  1817,  studied  theology  at  Edin
burgh,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1822.  After
being  employed  as  a  missionary  he  came  to  this
country  in  1828,  and  was  ordai'ned  and  installed
pastor  of  Presbyterian  churches  at  Fort  Miller  and
Northumberland,  N.  Y.  He  was  pastor  at  Johns
town  in  1830-'43,  and  after  supplying  pulpits  in
Brockport  and  Warsaw  went  to  Upper  Canada  in
1847  and  took  charge  of  a  church  in  Fergus  until
his  death.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  upon
him  by  the  University  of  New  York  in  1842.  He
published  separate  sermons,  and  after  his  death  a
memoir  of  him,  with  selected  sermons,  was  issued
by  A.  Dingwall  Fordyce  (1856).

MAISt'H,  John  Michael,  pharmacist,  b.  in
Hanau,  Germany,  30  Jan.,  1831.  He  was  educated
at  the  scientific  schools  of  his  native  town,  and
after  participating  in  the  liberal  agitations  in  Ger
many  during  1848-'9  came  to  the  United  States  in
the  latter  year  and  acted  as  a  clerk  in  Baltimore,
Washington,  Philadelphia,  and  New  York.  He
was  professor  of  materia  medica  and  pharmacy  in
the  New  York  college  of  pharmacy  in  1861-'3.  and
then  became  chief  chemist  of  the  U.  S.  army  labo
ratory  in  Philadelphia.  This  office  he  held  until
1S66.  when  he  became  the  proprietor  of  a  pharma
ceutical  establishment  in  Philadelphia,  and  profes
sor  of  pharmacy  at  the  Philadelphia  college  of  phar
macy.  Since  1867  he  has  been  professor  of  materia
medica  and  botany  in  that  institution.  Prof.
Maisch  disposed  of  his  business  in  1871,  and  dur
ing  1870-'81  had  charge  of  the  chemical  laboratory
of  the  Philadelphia  college  of  pharmacy.  In  1871
he  received  the  degrees  of  Phar.  M.  and  Phar.  D.
from  the  Maryland  college  of  pharmacy.  He  has
been  very  active  in  the  American  pharmaceutical
association,  and  its  permanent  secretary  since  1865,
having  charge  of  the  editing  of  its  annual  volume  of
proceedings.  He  was  also  one  of  the  committee  of
revision  of  the  "U.  S.  Pharmacopoeia."  His  origi
nal  investigations  in  technical  pharmacy  have  been
many,  and  have  reference  to  improved  processes
of  analysis,  botanical  methods,  and  chemical  re
searches.  These  for  the  most  part  have  been  pub
lished  in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Pharmacy,"  of
which  he  became  editor  in  1870.  He  has  edited
"  Griffith's  Universal  Formulary  "  (3d  ed.,  Phila
delphia,  1874) :  "The  National  Dispensatory," with
Alfred  M.  Stille  (4  eds.,  1879-'86) ;  and  "Manual
of  Organic  Materia  Medica  "  (3  eds.,  1882-'7).

MAISONNEUVE,  Paul  de  Chomedey,  Sieur
de,  first  governor  of  Montreal,  b.  in  Champagne,
France  ;  d.  in  Paris,  9  Sept.,  1676.  He  entered  the
French  army  in  his  thirteenth  year,  and  was  se
lected  as  the* leader  of  a  band  of  colonists  that  were


178


MAISTRAL


destined  for  Canada,  He  sailed  with  them  in  three
ships,  and  arrived  at  Quebec,  20  Aug.,  1641.  He
founded  Montreal  in  May,  1642,  was  installed  its
first  governor,  and  held  the  office  for  twenty-two
years.  In  1653  he  returned  to  France  and  brought
over  another  body  of  settlers.  lie  was  an  able  ad
ministrator,  maintained  great  order  in  the  settle
ment,  organized  the  militia  for  service  against  the
Indians,  and  by  his  vigorous  and  courageous  policy
gained  the  respect  of  the  hostile  tribes.  He  re
tained  office  under  the  Sulpitians  when  the  island
was  conveyed  to  them,  but  was  removed  in  June,
1664,  by  be  Mesy,  the  governor-general,  who  was
jealous  of  his  popularity  and  success,  and  sent  back
to  France  by  the  Marquis  de  Tracy  in  1665.  No
charges  were  made  against  Maisonneuve,  and.  find
ing  that  there,  was  no  hope  of  his  restoration  to  of
fice,  he  resigned  in  1669.  A  pension  was  bestowed
upon  him  by  the  Seminary  of  Paris  for  his  ser
vices  to  the  Catholic  church  in  Canada.

MAISTRAL,  Ernest  Trauquille  (may-stral),
French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Quimper,  21  May,  1763;
d.  in  Guipavas.  near  Brest,  5  Nov.,  1815.  He  en
listed  in  the  navy  in  1775,  and  took  part  in  the
war  of  American"  independence.  He  commanded
a  frigate  in  1782.  and  assisted  in  the  defeat,  with
two  "ships,  of  a  division  of  the  English  fleet  near
Porto  Rico.  At  the  conclusion  of  peace  in  1783
he  continued  to  serve  in  the  West  Indies,  and  in
1792  was  sent  to  cruise  in  the  Atlantic  and  on
the  coasts  of  New  England.  He  was  imprisoned
in  1794  on  suspicion  of  being  a  royalist,  but  was
released  after  the  reign  of  terror,  and  served  under
Villaret-Joyeuse  during  the  expedition  to  Santo
Domingo  in  1802.  afterward  transporting  troops
and  supplies  to  Martinique.  Returning  to  France
in  1804,  he  joined  Villeneuve,  and  accompanied
him  in  his  expedition  to  the  West  Indies  in  1805.
From  1806  till  1813  he  was  employed  in  several
cruises  in  North  and  South  America,  and  he  re
tired  in  1814  with  the  rank  of  rear-admiral. — His
brother,  l)e"sire  Marie,  French  naval  officer,  b.
in  Quimper.  25  Oct.,  1764;  d.  in  Brest,  17  Aug.,
1842,  entered  the  navy  in  1776,  and  served  during
the  war  of  American  independence.  He  was  a
lieutenant  at  the  conclusion  of  peace  in  1783,  and
was  ordered  to  service  in  Santo  Domingo,  where  he
remained  almost  without  interruption  till  1803,
and  held  an  important  command  in  the  fleet  of
Villaret-Joyeuse  and  Latouche-Treville  during  the
expedition  "of  1802.  He  served  afterward  under
Missiessy  during  his  campaign  in  the  West  Indies
in  1805,  "was  severely  wounded  at  the  bombardment
of  Les  Roseaux  in  Dominique,  and  retired  in  1807.
He  deserves  special  mention  for  his  generous  con
duct  during  the  troubles  in  Santo  Domingo,  as  he
saved  many  citizens  from  certain  death  by  receiv
ing  them  at  great  personal  danger  on  board  his
ship,  and  he  also  saved  much  personal  property.
In  commemoration  of  his  services  his  name  has
been  lately  given  to  a  street  in  Port  au  Prince.

MAITA  CAP  AC  (mi-tah-cah-pack'),  fourth  inca
of  Peru.  He  reigned,  according  to  Acosta,  be
tween  1225  and  1255,  or,  according  to  more  modern
historians,  from  1171  till  1211,  and  was  the  eldest
son  and  successor  of  Lloque  Yupanqui.  His  reign
is  justly  considered  as  among  the  most  glorious
of  the  incas,  as  he  governed  with  firmness.  He
promptly  subdued  at  his  accession  several  nations
that  had  been  conquered  by  Lloque  Yupanqui,  but
had  tried  to  regain  their  independence,  and.  pur
suing  his  conquests,  subdued  the  city  of  Tiahuan-
acu,  famous  for  its  magnificent  buildings,  the
provinces  of  Hatunpacasa  and  Caquiaviri,  and  the
rich  territories  of  Cauquicuro,  Mallama,  and  Hua-


MAITLAND


rina.  During  a  second  expedition  westward  he
subdued  the  provinces  of  IchiiQa  and  Cochuna,
where  lie  founded  the  city  of  Moquegua,  Direct
ing  his  march  eastward,  lie  conquered  the  territo
ries  of  Larecaja,  Sangaban,  and  Pacage,  and  then,
turning  to  the  southward,  he  took  the  cities  of
Huaycho,  Calamarca,  Caracollo,  and  Paria,  defeat
ing  at  Caracollo  and  in  several  other  encounters
the  Colla  and  Charca  Indians,  who  were  obliged
to  acknowledge  his  authority.  Returning  after  a
three  years'  absence  to  Cuzco.  he  devoted  the  fol
lowing  ten  years  to  improving  anil  embellishing
his  capital,  building  palaces  and  monuments,  and
founding  beneficent  institutions.  But  the  Charcas
having  again  rebelled,  the  inca  marched  against
them,  and,  after  defeating  them,  he  constructed
over  Apurimac  river  a  bridge  of  bejuco,  a  kind  of
wild  vine,  and.  crossing  it  with  24.000  men,  con
quered  the  provinces  of  Chumbivilca  and  Velille,
and,  passing  the  marshy  desert  of  Cuntisuyu  on  a
causeway,  he  occupied  Chuquibaraba,  Cailloma,  and
the  valley  of  Arequipa,  where  he  founded  the  city
of  that  name,  and  colonized  it  with  3,000  families
from  the  less  fertile  parts  of  the  empire.  He  was
succeeded  by  his  eldest  son,  Capac  Yupanqui.

MA  IT  IN,  Jose  Antonio  (mi-teen'),  Venezuelan
poet,  b.  in  Porto  Cabello  in  1798;  d.  in  Choroni  in
1874.  In  consequence  of  persecution,  he  emigrated
to  Havana,  and  there  he  made  the  acquaintance  of
Fernandez  Madrid,  who  taught  him  to  cultivate
science  and  poetry.  In  1824  he  returned  to  his
native  country,  and  in  1826  he  was  appointed  by
Santos  Michelena  attache  to  the  legation  at  Lon
don.  On  his  return  he,  began  to  write  poetry,  and
in  1835-'8  published  in  Valencia  two  dramas  in
verse,  which  were  favorably  received  by  the  critics,
but  are  not  included  in  a  collection  of  his  poems
that  appeared  later.  In  1841  he  began  to  publish
poems  in  the  literary  papers.  He  afterward  re
tired  to  the  valley  of  Choroni,  where  his  poetical
talent  found  new  inspiration,  and  where  he  spent
the  rest  of  his  days.  He  published  a  collection  of
his  best  poems  under  the  title  of  "  Ecos  de  Cho
roni"  (1844),  and  an  edition  of  all  his  works,  en
titled  "  Obras  poeticas  de  Jose  Antonio  Maitin,
comprendiendo  todas  las  publicadas  por  el  autor
en  diversas  epocas,  y  algunas  ineditas"  (Caracas,
1851).  The  general  tone  of  Maitin's  verses  is
plaintive,  but  his  style  is  elevated  and  pure.

MA1TLAND,  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Scot
land,  5  March,  1789 ;  d.  in  London,  Canada,  18
Jan.,  1839.  He  was  the  third  son  of  the  eighth
Earl  of  Lauderdale,  and  entered  the  army  as  en
sign  in  the  52d  foot  on  26  Feb.,  1807.  He  was
made  lieutenant,  21  July,  1808.  captain  in  the  47th
foot,  30  Aug.,  1810,  and  major,  2  Feb.,  1813.  He
served  in  Spain  and  Portugal  as  extra  aide-de-
camp,  and  on  24  March,  1816,  was  appointed  lieu
tenant-colonel  on  the  Mediterranean  staff,  and
inspecting  field-officer  of  militia  in  the  Ionian
islands.  He  was  transferred  to  the  32d  regiment
as  lieutenant-colonel,  and  served  during  the  Cana
dian  rebellion  of  1837,  receiving  the  brevet  of
colonel  on  10  Jan.,  1837.  He  gained  a  victory  over
the  insurgents  and  their  American  sympathizers  r.t
Point  Pelee  island,  Lake  Erie,  3  March,  1838,  and
there  took  a  cold  that  resulted  fatally.  He  was
created  a  companion  of  the  bath,  and  was  noted
for  his  gallantry  and  courage.

MA1TLAN1),  Sir  Peregrine,  lieutenant-gov
ernor  of  Upper  Canada,  b.  at  Long  parish  House,
Hampshire,  England,  in  1777:  d.  in  London,  30
May,  1854.  He  entered  the  army  in  June,  1792,
as  ensign  in  the  guards,  was  promoted  lieutenant
and  captain  in  April,  1794,  attained  the  brevet


MAITZ DE GOIMPY


MALARTIE


179


rank  of  colonel  in  January,  1812,  and  became
major-general,  4  June,  1814.  He  served  in  Flan
ders  and  in  Spain,  when  he  received  a  silver  war-
medal  for  gallant  conduct  at  Corunna,  accompanied
the  expedition  to  the  Scheldt,  at  the  battle  of  Nive
commanded  the  1st  brigade  of  guards,  and  for  his
services  on  that  occasion  received  a  gold  medal.
At  the  battle  of  Waterloo  he  led  the  1st  British  bri
gade  of  the  1st  division,  and  for  his  services  at  that
battle  he  was  made  a  knight  commander  of  the  bath,
22  June,  1815.  On  3  Jan.,  1818,  Sir  Peregrine  was
appointed  lieutenant-governor  of  Upper  Canada,
and  accompanied  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  his
father-in-law,  who  had  been  appointed  governor-
general  of  Canada.  After  the  death  of  the  latter,
27  Aug.,  1820,  the  government  of  Canada  was  ad
ministered  by  Gen.  Maitland  until  the  arrival  of
the  Earl  of  Dalhousie,  the  new  governor-general.
Gen.  Maitland  wus  afterward  lieutenant-governor
of  Nova  Scotia.  He  was  promoted  lieutenant-
general  on  22  July,  1830.  appointed  to  the  com
mand  of  the  70th  foot,  or  19  July,  1834,  became com-
mander-in-chief  of  the  Madras  army  in  April,  1836,
and  from  December,  1843,  till  September,  1846,
was  governor  and  commander-in-chief  at  the  Cape
of  Good  Hope.  In  November,  1846,  he  attained  the
full  rank  of  general,  and  in  1852  became  a  knight
grand  cross  of  the  bath.

MAIT/  I)E  GOIMPY,  Francois  Louis
Ed  me  Gabriel,  Count  du  (mah-eets-deh-gwam-
pe),  French  naval  officer,  b.  in  the  Castle  of  Goimpy,
near  Saint  Leger,  8  Feb.,  1729;  d.  in  Billancourt,
Picardy,  in  1792.  He  became  midshipman  in  the
French  navy  in  1746,  and  lieutenant  in  1752,  was
commissioned  a  commander  in  1772,  and  served
during  the  whole  of  the  war  of  American  independ
ence.  He  led  the  1st  division  of  the  fleet  under
Admiral  Count  de  Gnichen,  which  defeated  Lord
Rodney  off  Dominique  three  times — 17  April,  15
May,  and  19  May,  1780 — and  was  severely  wounded
in  the  first  battle,  which  he  gained  for  the  French
by  a  timely  movement.  He  commanded  a  division
of  the  fleet  that  under  Count  de  Grasse  blockaded
the  Chesapeake  bay,  and  defeated  the  English  on  5
Sept.,  1781.  He  fought  also  under  De  Grasse  in
the  battles  off  Dominique  on  9  and  12  April,  1782,
and  in  1783  became  a  member  of  the  Cincinnati
and  a  knight  of  Saint  Louis.  In  the  following
year  he  was  made  commodore,  but  retired  in  1785.
He  published  "Compte  rendu  a  Sa  Majeste  Tres
Fidele  de  Portugal  des  observations  astronomiques
et  geographiques  faites  par  J'expedition  francaise
sur  les  cotes  de  Portugal  et  du  Bresil "  (2  vols.,
Lisbon,  1755) ;  "  Remarques  sur  quelques  points
d'astronomie  observes  in  Bresil "  (2  vols.,  Paris,
1760);  "Mirage  extraordinaire  observe  avant  le
jour,  16  Juillet.  1763.  dans  les  parages  des  Cayes,
ile  de  Saint  Domingue"  (1761);  "Memoires  sur
les  forces  centripedes"(1771);  and  several  technical
works  on  the  navy  and  naval  constructions.

MAKEMIE,  Francis,  clergyman,  b.  near  Rath-
melton.  County  Donegal,  Ireland,  in  the  17th  cen
tury;  d.  in  Virginia  in  1708.  After  completing
his  academical  and  theological  studies,  he  was  li
censed  by  the  presbytery  of  Laggan  in  1681,  un
dertook  a  mission  to"  Bafbadoes,  W.  I.,  and  was  or
dained  sine,  titulo  with  a  view  of  coming  to  this
country.  Subsequently  lie  went  to  Somerset  county.
Md.,  where  he  is  supposed  to  have  founded  the
church  in  Snow  Hill,  and  thence  removed  to  Vir
ginia,  where,  through  his  marriage  with  Naomi,
the  daughter  of  William  Anderson,  a  wealthy  mer
chant  of  Acconiac  county,  he  became  possessed  of
property  and  engaged  in  trade  with  the  West  In
dies.  In  1091  he  went  to  England,  and,  after  his


return  in  July,  1692,  he  was  visited  by  George
Keith,  who  had  separated  from  the  Society  of
Friends  and  was  travelling  through  the  southern
provinces  to  promulgate  his  views.  Keith  wrote
an  examination  of  a  "  Catechism  "  that  had  been
published  in  1691  by  Ma  k  cm  it1,  who  replied  to  it
in  "An  Answer  to  George  Keith's  Libel,"  which
was  printed  and  recommended  by  Increase  Mather
and  other  clergymen  of  Boston  as  "  the  work  of  a
reverend  and  judicious  minister  "  (Boston,  1G92).
His  preaching  incurred  the  anger  of  the  Virginia
clergy,  and  he  was  seized  and  tarried  before  the
governor  at  Williamsburg ;  but  his  vindication  se
cured  the  governor's  license  to  preach  throughout
the  colony.  In  1699  he  obtained  a  formal  license
to  preach  agreeably  to  the  requirements  of  the
toleration  act,  and  travelled  from  Maryland  to
South  Carolina  to  supply  feeble  churches.  In  1707,
on  his  way  to  New  England.  Mr.  Makemie  preached
in  a  private  house  in  New  York  without  a  license,
for  which  he  was  arrested  by  Gov.  Cornbnry  and
imprisoned  for  two  months,  and  after  his  release
he  narrowly  escaped  arrest  for  a  similar  offence  in
New  Jersey.  He  went  soon  afterward  to  Boston,
where  the  sermon  that  he  preached  in  New  York
was  printed.  He  also  published  "  A  Narrative  "  of
the  affair,  which  was  reprinted  in  1755  by  Hugh
Gaine  in  New  York  and  in  Force's  "  Tracts."  Corn-
bury  wrote  to  the  lords  of  trade  and  the  planta
tions  that  Makemie  was  "  a  preacher,  a  doctor  of
physic,  a  merchant,  an  attorney,  a  counsellor-at-
law.  and,  which  is  worst  of  all.  a  disturber  of  gov-,
ernments."  In  1706  he  aided  in  forming  the  Phila
delphia  presbytery,  of  which  he  was  moderator.
Two  letters  of  Mr.  Makemie.  addressed  to  Increase
Mather,  dated  1084  and  1685,  are  preserved  in  the
library  of  the  Massachusetts  historical  society.  He
occupies  a  prominent  place  in  the  history  of  the
Presbyterian  church  in  this  country.  Besides  the
above-mentioned  writings  he  published  "  Truths  in
a  New  Light"  (Edinburgh,  1699);  "A  Plain  and
Loving  Persuasive  to  the  Inhabitants  of  Indiana
and  Virginia,  etc."  (London,  1704);  and  a  "Letter
to  Lord  Cornbury"  (Boston,  1707).

MAKIN,  Thomas,  poet.  b.  about  1665;  d.  in
Pennsylvania  in  1733.  He  was  an  early  settler  of
Pennsylvania,  and  in  1689  was  usher  under  George
Keith  in  the  Friends'  grammar-school,  succeeding
him  as  master  in  1690.  For  some  time  he  was
clerk  of  the  provincial  assembly.  He  was  the  au
thor  of  two  Latin  poems  addressed  to  James  Lo
gan,  which  were  found  among  his  papers  at  his
death.  They  are  entitled  "  Encomium  Pennsylva
nia?,"  and  "  In  laudes  Pennsylvania?  poema,  sen  de-
scriptio  Pennsylvania^,"  bearing  the  dates  of  1728
and  1729.  The  second  was  published  by  Robert
Proud,  with  an  English  translation,  in  his  "  History
of  Pennsylvania  "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1797-'8).

MALARTIE,  Anne  Joseph  Hyppolite,  Count
de  (mah-lar-tee').  French  soldier,  b.  in  Montauban,
3  July,  1730 ;  d.  in  Mauritius,  28  July,  1800.  He
entered  the  service  in  1745,  and  was  sent  in  1749  as
major  to  Quebec,  where  he  was  intrusted  almost
immediately  with  high  commands  and  perilous
missions.  He  defeated  the  English  in  several  en
counters,  and  was  wounded,  3  July,  1758,  in  the  at
tack  on  Fort  Carillon,  and  again  in  the  battles  of  13
Dec.,  1759,  and  28  April,  1760,  when  at  the  head  of
his  regiment  he  destroyed  the  works  constructed  by
the  English  at  that  place.  He  was  commissioned
brigadier  in  1763  and  sent  in  1767  to  command  in
Guadeloupe,  which  he  governed  with  efficiency  till
1780,  being  very  useful  to  the  patriot  cause  during
the  war  of  American  independence,  and  forward
ing  as  early  as  1777  men,  guns,  and  munitions  to


180


MALASPINA


MALCOLM


Washington.  lie  was  appointed  major-general  in
1780  and  lieutenant-general  in  1792,  and  was  sent
in  the  latter  year  to  Mauritius,  which  he  governed
till  the  time  of  his  death.

MALASPINA,  Alejandro  (mah-lah-spee'-nah),
Spanish  naval  officer,  b.  in  Andalusia  about  1750;
d.  in  Cadiz  about  1810.  Little  is  known  of  his
early  life,  but  he  had  acquired  a  reputation  as  a
scientist  and  a  thorough  cosmographer,  and  in
1789  was  appointed  to  the  chief  command  of  an
expedition  to  explore  and  ascertain  the  exact  geo
graphical  position  of  the  Spanish  possessions  in  the
Pacific.  The  expedition  consisted  of  the  two  frig
ates  "  Atrevida"  and  "  Descubierta,"  and  left  Cadiz
30  July,  1789,  touching  at  Montevideo  on  20  Sept.,
and  at  Cape  Horn  on  13  Nov.  It  explored  the
Pacific  coast  in  detail  and  the  natural  history  of
the  different  colonies  up  to  Acapulco  in  Mexico.
Malaspina  left  that  place  on  1  May,  1791,  with  or
ders  to  explore  the  northeast  passage  to  the  Atlan
tic,  which,  according  to  documents  that  had  been
recently  discovered  about  Lorenzo  Ferrelo's  (q.  v.)
voyage  in  1558,  ought  to  exist  at  CO0  north  lati
tude.  On  24  June  he  came  in  sight  of  the  coast  at
57°  and  entered  Bering's  bay.  discovering  at  59°  45'
an  inlet  which  he  supposed  to  be  the  passage  he
was  looking  for;  but,  finding  it  closed  by  land,  he
called  it  Port  Desengafio.  After  entering  Port
Mulgrave  and  passing  Cape  Saint  Elias,  Malaspina
was  convinced  that  there  was  no  northeast  passage
to  the  Atlantic,  and  with  Capt.  Bustamante,  of  the
"Atrevida,"  and  the  officers  and  pilots  of  the  two
vessels,  he  signed  a  declaration  that  from  Cape
Fairweather  to  Prince  William's  sound  no  strait
had  been  found.  He  now  turned  southward,  and
reached  Acapulco.  19  Oct.,  1791,  after  taking  dur
ing  the  whole  passage  observations  of  the  pendu
lum  to  determine  the  true  figure  of  the  earth.
From  Acapulco  he  sailed  for  the  Marianne  and
Philippine  islands,  touched  at  Macao,  and,  after
exploring  the  coasts  of  Australia,  returned  to  Spain,
arriving  in  Cadiz,  21  Sept.,  1794.

MALAY  ER.  Antonio  E.  (mah-lah-vare'),  Ar
gentine  author,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayres,  10  April,  1835.
He  studied  in  the  university  of  his  native  city,  and
in  1802  was  graduated  as  doctor  in  civil  and  ca
nonical  law.  He  was  successively  chief  of  the
National  department  of  public  schools,  minister  of
the  interior,  deputy  to  the  national  assembly,  and
professor  of  common  law  in  the  University  of
Buenos  Ayres,  which  place  he  still  (1888)  holds.
The  most  important  of  his  many  juridical  works
are  "  Memoria  sobre  la  ley  de  educacion  que  rige
en  la  Republica  Argentina"  (Buenos  Ayres,  1882) ;
"  Curso  de  procedimientos  judiciales  en  materia
civil  y  criminal,"  and "  Prescripcion  de  las  acciones
de  peticion  y  division  de  herencias  "  (1884).

MALBONE,  Edward  Greene,  artist,  b.  in  New
port,  It.  I.,  in  August,  1777;  d.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,
7  May,  1807.  He  was  an  illegitimate  son  of  John
Malbone,  and  was  known  by  his  mother's  name  of
Greene  till  he  was  permitted  by  act  of  legislature
to  assume  that  of  his  father.  He  early  showed  a
taste  for  art,  and  was  in  the  habit  of  watching  the
scene-painters  in  the  theatre  at  Newport.  His  suc
cess  in  painting  an  entire  landscape  scene  for  this
establishment  led  him  to  give  his  whole  time  to
art,  and  in  1794  he  became  a  portrait-painter  in
Providence,  where  he  remained  two  years.  He
then  followed  his  calling  in  Boston,  New  York,
and  Philadelphia  till  1800,  when  he  accompanied
his  friend  Washington  Allston  to  Charleston,  S.  C.
In  1801  the  two  went  to  Europe,  whence  Malbone
returned  in  December  to  Charleston,  notwithstand
ing  the  advice  of  Benjamin  West,  then  president


of  the  Royal  academy,  that  he  should  remain  per
manently  in  London.  After  this  he  resided  in
Charleston,  making  periodical  visits  to  the  north,
and  painting  miniatures  in  various  cities  of  the
United  States  with  great  reputation ;  but  his  ap
plication  to  his  art  undermined  his  health,  which  a
voyage  to  the  West  Indies  in  1800  was  unable  to
restore.  Malbone  "  had  the  happy  talent,"  says
Allston,  "of  elevating  the  character  without  im
pairing  the  likeness.  This  was  remarkable  in  his
male  heads,  and  no  woman  ever  lost  beauty  under
his  hand.  To  this  he  added  a  grace  of  execution
all  his  own."  In  temperament  he  must  have  been
near  akin  to  his  friend  Allston,  one  of  those  gen
tle  yet  strong  characters  whose  influence  for  good
is  felt  universally.  In  his  art  Malbone  is  admitted
to  be  without  a  peer.  His  miniatures  stand  alone.
Not  only  is  this  so  in  his  native  land,  but  equally
true  in  comparison  with  the  best  foreign  work —
the  work  of  Isabey,  Cosway,  and  Ross.  He  drew
with  the  utmost  correctness.  He  was  endowed
acutely  with  the  power  of  discerning  character  and
had  the  ability  to  delineate  it,  and  he  was  pos
sessed  of  fine,  delicate  taste  which  gave  a  grace  to
his  work  which  is  irresistibly  charming;  but  his
pre-eminent  excellence  was  in  coloring — perfect
harmony,  utmost  delicacy,  and  absolute  truth  com
bined.  Toward  the  close  of  his  life  lie  attempted
oil-painting,  and  it  is  in  this  medium  that  we  pos
sess  his  own  portrait  by  his  own  hand,  now  in  the
Corcoran  gallery  at  Washington.  His  miniatures
are  generally  preserved  as  much-valued  heirlooms
in  the  families  of  his  sitters,  but  good  specimens  of
his  male  portraits  can  be  seen  in  the  I5oston  mu
seum  of  fine  arts  and  the  Pennsylvania  academy
of  the  fine  arts.  Two  of  his  most  beautiful  female
heads,  portraits  of  members  of  the  Middleton  fam
ily  of  South  Carolina,  are  well  known  through
engravings  by  John  Cheney,  entitled  "Egeria"
a-id  "Annette."  Besides  portraits  he  occasionally
painted  landscapes  in  oil  and  figure-pieces,  of
which  one  of  his  finest,  on  ivory,  is  "  The  Hours,"
painted  in  London,  and  representing  the  past,  the
present,  and  the  future,  as  three  female  figures
moving  in  a  circle.  This  is  still  preserved  in  the
Providence  athenaeum.

MALBONE,  Francis,  senator,  b.  in  Newport,
R.  I.,  in  1757;  d.  in  Washington,  I).  C.,  4  June,
1809.  He  was  elected  a  representative  to  congress
from  Rhode  Island  as  a  Federalist,  and  served  from
2  Dec..  1793,  till  3  March,  1797,  when  he  was  chosen
a  United  States  senator,  serving  from  22  May,
1809,  till  the  time  of  his  death.

MALCOLM,  James  Peller,  artist,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  in  August,  1707 ;  d.  5  April,  1815.
His  ancestor,  James  Peller,  was  an  emigrant  with
Penn.  He  began  painting  and  engraving  in  1787,
and  afterward  went  to  England,  where  he  studied
at  the  Royal  academy  three  years,  subsequently  de
voting  himself  to  engraving.  About  1792  he  re
turned  to  Philadelphia  for  a  short  time,  and  did
some  work  there,  including  an  inside  view  of  Christ
church.  He  then  returned  to  London,  worked  for
the  "Gentleman's  Magazine,"  and  drew  and  en
graved  plates  for  historical  and  antiquarian  works.
He  published  "Londinium  Redivivum,  or  an  An
cient  History  and  Modern  Description  of  London  "
(4  vols.,  London,  1802-'5);  "Excursion  in  the
Counties  of  Kent,  Gloucester,  etc."  (1802-'o) ;  "  Let
ters  between  the  Rev.  James  Granger  and  Many
Eminent  Men";  "First  Impressions,  or  Sketches
from  Art  and  Nature  "  ;  "  Anecdotes  of  the  Man
ners  and  Customs  of  London  "  (5  vols.,  1808-'!!);
"  Miscellaneous  Anecdotes"  (1811);  and  "An  His
torical  Sketch  of  the  Art  of  Caricaturing."


MALCOM


MALINCOURT


181


1


MALCOM,  Howard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Philadel
phia.  Pa.,  19  Jan.,  1799;  d.  there,  25  March,  1879.
He  was  graduated  at  Dickinson  in  1818,  and  at
Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1821,  and  held
pastorates  in  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  and  Boston,  Mass.
<>om  1839  till  1849  he  was  president  of  the
college  in  Georgetown,  Ky.,  and  from  1851  till
1858  of  the  University  of  Lewisburg,  Pa.,  having
abandoned  preaching  from  failure  of  the  voice.
He  filled  in  both  institutions  the  chair  of  meta
physics  and  moral  philosophy.  He  then  removed
to  Philadelphia,  where  he  was  president  of  Hah-
nemann  medical  college  from  1874  till  1879.  The
degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  the  Uni
versity  of  Vermont  and  Union  college,  X.  Y.,  in
1841,  'and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Lewisburg  in  1858.
He  was  a  founder  of  the  American  tract  society,
of  which  he  was  vice-president,  president  of  the
American  Baptist  historical  society,  honorary
president  of  the  American  peace  society,  and  ah
active  member  of  the  American  Sunday-school
union,  visiting  nearly  every  city  in  the  United
States  in  its  behalf.  In  1835  he  was  sent  to  in
spect  Baptist  missions  in  India,  Burmah,  Siam,  and
China.  He  was  the  author  of  "Dictionary  of  the
Bible"  (Boston,  1828);  "Nature  and  Extent  of  the
Atonement "  (1829) ;  "  Christian  Rule  of  Marriage  "
(1830);  "Travels  in  Southeastern  Asia"  (2  vols.,
1839);  an  "Index  to  Religious  Literature"  (Phila
delphia,  1869);  and  several  pamphlets,  and  edited
"  Hymns  for  the  Conference"  (Hudson,  1822).  and
various  standard  religious  works. — His  son,  Thom
as  Shields,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hudson,  X.  Y.,  23
March,  1821 :  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa,,  5  Jan.,  1886,
was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1839,  studied  in  Prince
ton  theological  seminary,  and  in  1841  was  licensed
to  preach.  He  then  went  to  Kentucky,  and  on
8  July.  1842,  was  ordained  pastor  of  a  Baptist
church  in  Louisville,  but  in  1846  he  went  to  Phila
delphia,  as  corresponding  secretary  of  the  Ameri
can  Baptist  publication  society.  In  1866  he  be
came  secretary  of  the  Pennsylvania  colonization
society,  and  he  served  as  such  until  about  1877.  Mr.
Malcom  was  a  constant  contributor  to  the  secular
and  religious  press,  but  his  only  publication  was  a
tract  entitled  '•  One  Honest  Effort,"  which  has
appeared  in  eight  different  languages  and  of  which
several  million  copies  have  been  circulated  (Xew
York,  1851).  Mr.  Malcom  was  a  man  of  rare  schol
arly  attainments,  and  no  benevolent  enterprise  or
good  work  that  he  touched  failed  to  derive  addi
tional  strength  and  influence  from  his  exertions.

MALDONADO,  Diego  (mal-do-nah'-do),  Spanish
adventurer,  b.  in  Salamanca,  Spain,  toward  the
end  of  the  15th  century ;  d.  in  Cuzco,  Peru,  in
15G4.  He  came  to  Peru  with  Francisco  Pizarro,
and  participated  in  the  capture  of  the  emperor
Atahualpa,  receiving  a  large  share  of  the  silver
and  gold  that  the  latter  gave  for  his  ransom.  In
1534  he  was  appointed  alderman  of  Cuzco.  In
1537  he  was  induced  by  the  other  members  of  the
common  council  to  sign  an  act  declaring  Almagro
to  be  governor  of  the  southern  part  of  Peru ;  but
the  latter,  knowing  Maldonado  to  be  his  enemy,
put  him  in  prison,  where  he  remained  till  Alma-
gro's  execution  in  1538.  After  the  assassination  of
Pizarro  and  the  usurpation  of  the  younger  Alma
gro,  Maldonado  fled  to  Panama,  and,  returning
with  the  governor  Vaca  de  Castro,  went  to  Cuzco
and  persuaded  Ilolguin,  who  resisted  Almagro,  to
join  the  governor.  When  Gonzalo  Pizarro  revolt
ed  in  1544,  Maldonado  retired  to  Andahuaylas,  re
solving  to  remain  neutral,  but  Pizarro  forced  him
to  accept  the  place  of  chief  justice.  He  soon  de
clared  for  the  viceroy  Vela,  but  when  the  latter


was  defeated  and  killed  in  Anaquito,  in  1546,  Mal
donado  was  pardoned  by  Pizarro.  He  was  closely
watched,  however,  and,  fearing  for  his  life,  fled  and
joined  the  army  of  the  new  president,  De  la  Gas-
ca.  After  the  defeat  of  Pizarro  in  Sacsahuana  in
1548,  he  retired  to  Cuzco  till  the  revolution  of  Go-
dinez,  against  whom  he  did  good  service.  He  lived
afterward  at  Cuzco,  enjoying  his  wealth,  and  in
1556  founded  a  hospital  for  the  Indians  in  that
city.  His  estate  is  still  in  the  possession  of  his
family.  He  was  buried  in  the  cathedral  of  Cuzco.
MALE,  Job,  donor,  b.  in  Somersetshire,  Eng
land,  24  Aug.,  1808.  He  came  with  his  parents  to
America  in  1816,  and  began  to  earn  his  livelihood
by  attending  the  toll-gate  on  the  turnpike  between
Jersey  City  and  Xewark.  X.  J.  His  early  education
was  limited  to  a  few  months'  attendance  at  school
and  to  the  knowledge  he  was  able  to  acquire  while
learning  his  trade,  that  of  a  carpenter.  He  was
employed  by  the  Union  ferry  company  to  build
their  ferry-houses  in  Xew  York  and  Brooklyn  from
1838  till  1845.  He  was  the  supeiintendent'of  con
struction  for  the  Xew  Jersey  railroad  and  trans
portation  company  from  1853  till  1859,  and  built
their  docks,  ferry-houses,  and  depots  at  Jersey  City.
He  was  also  a  member  of  the  board  of  education  in
Jersey  City  in  1863-'7,  for  twenty  years  a  director  of
the  Hudson  county  national  bank,  and  its  presi
dent  in  1873-'8.  In  1867  he  removed  to  Plainfield,
X.  J.,  and  in  1869  became  the  first  mayor  of  that
city  and  was  re-elected  in  1877  and  1887.  In  1875
he  gave  to  the  Muhlenberg  hospital  in  Plainfield
the  ground  on  which  their  building  now  stands.
In  1884  he  built  and  gave  to  the  city  of  Plainfield
a  library  and  art -gallery,  to  be  known  as  the  Job
Male  library  and  art-gallery.  This  gift  is  valued
at  $25.000,  and  the  building  already  contains
works  of  art  worth  $10.000  and  about  7'.000  books.
MALIBRAN,  Maria  Felicia,  vocalist,  b.  in
Paris,  24  March,  1808;  d.  in  Manchester.  England,
23  Sept..  1836.  She  was  the  eldest  daughter  of
Manuel  Garcia  (q.  r.),  and  was  musically  educated
by  her  father.  She  appeared  early  at  several  con
certs,  and  in  1825  performed  in  London  with  the
Italian  opera  company.  In  the  autumn  of  1825
she  came  to  the  United  States  with  the  troupe  that
had  been  organized  by  Garcia,  and  here,  at  his  in
stigation  and  against  her  wishes,  she  married  a
French  merchant,  Eugene  Malibran,  on  23  March,
1826.  Her  husband  was  apparently  opulent,  but
within  a  year  after  the  marriage  failed  disgraceful
ly  in  business,  and  was  incarcerated.  This  unhap
py  development  led  to  their  separation.  In  the
I  autumn  of  1826  the  wife  returned  to  Europe  and
in  the  spring  of  the  following  yrar  made  her  ap
pearance  in  Paris,  with  remarkable  success.  She
ever  afterward  maintained  a  high  rank  among  the
vocalists  of  her  time.  In  1836  she  was  legally  di
vorced,  by  French  law,  from  Malibran,  and  soon
afterward  married  Charles  Auguste  de  Beriot.
Madame  Malibran  spoke  five  languages  with  al
most  equal  fluency,  and  was  an  accomplished  pi-
i  anist.  She  also  composed  several  ballads  and  ro-
1  mances,  some  of  which  have  been  published  and
!  are  still  occasionally  sung.  Her  forte  was  dramatic
song,  in  which  she  often  improvised  "  tours  de
force  "  with  wonderful  effect.  Her  voice,  a  mezzo-
soprano  of  uncommon  compass,  was  somewhat
weak  in  its  middle  register.  Originality,  dramatic
|  intensity,  and  personal  magnetism  aided  in  her
success.'  Halleck  paid  poetical  tributes  to  her.

MALINCOURT, Hector  Charles (mal-ang-

koor),  West  Indian  poet,  b.  in  Griffon.  Guadeloupe,

in 1703; d.  there in  1750. He  was  a  slave,  and

j  showed  in  infancy  a  strong  disposition  for  poetry,


182


MALLALIEU


MALLERY


but  his  master,  to  suppress  his  mania,  as  he  called
it,  condemned  him  to  the  heaviest  work.  A  few  of
Malincourt's  songs  having  in  some  way  spread
over  the  country,  several  rich  citizens  intervened
in  his  behalf,  and  when  his  master  refused  all
offers  for  him  they  applied  to  the  governor  of  the
colony,  who  sent  for  Malincourt,  and,  on  hearing  his
verses,  ordered  his  enfranchisement  and  gave  him
a  small  annuity  from  the  royal  treasury.  Malin
court  returned' to  Griffon  in  1741,  and  resided  on  a
small  estate  that  was  presented  to  him  by  a  few
admirers.  He  composed  many  songs  which  are
still  popular  in  the  colony.  The  verses  are  good,
the  style  pure,  and  the  composition  almost  fault
less,  although  Malincourt  could  never  read  or
write,  and  was  ignorant  of  the  rules  of  poetry.
His  songs  were  published  after  his  death  under  the
title  "  Fleurs  du  champ  de  Cannes  a  Sucre "  (2
vols.,  Basse  Terre,  1759).

MALLALIEU,  Williard  Francis,  M.  E.  bish
op,  b.  in  Sutton,  Worcester  co..  Mass.,  11  Dec.,

1828.  Hewasgrad-
uated  at  Wesleyan
university  in  1857,
received  into  the
ministry  of  the
Methodist  Episco
pal  church,  and
joined  the  New
England  confer
ence  in  1858.  For
the  next  twenty-
four  years  he  had
charge  of  many
of  the  more  im
portant  churches
connected  with
that  body,  and  was
highly  esteemed
both  as  a  pastor
and  preacher.  He
was  a  member  of
the  general  conferences  of  1872.  1876,  and  1880,
and  in  1882  became  presiding  elder  of  the  Boston
district.  He  was  elected  bishop  in  1884,  and  now
(1888)  resides  in  New  Orleans.  He  received  the  de
gree  of  D.  D.  from  the  East  Tennessee  Wesleyan
university,  Athens,  Tenn.,  in  1874.

MALLARY,  Rollin  Carol  us,  statesman,  b.  in
Cheshire,  Conn.,  27  May,  1784;  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  16  April,  1831.  He  removed  with  his  father

to  Poultney,  Vt,
in  early  life,  was
graduated  at  Mid-
dlebury  college  in
1805,  studied  law
with  Horatio  Sey
mour  at  Middle-
bury  and  in  Rut
land,  Vt.,  and  was
admitted  to  the
bar  in  March,  1807.
He  began  prac
tice  at  Castleton,
was  secretary  to
the  governor  and
council  in  1807-
'18,  and  state  at-
torney  in  1811-'13
and!815-'16.  In
1818  he  returned
to  Poultney,  and
was  a  candidate  for  congress  against  Orsamus  C.
Merrill,  who  was  declared  elected  ;  but  at  the  ensu
ing  session  Mr.  Mallary  claimed  the  election,  and


f


the  honse,  after  a  hearing,  gave  him  his  seat,  13
Jan.,  1820.  This  controversy  brought  him  into  no
tice,  and  he  was  re-elected,  and  remained  a  member
continuously  until  his  death.  In  congress  he  was
an  advocate  of  the  protective  system,  and  was  chair
man  of  the  committee  on  manufactures.  At  the
beginning  of  the  20Ui  congress  he  was  made  chair
man  of  the  committee  on  manufactures,  and  re
ported  the  tariff  bill  of  1828,  and  his  efforts  con
tributed  largely  to  secure  its  passage.  Mr.  Mallary
died  while  on  his  return  from  Washington. — Hi's
brother,  Charles  Dutton,  clergyman,  b.  in  Poult
ney,  Vt.,  23  Jan.,  1801 ;  d.  near  Albany,  Ga.,  31  July,
18(54,  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in  1821,  re
moved  to  South  Carolina  in  the  following  year,  and
was  ordained  as  a  Baptist  minister  at  Columbia  in
1824.  After  preaching  there  for  six  years  he  took
charge  of  the  church  at  Augusta,  Ga..  and  four
years  later  of  that  at  Milledgeville.  lie  was  an  ad
vocate  of  missionary  societies  when  his  denomina
tion  was  divided  on  that  question  in  1835,  and  also
expressed  himself  publicly  in  favor  of  the  temper
ance  cause  and  of  Sunday-schools.  In  1837  he  re
signed  this  pastorate  in  order  to  become  agent  for
Mercer  university,  and  during  three  years  of  ener
getic  labor  did  much  toward  securing  the  endow
ment  fund.  From  1840  till  1852  he  was  engaged
in  missionary  and  pastoral  labors  in  middle  and
western  Georgia,  and  in  the  latter  year  he  retired
to  a  farm  near  Albany  on  account  of  failing  health.
He  was  the  author  of  a  "Life  of  Edmund  Bots-
ford  "  (Charleston,  1832) ;  "  Memoir  of  Jesse  Mer
cer"  (Philadelphia,  1844);  and  "Soul  Prosperity"
(Charleston,  1860).

MALLERY,  Uarrick,  jurist,  b.  in  Middlebury,
Conn.,  17  April,  1784;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  6
July,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1808,
and  studied  law  at  the  Litchfield  law-school  and
at  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1811.  He  was  elected  to  the  Pennsylvania
legislature  in  1827,  and  three  times  re-elected,  and
was  largely  instrumental  in  developing  the  inter
nal  improvements  and  establishing  the  penitentiary
system  of  the  state.  He  was  president  judge  of
the  3d  district  in  1831-'6,  and  subsequently  prac
tised  law  in  Philadelphia  till  his  death. — His  son,
Garrick,  ethnologist,  b.  in  Wilkesbarre,  Pa..  23
April,  1831,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1850,  in  1853
received  the  degree  of  LL.  B.  from  the  University
of  Pennsylvania,  and  the  same  year  was  admitted
to  the  bar  of  Philadelphia,  where  he  practised  law
and  engaged  in  editorial  work  until  he  entered
the  volunteer  service  as  1st  lieutenant  of  Pennsyl
vania  troops.  15  April,  1861.  He  rose  to  the  rank
of  lieutenant-colonel  and  brevet  colonel,  and  at  the
reorganization  of  the  regular  army  in  1870  was
commissioned  as  a  captain  in  the  1st  U.  S.  infant
ry,  with  the  brevet  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  He
was  twice  severely  wounded,  was  kept  for  some
time  in  Libby  prison,  and  received  four  promotions
by  brevet  for  gallantry  in  action.  During  the  re
construction  period,  while  on  military  duty  in  Vir
ginia  in  1869-70  as  judge-advocate  on  the  staff  of
the  successive  generals  commanding,  he  was  ap
pointed  to  the  offices  of  secretary  of  state  and  ad
jutant-general  of  Virginia,  with  the  rank  of  briga
dier-general.  In  August,  1870,  he  was  the  first
officer  that  was  detailed  for  meteorological  service
with  the  chief  signal-officer  of  the  army.  He  was
long  in  charge  of  the  Signal-service  bureau,  and
was  its  executive  officer  until  Aug.,  1876,  when  he
was  ordered  to  the  command  of  Fort  Rice,  Dakota
territory.  There  he  made  investigations  into  the
pictographs  and  mythologies  of  the  Dakota  Indians,
which  led  to  his  being  ordered,  13  June,  1877,  to


MALLET


MALLORY


183


report  to  Maj.  John  W.  Powell,  then  in  charge  of
the  geological  and  geographical  survey  of  the
Rocky  mountain  region,  for  duty  in  connection
with  the  ethnology  of  the  North  American  In
dians,  being,  in  July,  1879,  retired  from  active
military  service  on  account  of  wounds  received
in  action.  He  received  the  appointment  of  eth
nologist  of  the  Bureau  of  ethnology  on  its  organiza
tion  at  Washington  in  that  year*  which  office  he
still  (1888)  holds.  Gen.  Mallery  was  a  founder  and
president  of  the  Anthropological  society  and  of  the
Cosmos  club  of  Washington,  and  was  chairman  of
the  anthropological  section  of  the  American  asso
ciation  for  the  advancement  of  science  at  its  meet
ing  in  1881.  He  has  contributed  largely  to  peri
odical  literature,  but  his  most  important  works,
some  of  which  have  been  translated,  are  "  A  Calen
dar  of  the  Dakota  Xation"  (Washington,  1877);
'•  The  Former  and  Present  Number  of  our  Indians  "
(Salem,  1878) ;  "  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Sign
Language  among  the  North  American  Indians  as
illustrating  the  Gesture  Speech  of  Mankind"
(Washington,  1880);  "Gesture  Signs  and  Signals
of  the  North  American  Indians,  with  some  Com
parisons"  (1880);  "Sign  Language  among  the
North  American  Indians  compared  with  that  among
other  Peoples  and  Deaf-Mutes"  (1881);  and  "  Pic-
tographs  of  the  North  American  Indians"  (1886).

MALLET,  John  William,  chemist,  b.  in  Dub
lin,  Ireland,  10  Oct.,  1832.  He  was  graduated  at
Trinity  college,  and  studied  chemistry  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Gottingen,  Germany,  where  he  received
the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  for  his  researches  on  the  tel
lurium  ethers  in  1852.  Soon  afterward  he  came  to
the  L'nited  States,  and  was  called  to  Amherst,
where,  during  18o4-'G,  he  was  assistant  professor
of  analytical  and  applied  chemistry.  He  was  then
given  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  the  University  of
Alabama,  where  he  remained  until  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war,  and  was  also  associated  in  the
chemical  work  of  the  geological  survey  of  Ala
bama.  Prof.  Mallet  took  an  active  part  in  the
war  and  attained  the  rank  of  colonel  in  the  Con
federate  army.  He  became  professor  of  chemistry
in  the  medical  department  of  the  University  of
Louisiana  in  1865.  and  later  engaged  in  the  iron
business  near  Vicksburg,  Miss.  He  accepted  in
1867  the  professorship  of  analytical,  industrial,  and
agricultural  chemistry  in  the  University  of  Vir
ginia,  which  chair  in  1872  became  that  o'f  general
and  industrial  chemistry  and  pharmacy.  Prof.
Mallet  continued  this  relation  until  1883,  when
he  became  professor  of  chemistry  and  physics  in
the  recently  organized  University  of  Texas,  and  the
equipment  of  these  departments  was  selected  by
him,  but  he  resigned  a  year  later  to  accept  a
similar  chair  in  Jefferson  medical  college,  Phila
delphia.  In  1885  he  returned  to  the  University  of
Virginia  as  professor  of  general  and  industrial
chemistry  and  pharmacy,  which  post  he  still
(1888)  holds.  Prof.  Mallet's  researches  in  pure
chemistry  include  valuable  investigations  on  the
atomic  weights  of  aluminium  and  lithium,  and  im
proved  methods  of  analysis.  In  the  direction  of
mineral  chemistry  he  has  accomplished  much,  not  I
only  by  making  analyses  of  new  minerals,  but  also
in  the  "  Laboratory  Communications  "  from  his  |
students  that  have  been  published  by  him.  separa
tions  of  rare  earths  have  been  indicated.  His  spe
cialty  is  industrial  chemistry  or  chemistry  applied
to  the  arts  and  manufactures,  and  in  this  branch
he  has  probably  no  superior  in  the  United  States.
His  extended  knowledge  of  this  subject  led  to  his
being  called  to  lecture  on  the  "  Utilization  of
Waste  Products"  in  1879-'80  at  Johns  Hopkins


university,  and  at  that  time  he  published  in  the
"American  Chemical  Journal"  a  review  of  the
i  "  Progress  of  Industrial  Chemistry"  for  the  decade
|  of  1870-'80.  At  the  request  of  the  National  board
j  of  health  he  undertook  an  elaborate  investigation
as  to  the  chemical  methods  in  use  for  the  deter
mination  of  organic  matter  in  potable  water,  with
a  comparative  study  of  the  water-supply  of  differ
ent  localities  in  the  United  States.  This  work  has
taken  high  rank  in  the  literature  of  water  analysis,
and  was  published  by  the  board  in  its  annual  re
port  for  1882.  In  1880  he  was  elected  a  fellow  of
the  Royal  society  of  London,  and  in  1882  he  was
president  of  the  American  chemical  society.  The
honorary  degrees  of  M.  D.  and  LL.  D.  have  been
conferred  on  him.  His  publications  have  been
entirely  in  the  line  of  his  profession,  and  have
been  confined  to  scientific  journals.

MALLIAN,  Jnlien  de  (mal-yan).  West  Indian
author,  b.  in  Le  Moule,  Guadeloupe,  in  1805 ;  d.
in  Paris  in  1851.  He  began  to  write  for  the  thea
tre  in  1825,  and  acquired  a  great  reputation  as  an
author  of  comedies  and  dramas.  Several  of  his
works  have  been  represented  in  New  Orleans  and
New  York.  Those  that  are  best  known  are  "  Deux
roses,"  an  historical  drama  of  the  civil  wars  in
England  (1831) ;  "  Le  charpentier,"  comedy  (1831) ;
"  Le  medecin  noir."  a  drama  representing  sceneries
of  tropic-til  life  (1832);  "Les  negres  marrons,"  a
drama  of  slavery  in  South  America  and  the  West
Indies  (1832) :  "  Saint  Denis,  ou  une  insurrection  de
demoiselles,"  comedy  (1832) ;  and  "  Le  Juif  en-ant "
(1834).  Mallian  wrote  also  several  pamphlets  on
abolition,  including  "  Condition  des  negres  dans  les
Antilles"  (Paris,  1836);  "  De  1'emancipation  par
l'education"  (1838);  and  "De  1'esclavage"  (1840).

MALLORY,  George  Scovill,  editor,  b.  in  Wa-
tertown.  Conn..  5  June,  1838.  He  was  graduated
at  Trinity  in  1858,  and  at  Berkeley  divinity-school,
Middletown.  Conn.,  in  1862,  was  assistant  profes
sor  of  ancient  languages  in  Trinity  in  1862-'4,
and  then  held  the  professorship  of  literature  and
oratory  till  1872.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Hobart  college  in  1874.  Since  1866  Dr.
Mallory  has  edited  the  "  Churchman,"  a  weekly
religious  journal  published  in  New  York  city.

MALLORY,  Stephen  Russell,  statesman,  b.  in
Trinidad.  W.  I.,  in  1813 ;  d.  in  Pensacola,  Fla..  9
Nov.,1873.  He  was  the  second  son  of  Charles  Mallory,
a  civil  engineer  of  Reading.  Conn.  When  he  was
about  a  year  old  his  parents  removed  to  Havana,
and  in  1820  they  settled  at  Key  West,  Fla.  He
was  educated  at  Mobile  and  at  Nazareth.  Pa.,  and
at  the  age  of  nineteen  was  appointed  by  President
Jackson  inspector  of  the  customs  at  Key  West.
While  filling  this  post  he  studied  law  with  Judge
William  Marvin,  of  the  U.  S.  district  court  at  Key
West,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  about  1839.
He  soon  attained  a  high  reputation  and  enjoyed
a  large  practice.  He  became  judge  for  Monroe
county,  and  judge  of  probate,  and  in  1845  was
appointed  collector  of  customs  at  Key  West.  Dur
ing  the  Indian  war  in  Florida  he  volunteered  and
served  for  several  years  in  active  operations  against
the  Seminoles.  In  1850  he  was  elected  a  delegate
to  the  Nashville  commercial  convention,  but  de
clined.  In  1851  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate
for  six  years.  His  opponent,  David  L.  Yulee.  con
tested  his  seat,  but  it  was  unanimously  awarded  to
Mr.  Mallory.  He  was  re-elected  in  1857,  and  con
tinued  to  represent  his  state  until  the  secession  of
Florida  in  1861,  when  he  resigned  and  at  once
took  an  active  part  with  the  southern  states.  He
had  removed  from  Key  West  to  Pensacola  in  1858.
During  the  greater  part  of  his  service  in  the  U.  S.


184


MALONEY


MALTBY


senate  he  was  chairman  of  the  committee  on  naval
affairs,  and  a  member  of  the  committee  on  claims.
In  1858  President  Buchanan  tendered  him  the  ap
pointment  of  minister  to  Spain,  which  he  declined.
On  the  secession  of  Florida  he  was  appointed  chief
justice  of  the  admiralty  court  of  the  state,  which
office  he  also  declined.  Jefferson  Davis  was  in
augurated  president  of  the  Confederate  states  on
18  Feb.,  18(51,  and  on  the  21st  he  appointed  Mr.
Mallory  secretary  of  the  navy,  which  post  he  held
during'  the  war.  He  found  himself  at  the  head  of
a  naval  department  on  the  eve  of  a  great  war,
without  a  ship  or  any  of  the  essentials  of  a  navy.
He  had  not  only  to  organize  and  administer,  but  to
build  the  ships  and  boats,  provide  as  best  he  could
their  ordnance  and  machinery,  and  create  a  naval
force  in  a  country  whose  ports  were  rapidly  block
aded  and  which  possessed  resources  only  in  a  crude
state.  The  timber  for  his  ships  stood  in  the  forest, ;
the  iron  was  in  the  mines,  and  there  were  neither
furnaces  nor  workshops;  the  hemp  for  the  ropes
had  to  be  sown,  grown,  and  reaped,  and  then  there
were  no  rope-walks;  he  had  no  rolling-mill  ca
pable  of  turning  out  a  2^-inch  iron  plate,  nor  a
workshop  able  to  complete  a  marine  engine.  Mr.
Mallory  left  Richmond  in  company  with  Jefferson
Davis  on  the  abandonment  of  that  city  by  the  Con
federate  government  in  April.1865.  At  Washington,
Ga.,  they  separated,  Mr.  Mallory  going  to  La
Grange,  Ga.,  where  his  family  were  then  living.
On  20  May,  18G5,  he  was  arrested  and  was  taken
to  Fort  Lafayette,  New  York  harbor,  where  he  was
confined  ten  months,  and  released  on  parole  in
March,  180(5.  He  returned  to  Pensacola  in  July,
1866,  still  under  parole,  and  resumed  the  practice
of  law,  which  he  continued  until  his  death.

MALONEY,  Maurice,  soldier,  b.  in  Ireland
about  1812;  d.  in  Green  Bay,  Wis.,  8  Jan.,  1872.
He  emigrated  to  the  United  States  early  in  life,  en
listed  in  the  4th  U.  S.  infantry  about  1835,  and  was
a  non-commissioned  officer  from  1836  till  1846,  serv
ing  through  the  Seminole  war  in  Florida  and  in  the
Cherokee  nation,  and  afterward  at  Fort  Scott.  In
November,  1846,  he  was  commissioned  lieutenant.
He  was  engaged  at  all  the  principal  battles  of  the
Mexican  war,  was  brevetted  for  gallantry  at  Molino
del  Rev,  where  he  was  one  of  the  storming  party,
and  again  for  his  conduct  at  Chapultepec,  and  was
wounded  at  the  taking  of  the  city  of  Mexico,  and
promoted  1st  lieutenant  on  6  May,  1848.  He
received  a  captain's  commission  on  22  Nov..  1854,
and  served  on  the  western  frontier  and  in  the  war
of  secession  till  September,  1862,  when  he  was  pro
moted  major  in  the  1st  U.  S.  infantry,  and  served
as  colonel  of  the  13th  Wisconsin  volunteers,  and
afterward  with  his  regiment  in  the  field.  He  re
ceived  the  brevet  of  lieutenant-colonel  for  services
at  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  and  that  of  colonel  for
his  record  during  the  war.  He  was  promoted  lieu
tenant-colonel  on  16  June,  1867.  commanded  for
some  time  the  barracks  at  Atlanta,  Ga.,  and  was
retired  on  15  Dec.,  1870.

MALOT,  Francois  Paul  (mah-lo),  French  au
thor,  b.  in  Conde  sur  Noireau  in  1770;  d.  in  Ar
gentan  in  1832.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  mid
shipman  in  1784,  became  a  lieutenant  in  1793,  and
in  1795  was  one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  squadron  of
privateers  that  devastated  several  of  the  English
West  India  islands.  He  went  afterward  to  Guade
loupe,  where  he  became  commander  of  the  navy
and  directed  the  armament  of  the  numerous  pri
vateers  that  were  sent  out  by  Victor  Hugues  (q.  v.).
Malot  held  various  commands  in  the  colony  under
the  subsequent  governors,  and,  when  the  English
took  possession  of  Guadeloupe,  remained  there  as


a  prisoner  till  1814,  and  devoted  his  time  to  the
study  of  the  colony.  He  returned  to  France  in
1815,  and  lived  quietly  on  his  estate  near  Argentan
till  his  death.  He  published  4i  Histoire  de  la  domi
nation  anglaise  a  la  Guadeloupe  "  (2  vols.,  Rennes,
1819);  "Description  du  volcan  de  la  Soufriere"
(Argentan,  1822) ;  "  Histoire  de  la  Guadeloupe  sons
le  gouvernement  cln  conventionel  Victor  Hugues  "
(2  vols.,  Rennes,  1829) ;  and  "  Principaux  faits  des
corsaires  francois  dans  les  Antilles  de  1793  a  1805  "
(2  vols.,  Arsentan,  1830).

MALOUET,  Pierre  Victor,  Baron  (mal-way),
French  statesman,  b.  in  Riom,  France,  in  1740;  d.
in  Paris,  7  Sept.,  1814.  After  holding  various  dip
lomatic  appointments,  he  was  sent  to  Rochefort
in  1763,  where  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  scheme
for  establishing  colonies  in  Guiana.  In  1767  he
was  named  sub-commissioner  of  St.  Domingo,  and
he  became  commissioner  in  1769.  During  the  sub
sequent  five  years,  while  he  remained  in  the  island,
he  collected  the  materials  for  the  memoirs  that
he  afterward  published  on  the  administration  of
the  French  colonies  in  America.  Shortly  after  his
return  to  France,  in  1776,  he  was  sent  to  Cayenne
as  governor-general,  and  took  steps  to  reform  the
administration  there  and  increase  the  number  of
colonists.  He  did  not  remain  long  enough  to  give
full  effect  to  his  plans,  yet  the  colony  prospered
greatly  under  his  rule,  and  he  is  still  considered  as
one  of  its  chief  benefactors.  He  returned  to
France  in  1779,  and  was  afterward  a  supporter  of
the  liberal  Royalist  party.  Among  his  works  are
"  Memoire  sur  1'esclavage  des  negres  dans  les  pos
sessions  fran9aises"  (Paris,  1788);  "Exainen  de
cette  question  :  Qucl  sera  pour  les  colonies  de  1'Ame-
rique  le  resultat  de  la  revolution  franchise?"
(London,  1797) ;  "  Memoires  et  correspondances
officielles  sur  1'administration  des  colonies,  et  no-
tamment  sur  la  Guyane"  (5  vols.,  Paris,  1802).

MALTBY,  Isaac,  author,  b.  in  Northfield,
Conn.,  10  Nov.,  1767;  d.  in  Waterloo,  N.  Y.,  9
Sept.,  1819.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1786,
studied  divinity  with  John  Smalley,  and  was  li
censed  to  preach  in  1789,  but  was  never  ordained.
He  removed  to  Hatfield,  Mass.,  in  1790,  and  was
appointed  a  major  in  the  militia  in  1803.  He  took
an  active  part  in  proceedings  that  were  instituted
against  Gen.  Benjamin  Lincoln  when  he  was  col
lector  of  the  port  of  Boston.  In  18()8-'9  he  was  a
representative  in  the  Massachusetts  legislature,  and
in  1812  a  presidential  elector.  From  1813  till  the
close  of  the  war  with  Great  Britain  he  served  as
brigadier-general  of  Massachusetts  militia,  with
headquarters  at  Boston.  In  1816  he  was  again
elected  to  the  legislature,  and  in  1819  he  removed
to  Waterloo,  N.  Y.  Gen.  Maltby  was  the  author
of  "Elements  of  War"  (Boston,  1812;  3d  ed.,
Hartford,  1815) ;  "  Courts-Martial  and  Military
Law  "  (1813) ;  and  "  Military  Tactics."

MALTBY,  Jasper  Adalmorn,  soldier,  b.  in
Kingsville,  Ashtabula  co.,  Ohio,  3  Nov.,  1826 ;  d.
in  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  12  Dec.,  1867.  He  served  dur
ing  the  Mexican  war  as  a  private,  and  was  severely
wounded  at  Chapultepec.  After  his  discharge  he
established  himself  in  mercantile  business  at  Ga
lena,  111.  In  1861  he  entered  the  volunteer  service
as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  45th  Illinois  infantry,
was  wounded  at  Fort  Donelson,  and,  after  being
promoted  colonel  on  29  Nov.,  1862,  received  a  se
vere  wound  at  Vicksburg.  He  was  commissioned
as  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  4  Aug.,  1863,
served  through  the  subsequent  campaigns  of  the
Army  of  the  Tennessee,  and  was  mustered  out  on
15  Jan.,  1866.  He  was  appointed  by  the  military
commander  of  the  district  mayor  of  Vicksburg  on


MAMBERTOU


MANGE


185


3  Sept.,  1807,  and  died  while  in  the  discharge  of
the  duties  of  that  office.
MAMBERTOU,  or MEMBERTOU, Henry,

Indian  chief,  b.  in  Ac-ad ia  about  1506:  d.  there,  18
Sept.,  1611.  He  was  met  in  1606  by  Marc  Lescar-
bot,  who  affirms  that  he  was  then  a  hundred  years
old,  and  who  relates  his  life  in  his  "  Histoire  de  la
Nouvelle  France  "  and  sings  his  military  exploits
in  his  "  Muses  de  la  Nouvelle  Prance."  Accord
ing  to  his  account  and  those  of  other  travellers  of
the  time.  Mambertou  was  a  brave  and  able  warrior,
with  nothing  of  the  savage  in  his  appearance  or
manners.  He  learned  the  French  language,  but
declined  to  receive  baptism  until  he  was  fully  in
structed  in  the  Christian  religion.  He  was  then
baptized  and  called  Henry  after  Henry  IV.  On  the
arrival  of  the  missionaries  Peter  Biard  and  Ene-
mond  Masse,  early  in  1611,  he  was  of  great  assist
ance  to  them,  as  he  had  acquired  an  authority  in
Acadia  that  no  chief  before  him  had  been  able  to
exercise.  He  fell  sick  just  as  his  aid  was  becoming
necessary  to  the  progress  of  the  colony  and  the
establishment  of  the  Christian  religion.  Although
for  a  time  he  insisted  on  being  buried  among  his
kindred  and  with  certain  Indian  rites,  he  finally
yielded  to  the  missionaries,  and  left  it  to  them  to
give  him  burial  where  they  thought  proper.

MAMBRE,  or  MEMBRE,  Zenobius,  French
missionary,  b.  in  Bapaume,  Artois,  France,  in  1045 ;
d.  in  Texas  about  1687.  He  became  a  member  of
the  order  of  Recollet  Franciscans,  and  sailed  for
Canada  in  1675.  He  accompanied  La  Salle  to  the
west  in  1678,  and  was  adopted  by  an  Illinois  chief
and  well  treated  by  the  Indians,  but  had  little  suc
cess  in  converting  them.  The  Illinois  Indians  hav
ing  been  defeated  by  the  Iroquois,  Mambre  was
obliged  to  fly,  and,  after  much  suffering,  reached
the  Jesuit  settlement  in  Green  Bay.  He  passed
through  the  same  country  in  1681-'2,  and  went
down  the  Mississippi  with  La  Salle,  but  he  makes
no  mention  of  any  intercourse  with  the  natives
until  he  reached  the  mouth  of  the  river,  where  he
preached  to  the  Quappa  Indians.  His  missionary
labors  were  not  successful.  His  "Journal"  de
scribing  his  voyage  in  a  canoe  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexi
co  forms  a  part  of  the  "  Etablissement  de  la  foi"
by  Chretien  Le  Clercq,  who  was  his  cousin.  On  his
return  to  France  he  was  made  warden  of  Bapaume.
When  La  Salle  sailed  from  France  for  Louisiana  in
July,  1084,  Mambre  accompanied  him,  having  spe
cial  powers  from  the  propaganda  to  establish  a
mission  of  his  order.  He  was  left  by  La  Salle  at  a
fort  in  Texas  near  Galveston  bay  with  Father  Le
Clercq  and  twenty  others.  Here  he  established  a
mission  among  the  Cenis  or  Assinais.  It  is  not
certainly  known  how  long  the  party  at  the  fort  re
mained  unmolested,  but  finally  they  were  nearly
all  killed  by  the  Quoaquis  Indians.

MANCE,  Jeanne,  Canadian  philanthropist,  b.
near  Langres,  France,  in  1606 :  d.  in  Montreal,
Canada,  in  June,  1673.  She  made  a  vow  in  child
hood  to  devote  herself  to  a  religious  life.  After
the  death  of  her  parents  she  resolved  to  labor  on
the  Canadian  mission,  and  put  herself  in  relation
with  Madame  de  Bullion,  a  wealthy  lady,  who  con
sented  to  furnish  her  with  the  funds  necessary  to
found  a  hospital  in  Montreal,  provided  she  took
the  direction  of  the  institution.  She  consented,
and  went  to  La  Rochelle  in  1641  in  order  to  em
bark  for  her  destination.  Here  she  learned  that  a
body  of  soldiers  that,  had  been  sent  out  by  the
Society  of  Montreal,  under  De  Maisonneuve  (q.  ?'.),
had  demanded,  before  embarking,  that  a  woman
should  accompany  them  who  might  nurse  such  of
them  as  should  fall  sick.  She  consented  to  become


an  associate  of  the  Society  of  Montreal  for  this
purpose,  and  sailed  with  the  soldiers.  After  land
ing  at  Quebec  she  was  obliged  to  pass  the  entire
winter  with  the  sol
diers,  who  were  en
gaged  in  building
wooden  barracks,
which  they  after
ward  transported  to
the  island  of  Mon
treal.  She  took  sole
charge  of  the  admin
istration  of  these  col
onists,  distributed
to  them  their  provis
ions  daily,  and  even
had  care  of  the  mili
tary  stores.  She
obtained  such  au
thority  over  the
soldiers  and  colo
nists  that  they

obeyed  her  like  children.  She  left  Quebec,  8  May,
1642,  and  readied  Montreal  a  few  days  after
ward.  She  decorated  the  first  altar  there  on  17
May,  and  then,  with  the  funds  of  Madame  de  Bul
lion,  she  proceeded  to  build  a  hospital  at  Ville-
marie,  of  which,  after  its  erection,  she  became
manager.  She  had  first  to  take  care  of  numerous
soldiers  that  were  wounded  in  almost  daily  com
bats  with  the  Iroqiiois,  and  as  the  town  grew  her
labors  increased.  She  went  to  France  in  1649
saw  the  members  of  the  association  of  Montreal,
who  were  thinking  of  abandoning  their  colony,
and  prevailed  on  them  to  reorganize  it.  In  1650.
after  her  return  to  Villemarie,  it  was  attacked  by
the  Iroquois,  and,  after  enduring  great  dangers,
she  was  obliged  to  abandon  the  hospital  and  re
tire  with  her  patients  into  the  fort.  Seeing  that
the  colonists  must  succumb,  if  they  were  not  suc
cored,' she  persuaded  De  Maisonneuve  to  return  to
France  for  soldiers,  giving  him  part  of  the  money
that  remained  in  her  hands  for  the  expenses  of
the  hospitals,  on  condition  that  when  peace  was
restored  lands  should  be  given  in  exchange.
During  the  absence  of  the  governor  she  did  her
best  to  keep  up  the  courage  of  the  colonists,  only
seventeen  of  whom  were  able  to  bear  arms.  The
return  of  Maisonneuve  restored  security  to  the
colony ;  the  hospital  buildings  were  repaired  and  en
larged,  and  Mdlle.  Mance  was  enabled  to  leave  the
fort  with  her  sick.  The  resolution  of  this  courageous
woman  and  the  money  that  she  gave  at  a  critical
time  to  arm  and  pay  soldiers  saved  not  only  the
island  of  Montreal,  but  the  whole  of  Canada  to
France,  which  was  recognized  by  successive  gov
ernors  in  their  reports  to  their  government.  But
the  hospital  she  had  founded  continued  to  grow  to
such  an  extent  that  she  was  no  longer  capable  of
directing  it  alone.  De  Maisonneuve  consented  to
visit  France  again  in  search  of  nuns  to  aid  and
succeed  her  in  its  management.  During  his  ab
sence  a  fall  on  the  ice  in  the  winter  of  1657  injured
her  right  arm,  and  she  decided  to  go  to  France  to
obtain  funds.  On  her  way  home  a  plague  broke
out  on  the  vessel,  and  her  attendance  on  the  sick
soon  resulted  in  her  own  prostration,  but  she  re
covered,  and  landed  in  Canada  toward  the  end  of
the  year  1659.  Although  in  feeble  health,  she  con
tinued  to  govern  the  Hotel-Dieu,  and  took  another
journey  to  France  in  1662,  in  order  to  defend  cer
tain  interests  of  the  colony  that  had  been  attacked.
After  her  arrival  she  saw  that  the  Society  of  Mon
treal  was  in  a  disorganized  condition,  and  she
persuaded  the  members  to  dissolve  it  and  cede


186


MANCO  CAPAC


MANDERSON


their  rights  over  the  island  of  Montreal  to  the
Sulpitians.  On  her  return  to  Canada  she  conse
crated  the  remainder  of  her  life  to  the  work  she
had  founded.  Her  life  has  been  published  (2
vols.,  Villemarie,  1854).

MANCO  CAPAC  (mang-ko-kah-pack').  founder
and  first  inca  of  the  empire  of  Peru,  d.  in  Peru
about  1107.  He  is  supposed  to  have  been  some
stranger  from  a  for
eign  land,  who  gath
ered  the  savage  tribes
together  on  the  bor
ders  of  Lake  Titicaca
and  persuaded  them
that  he  was  the  off
spring  of  the  sun,
and  had  been  sent  to
earth,  with  Mama-
Oclla  Huacco,  his  sis
ter  and  wife,  to  make
men  good  and  hap
py.  The  Peruvians,
according  to  their
tradition,  listened  to
his  instructions  sub
missively.  The  naked  men  who  were  scattered
through  the  forests  assembled  at  his  command,
and  were  taught  by  Manco  to  till  the  earth,  direct
the  course  of  the  streams,  and  protect  themselves
against  the  severity  of  the  weather,  while  the  In
dian  women  learned  from  Oclla  Huacco  the  art  of
weaving  wool  and  cotton,  obedience  to  their  hus
bands,  and  how  to  train  their  children.  Then
Manco  Capac  proceeded  to  establish  his  power  on
the  basis  of  religion.  He  abolished  human  sacri
fices,  taught  his  subjects  to  adore  as  a  supreme  but
unknown  God  the  great  Pachacamac  (the  soul  or
support  of  the  universe),  and  to  offer  externally
their  principal  homage  to  the  sun,  his  father,  as
a  known  and  visible  god,  the  source  of  light  and
fertility,  and,  after  him,  to  the  stars  and  the  moon.
He  afterward  laid  the  foundation  of  the  city  of
Cuzco  (the  navel  or  centre  of  the  earth),  in  the
beautiful  valley  of  that  name,  surrounded  it  with
villages,  divided  the  Peruvians  into  several  tribes,
and  placed  chiefs  or  "Caracas"  over  them,  who
governed  the  people  as  lieutenants  of  the  inca.
After  instituting  the  festival  of  the  sun,  he  raised
temples  to  this  deity,  which  he  adorned  with  gold
and  silver.  Manco  Capac  lived  to  see  the  empire
prosper  that  he  had  founded,  and  then,  feeling  his
strength  diminishing,  he  told  his  subjects  that  he
was  going  to  rest  in  the  bosom  of  the  sun,  his
father,  and  died  after  a  happy  reign  of  thirty  or
forty  years.  He  was  succeeded  by  Sinchi  Rocca-
Inca,  his  eldest  son,  whose  reign  was  signalized  by
the  same  kindness  and  benevolence.  Such  is  the
tradition  of  the  origin  of  the  incas  or  sovereigns
of  Peru.  The  empire  comprised  at  first  only  the
valley  of  Cuzco,  but  the  successors  of  Manco  Capac
extended  its  boundaries  widely,  less  from  love  of
conquest  than  desire  to  civilize  barbarous  tribes.
The  Peruvians  celebrated  the  obsequies  of  Manco
Capac  for  three  months,  and  embalmed  his  body
carefully  with  aromatic  preparations.  Looking  on
him  as  a  divinely  commissioned  legislator,  they  wor
shipped  his  memory  with  superstitious  observances.
MANCO  INCA  YUPANQUI,  sometimes
wrongly  called  MAXCO  CAPAC  II.  (mang-ko-ing-
ka-yu-pang'-ke),  inca  of  Peru,  b.  in  Cuzco  in  1516;
d.  in  the  Andes  in  1544.  He  was  the  son  of  Huaina
Capac,  the  twelfth  monarch  in  succession  from
the  founder  of  the  state.  After  the  death  of  his
brother,  Atahualpa  (q.  v.\  he  was  acknowledged
inca  by  the  city  of  Cuzco  and  the  adjacent  coun


try,  although  the  Spanish  conqueror  had  bestowed
the  royal  dignity  on  another  brother  of  Atahualpa.
who  died  shortly  afterward.  \Vhen  Cuzco  was
besieged  by  the  invaders,  Manco  defended  the
city,  and  when  lie  was  forced  to  abandon  his  capi
tal  took  refuge  in  the  mountains.  But,  imagining
that  his  conquerors  were  beings  of  a  superior
nature,  he  consented  to  receive  the  crown  of  his
ancestors  from  the  hands  of  Pi/arro  and  recog
nize  the  supremacy  of  the  king  of  Spain.  After
an  interview  with  the  conqueror  lie  made  his  pub
lic  entry  into  Cuzco  in  1534  in  a  palanquin,  es
corted  by  a  Spanish  guard,  and  was  presented  the
next  day  to  the  people  and  girt  with  the  royal  fil
let.  Not  being  able  to  obtain  the  restoration  of  all
his  rights  according  to  the  terms  of  the  treaty,  and
seeing  that  on  the  contrary  he  was  closely  guarded,
he  determined  to  escape.  Though  strictly  watched,
he  found  means  of  communicating  his  plans  to
those  of  his  followers  who  were  to  be  intrusted
with  their  execution.  His  attempts,  although
carried  on  with  great  secrecy,  were  at  first  unsuc
cessful,  but  Hernando  Pizarro  having  arrived  in
Cuzco  in  15:30,  he  obtained  his  permission  to  at
tend  a  national  festival  at  some  distance  from  the
capital.  It  was  arranged  that  the  principal  chiefs
of  the  empire  should  be  present  at  this  solemnity.
As  soon  as  Manco  joined  them,  he  unfurled  the
standard  of  war,  and  in  a  short  time  all  the  fighting
men  from  Quito  to  Chili  were  in  arms.  The  Spanish
troops  had  been  divided,  in  order  to  invade  differ
ent  provinces.  The  inca  cut  several  detachments
to  pieces,  and  then  besieged  Cuzco,  which  was  de
fended  by  170  men,  with  a  force  that  amounted  to
200.000,  if  the  Spanish  chroniclers  are  to  be  be
lieved.  He  also  sent  a  division  to  besiege  Lima,
lie  had  succeeded  in  making  himself  master  of
the  citadel  and  a.  part  of  the  capital,  when  the
arrival  of  Almagro  from  Chili,  with  a  body  of
troops,  saved  the  Spanish  garrison.  The  inca  en
tered  into  negotiations  with  Almagro,  whose  hos
tility  to  Pizarro  he  was  acquainted  with,  but  after
the  rejection  of  his  overtures  he  attacked  the
Spanish  forces,  and  was  defeated  with  much  slaugh
ter.  Almagro  afterward  proposed  to  Manco  to
unite  with  him  against  Pizarro,  but  the  inca  re
fused  this  alliance  with  scorn,  saying,  according  to
Spanish  historians:  "I  have  taken  up  arms  to  re
cover  my  rights  and  restore  freedom  to  the  Peru
vians,  not  to  protect  the  designs  of  one  vile  usurper
against  another."  Then  the  unfortunate  prince,
despairing  of  regaining  his  kingdom,  disbanded
his  army  and  tried  to  persuade  his  subjects  to
submit  to  their  conquerors.  He  fled  to  Villa-
pampa,  in  the  heart  of  the  Andes,  in  1587,  where
he  was  killed  in  a  brawl  several  years  afterward  by
a  fugitive  partisan  of  Almagro  to  whom  he  had
given  hospitality.

MANDERSON,  Charles  Frederick,  senator,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  9  Feb.,  1837.  He  was  edu
cated  in  the  schools  of  his  native  city,  removed  to
Canton,  Ohio,  in  1856,  studied  law,  and  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1859,  and  in  1800  elected  city
solicitor.  He  raised  a  company  of  three  months'
volunteers  in  April.  1801,  was  commissioned  as
captain  in  the  19th  Ohio  infantry,  served  in  west
ern  Virginia  in  the  summer  of  1861,  and  when
mustered  out  re-enlisted  for  the  war,  and  was  after
ward  attached  to  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland,
and  rose  through  the  various  grades  to  be  colonel  of
his  regiment,  of  which  he  'took  command  during
the  battle  of  Shiloh.  At  the  battle  of  Lovejoy
Station  he  was  so  severely  wounded  that  in  April,
1865,  after  receiving  the  brevet  of  brigadier-gen
eral,  he  resigned  his  commission.  Resuming  the


MAXDEVILLE


MANICAOTEX


187


practice  of  law  at  Canton,  Ohio,  he  was  twice
elected  district  attorney.  He  removed  to  Omaha,
Xeb.,  in  November,  1869,  was  city  attorney  for  six
years,  and  in  1871  and  1874  received  the  votes  of
both  parties  as  a  member  of  the  Constitutional
conventions  of  those  years.  He  was  elected  as  a
Republican  to  the  U.  S.  senate  for  the  term  of  six
years  beginning  on  4  March,  1883.

MANDEVILLE,  Henry,  educator,  b.  in  Kin-
derhook,  X.  Y.,  6  March.  1804:  d.  in  Mobile.  Ala.,  2
Oct.,  1858.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1826,  at
Xew  Brunswick  (X.  J.)  theological  seminary  in
1829.  and,  after  holding  pastorates  of  Dutch"  Re
formed  churches  in  Shawangunk,  Geneva,  and  Uti-
ca.  X.  Y.,  was  professor  of  moral  philosophy  and
belles-lettres  at  Hamilton  college  in  1841'-9".  He
afterward  had  charge  of  Presbyterian  churches  in
Albany,  X.  Y.,  and  Mobile,  Ala'.  Prof.  Mandeville
won  reputation  as  a  teacher  of  elocution,  and  pub
lished  a  successful  series  of  readers  and  "Elements
of  Reading  and  Oratory"  (Xew  York,  1845).

MANDRILLON,  Joseph,  author,  b.  in  Bourg,
France,  in  1743;  d.  in  Paris,  7  Jan..  1794.  His
parents  intended  him  for  a  commercial  career,  and
several  years  after  tlie  conclusion  of  his  studies  he
came  to  this  country  with  the  object  of  establish
ing  branches  of  a  banking-house  that  he  opened
in  Amsterdam  on  his  return.  He  went,  to  Paris  at
the  beginning  of  the  French  revolution,  joined
the  party  of  constitutional  royalists,  and,  having
been  accused  before  the  revolutionary  tribunal,
was  condemned  to  death  and  guillotined.  Among
his  more  important  works  are  "  Le  voyageur
Americain.  ou  observations  sur  1'etat  actuel,  la
culture  et  le  commerce  des  colonies  britanniques
en  Amerique  "  (Amsterdam,  1783).  and  "  Le  specta-
teur  Americain,  ou  remarques  general  sur  1'Amc-
rique  septentrionale"  (1784;  new  ed.,  accompanied
by  "  Recherches  philosophiques "  on  the  discov
ery  of  America,  1795).

MANEIRO,  Jnan  Lnis,  Mexican  clergyman,  b.
in  Vera  Cruz,  22  Feb..  1744:  d.  in  the  city  of  Mex
ico,  16  Xov.,  1802.  He  entered  the  Jesuit  novi
tiate  in  1759,  and  took  refuge  in  Italy  on  the  sup
pression  of  the  society,  but  returned  to  Mexico  in
1799.  His  works  are  "De  vitis  aliquot  Mexica-
norum,  aliorumque  qni  sive  virtute  sive  litteris
Mexici  imprimis  floruerunt"  (3  vols.,  Bologna.
1791):  "  De  Vrita  Antonii  Lopezii  Portilii.  Mexici
primum,  deinde  Valentin  Canonici "  (1791) ;  "  Joan
nes  Aloisius  Maneirus  de  Vita  Petri  Mali  Sacerdotis
Mexicans"  (1795);  "Vita  Michaelis  Gutierrii  Sa
cerdotis  Mexican!  "  (still  in  manuscript) ;  "  Relacion
de  la  fiinebre  ceremonia  y  exequias  del  Illmo  y
Exmo  Sr.  D.  Alonso  Xunez  de  Haro  y  Peralta.  Ar-
zobispo  de  Mejico  "  (Mexico,  1802);  and  "  Inscrip-
eiones  y  Epigramas  "  (still  in  manuscript).

MANGORE  (man-go'-ray).  cacique  of  the  Tim-
bus,  a  tribe  of  the  Guaranis,  South  America,  b.  about
1480;  d.  in  1532.  Xufio  de  Lara,  who  had  been
left  by  Sebastian  Cabot  (q.  r.)  when  he  retired  from
the  river  La  Plata  in  command  of  the  fort  of
Espiritu  Santo,  did  not  experience  at  first  any
trouble  from  the  chiefs  of  the  neighboring  tribes,
but  Mangore,  having  conceived  a  passion  for  Lucia
Miranda,  the  wife  of  Sebastian  Hurtado.  one  of
the  officers  of  Lara,  resolved  to  capture  the  fort
and  make  her  a  prisoner.  He  called  a  meeting  of
the  principal  chiefs  of  the  tribes,  and  explained  to
them  the  necessity  of  expelling  the  Spaniards
from  the  country.  Xotwithstanding  the  opposi
tion  of  some  of  the  chiefs,  and  especially  of  Siripo.
a  brother  of  the  cacique,  the  latter  convinced
them,  and  when  Lara,  with  the  greater  part  of  the
garrison,  had  left  in  search  of  provisions,  Mangore


presented  himself  with  a  few  followers,  and  was  re
ceived  hospitably  and  allowed  to  pass  the  night  at
the  fort.  When  he  knew  that  all  were  asleep,  he
gave  a  signal  to  his  men,  who  suddenly  attacked
the  Spaniards  with  overwhelming  numbers,  slaugh
tered  the  garrison  and  carried  away  the  few  sur
vivors,  including  Lucia  Miranda,  as  prisoners.  On
their  retreat  the  Indians  were  met  by  the  returning
Lara,  who,  together  with  the  greater  part  of  his
men,  perished,  and  only  Ruiz  Garcia  Mosquera
(q.  i1.),  with  a  few  followers,  escaped  to  Brazil.
Mangore  was  killed  in  the  battle,  and  Lucia,  who
had  been  carried  off  by  Siripo,  was  afterward  killed
by  the  latter  for  not  returning  his  passion.

MANGUM,  Willie  Person,  senator,  b.  in
Orange  county,  X.  C.,  in  1792 ;  d.  in  Red  Moun
tain,  X.  C.,  14  Sept..  1861.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Xorth  Carolina  in  1815,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1817,  elected  to  the  North
Carolina  house  of  commons  in  1818,  and  in  1819
chosen  a  judge  of  the  superior  court.  In  1823  he
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  and  in  1825  was
re-elected,  serving  from  1  Dec.,  1823,  till  18  March,
1826,  when  he  resigned,  and  was  again  elected  a
judge  of  the  superior  court.  He  was  elected  to
the  U.  S.  senate,  and  served  from  5  Dec.,  1831,  till
1836,  when,  under
instructions  from
the  legislature,  he
resigned.  He  de
clined  a  nomina
tion  for  congress
in  1837,  and  in  the
same  year  received
the  electoral  vote
of  South  Carolina
for  the  presidency.
When  the  Whigs
again  came  into
power  in  his  state
he  was  sent  to  1  lie
senate  a  second
time,  on  the  resig
nation  of  Bedford
Brown,  and  he  was
re-elected  at  the
expiration  of  the  term,  serving  from  9  Dec.,  1840,
till  3  March,  1853.  During  the  greater  part  of  his
congressional  career  he  was  one  of  the  leaders  on
the  Whig  side.  He  was  chosen  president  pro  tern-
pore  of  the  senate,  31  May,  1842.  on  the  resigna
tion  from  that  body  of  Samuel  L.  Southard,  of
Xew  Jersey,  and  served  during  that  and  the  suc
ceeding  congress.  At  the  close  of  his  last  term  in
the  senate  he  retired  from  public  life.  His  death
was  hastened  by  nervous  depression,  which  had
been  caused  by  the  death  of  his  only  son  at  the
first  battle  of  Bull  Run.  21  July.  1861.

MANICAOTEX  (mah-nee-kah-o-tex'),  Haytian
cacique,  brother  to  Caonabo  (q.  v.).  After  the  cap
tivity  of  his  brother  he  ruled  over  the  dominions
of  the  latter,  and  succeeded  in  1494  in  forming  a
formidable  league  of  the  caciques  of  the  island  to
exterminate  the  foreign  invaders.  The  natives
began  to  assemble  in  great  force  in  the  Vega,
within  two  days'  march  of  Isabella,  the  headquar
ters  of  the  Spaniards.  Columbus,  being  informed
of  this  conspiracy,  resolved  to  take  the  field,  and
on  27  March,  1495i  marched  from  Isabella.  The  In
dians,  under  the  command  of  Manicaotex,  were  in
great  numbers  on  a  place  that  is  known  to-day  as
'•  Sabana  de  Matanza."  The  battle  ended  in  the
complete  defeat  of  the  natives,  and  Manicaotex
was  obliged  to  sue  for  peace  and  pay  half  a  cala
bash  of  gold  every  three  months.  When  Aguado,


188


MANIGAULT


MANLEY


who  had  been  appointed  by  the  government  to
inquire  into  the  conduct  of  Columbus,  arrived
from  Spain  in  1495,  many  of  the  caciques  assem
bled  in  the  house  of  Manicaotex,  where  they  joined
in  a  formal  protest  against  the  admiral.  Nothing
more  is  heard  of  the  chieftain  after  that  time.

MANIGAULT,  Gabriel  (man-e-go),  patriot,  b.
in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  21  April,  1704;  d.  there,
5  June,  1781.  He  engaged  successfully  in  com
mercial  pursuits  in  Charleston,  accumulating  a  for
tune  of  about  $800,000.  Refusing  tempting  induce
ments  to  enter  into  the  slave-trade,  which  was  very
lucrative,  he  invested  his  profits  in  rice-plantations
and  slaves,  exercising  such  care  and  humanity  in
their  treatment  that  their  natural  increase  in  thirty-
eight  years  from  86  to  270  was  instanced  before
a  committee  of  the  British  house  of  commons  in
1790  in  justification  of  the  slave  system,  lie  was
treasurer  of  the  province  of  South  Carolina  in
1738,  when  the  accounts  of  the  St.  Augustine  ex
pedition  were  examined,  and  for  several  years
represented  Charleston  in  the  provincial  house  of
commons.  Shortly  after  the  Declaration  of  Inde
pendence  he  advanced  $ 220.000  from  his  private
fortune  to  the  state  of  South  Carolina  for  purposes
of  defence.  When  Gen.  Augustine  Prevost  ap
peared  before  Charleston  in  May,  1779,  he  armed
and  equipped  himself  and  his  grandson,  Joseph,  a
boy  of  fifteen,  and  both  took  their  places  in  the
lines  for  the  defence  of  the  city.  At  his  death  he
left  £5.000  sterling  to  the  South  Carolina  society,  of
Charleston.  —  Gabriel's  great-grandson,  Gabriel
Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  28  Dec..
1788;  d.  on  his  plantation,  7  Jan.,  1834.  He
moved  with  his  parents  to  New  York  in  1805,  and
the  same  year,  after  a  short  stay  at  Princeton,  was
sent  to  Paris  for  a  military  education,  and  entered
the  Lycee  imperial.  On  leaving,  in  1808,  he  de
clined  a  commission  in  the  French  army,  and  re
turned  with  the  desire  of  obtaining  a  commission
in  the  U.  S.  army.  In  1813  he  served  as  aide-de
camp  with  the  rank  of  captain  on  the  staff  of  Gen.
Izard,  who  commanded  a  brigade  under  Hampton
on  the  Canada  frontier.  He  was  brevetted  major
at  the  close  of  1813,  and  until  the  end  of  the  war
was  an  assistant  inspector-general.  He  was  offered
a  captaincy  in  one  of  the  artillery  regiments  when
the  army  was  reduced,  but,  returning  to  South
Carolina,  where  he  inherited  property,  he  devoted
the  remainder  of  his  life  to  agriculture. — Gabriel
Henry's  brother.  Charles,  merchant,  b.  in  Charles
ton,  S.  C.,  7  April,  1795 ;  d.  30  April,  1874,  removed
to  New  York  with  his  parents  in  1805.  and  two
years  afterward  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  grew  to
manhood.  He  was  at  the  University  of  Pennsyl
vania  in  1814  when  the  British  burned  Washington,
and  served  in  the  militia  that  was  ordered  out  for
the  defence  of  Philadelphia.  He  then  entered
mercantile  life,  and  after  1817  travelled  extensively
in  Asia,  Australia,  and  South  America.  He  re
turned  to  South  Carolina  in  1823,  where  he  mar
ried,  and  became  a  rice-planter.  —  Charles's  son,
Gabriel  Edward,  physician,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C.,  7  Jan.,  1833,  was  taken  as  an  infant  to  Paris,
and  again  at  thirteen  years  of  age,  and  entered
the  College  Bourbon,  where  he  completed  two
classes.  He  was  graduated  at  the  College  of
Charleston,  1852,  and  at  the  medical  college  of
South  Carolina  in  1854,  and  returned  to  Paris  to  con
tinue  his  medical  studies,  at  the  same  time  study
ing  zoology  at  the  Jardin  des  Plantes.  He  served
in  the  civil  war  as  private,  and  then  as  adjutant  of
the  4th  South  Carolina  cavalry.  He  continued
his  zoological  studies  and  was  elected  in  1873  cura
tor  of  the  museum  of  natural  history  in  the  College


of  Charleston,  which  post  he  still  holds.  He  delivers
public  lectures  at  the  college  on  his  branch,  and
is  a  contributor  on  zoological  and  other  subjects  to
the  proceedings  of  the  Elliott  society  of  science
and  art.  He  is  president  of  the  Carolina  art  asso
ciation. — Gabriel's  great-grandson,  Arthur  Mid-
dleton,  soldier,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  in  1824 ;  d.
16  Aug.,  1886,  was  prepared  for  college,  but  entered
business  in  Charleston.  In  1840  he  was  elected
1st  lieutenant  of  the  Charleston  company  in  the
Palmetto  regiment.  He  served  through  the  Mexi
can  war  under  Gen.  Scott,  and  was  present  in  all
the  battles  in  which  his  regiment  participated,  lie-
turning,  he  resumed  his  occupation,  which  he  con
tinued  until  he  inherited  a  rice-plantation  on  San-
tee  river.  S.  C.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
he  served  as  inspector-general  on  Beau  regard's
staff,  and,  having  been  elected  colonel  of  the  10th
regiment  of  South  Carolina  infantry,  he  com
manded  the  1st  military  district.  Early  in  1802
he  was  ordered  to  Mississippi,  and  served  continu
ously  in  the  western  army  under  Bragg,  Johnson,
and  Hood,  and  was  made  brigadier-general  in  1803.
His  brigade  was  frequently  engaged,  and  did  se
vere  fighting  in  the  retreat  before  Sherman.  He
was  wounded  twice,  the  second  time  severely  in  the
head,  at  the  battle  of  Franklin,  Tenn.  At  the
close  of  the  war  he  attempted  rice-planting  again,
but  without  success,  and  in  1880  he  was  elected
adjutant-general  of  the  state,  serving  in  that
post  six  years,  and  being  the  candidate  of  the
Democratic  party  for  re-election  at  the  time  of  his
death,  which  was  hastened  by  the  consequences  of
the  wound  that  he  received  at  Franklin.

MANLEY,  Henry  l)e  Haven,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Chester,  Pa.,  20  Dec.,  1839.  He  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1800,  promoted
master,  19  Sept.,  1861,  and  was  on  board  the  frig
ate  "  Congress "  when  she  was  destroyed  by  the
"  Merrimac "  at  Newport  News.  He  was  favor
ably  mentioned  in  the  reports  of  that  action,  and
promoted  lieutenant  on  16  July,  1862.  In  the  first
attack  on  Morris  island  he  commanded  the  boats
of  the  "Canandaigua,"  aiding  in  the  capture  of
the  lower  end  of  the  island.  lie  participated  in
all  the  subsequent  attacks  on  Fort  Sumter  and
other  works  in  Charleston  harbor,  and  command
ed  the  "Canandaigua"  and  four  other  vessels  in
the  blockade  of  Charleston.  S.  C.  He  was  pro
moted  lieutenant -commander  on  25  July,  1866,
served  on  the  flag-ships  of  the  European  and  Bra
zilian  stations,  was  commissioned  as  commander
on  5  April,  1874,  circumnavigated  the  globe  in
command  of  the  "Ranger"  and  the  "Alert"'  in
1878-'9,  and  was  retired  from  active  service  on  31
Jan.,  1883,  on  account  of  loss  of  hearing  and  fail
ure  of  health  caused  by  hard  service.

MANLEY,  or  MANLY,  John,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Torquay,  England,  in  1733 ;  d.  in  Boston.  Mass.,
12  Feb.,  1793.  He  was  a  sailor  from  his  youth,
settled  at  Marblehead,  Mass..  and  became  master
of  a  merchant  vessel.  On  24  Oct..  1775,  he  received
a  commission  from  Gen.  Washington  to  cruise  in
the  vicinity  of  Boston,  and  intercept  supplies  that
were  intended  for  Gen.  Thomas  Gage's  army.  He
went  to  sea  in  the  schooner  "  Lee  "  before  the  com
manders  of  the  other  cruisers,  sailing  from  Mar
blehead  near  the  close  of  November.  On  29  Nov.
he  fell  in  wyith  and  captured  the  brig  "  Nancy,"
which  had  on  board  a  large  mortar,  several  brass
guns,  muskets,  ammunition,  and  various  military
supplies.  He  captured  three  other  transports  on
8  Dec.,  and  succeeded  in  bringing  into  port  all  his
prizes.  The  guns  and  ordnance  stores  were  ot
great  assistance  to  Gen.  Washington  in  the  siege


MAXLY


MANX


189


operations.  Capt.  Manley  continued  to  cruise  dur
ing  the  rest  of  the  winter.  He  was  chased  into
Gloucester  harbor  by  the  "Falcon,"  and,  running
inshore,  inflicted  damage  on  his  pursuers.  Manley
was  given  a  captain's  commission  in  the  Conti
nental  navy  on  17  April,  1776,  and  on  22  Aug.  was
assigned  to  the  command  of  the  frigate  "  Han
cock,"  of  thirty-two  guns,  then  building  at  Bos
ton.  Of  the  captains  in  the  navy,  as  it  was  regu
larly  organized  after  the  Declaration  of  Independ
ence,  he  was  the  second  in  seniority  and  rank.
Soon  after  putting  to  sea  in  the  "  Hancock "  he
engaged,  and  after  a  sharp  conlest  captured,  the
"  Fox,"  a  British  war  vessel  carrying  twenty-eight
guns,  but  the  prize  was  afterward  recaptured  by
the  "Flora."  On  8  July,  1777,  the  "Hancock"
and  the  "  Boston,"  which  was  commanded  by  Capt.
Hector  McXiel,  fell  in  with  the  "  Rainbow,"  of
forty-four  guns,  accompanied  by  the  brig  "  Vic
tor.''  Capt.  Manley  intended  to  engage  the  ene
my,  but  when  the  "  Boston  "  sailed  away,  attempt
ed'  to  escape  and  was  overtaken  and  compelled  to
surrender  to  Sir  George  Collier  in  the  '•  Rainbosv."
He  was  confined  on  board  that  vessel  and  in  Mill
prison.  Halifax.  His  conduct  was  made  the  sub
ject  of  an  investigation  that  fully  exonerated  him
from  blame,  while  Capt.  McXiel  was  dismissed  the
service  for  not  assisting  the  "Hancock."  Having
been  exchanged,  Manley  was  again  captured  while
commanding  the  privateer  "  Pomona,"  and  held  a
prisoner  at  Barbadoes  until  he  made  his  escape,
and  took  command  of  the  privateer  "  Jason."  In
July,  1779.  being  attacked  by  two  British  priva
teers,  he  ran  between  them,  and  poured  a  broad
side  into  both  at  once,  which  compelled  them  to
strike  their  colors.  In  September.  1782.  Capt.
Manley  was  placed  in  command  of  the  "Hague"
frigate,  and  sailed  for  the  West  Indies.  After
calling  at  Martinique  his  vessel  was  descried  by  a
British  seventy-four,  which  gave  chase.  To  avoid
capture  he  ran  his  ship  aground  on  a  sand-bar.
Manley  succeeded  in  getting  his  vessel  off  the
bank.  and.  firing  thirteen  guns  as  a  signal  of  defi
ance,  made  his  escape.  This  occurrence  took  place
after  the  preliminaries  of  peace  had  been  signed,
and  ended,  as  Capt.  Mauley's  first  exploit  had  be
gun,  the  regular  naval  operations  of  the  Revolu
tion.  After  Mauley's  return  to  Boston,  where  he
was  received  with  distinguished  honors  by  the  citi
zens,  charges  brought  against  him  by  his  subordi
nate  officers  were  investigated,  and  so  far  justified
that  he  was  not  retained  on  the  naval  establish
ment  after  the  peace.

MANLY,  Charles,  governor  of  North  Carolina,
b.  in  Chatham  county,  X.  C.,  13  May,  1795:  d.  in
Raleigh.  X.  C..  1  May,  1871.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  North  Carolina  in  1814.  stud
ied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  181 G.  In
1823  he  was  appointed  reading-clerk  of  the  state
house  of  commons,  and  also  clerk  of  the  commis
sion  at  Washington  for  the  adjudication  of  claims
against  the  British  government  for  property  taken
in  the  war  of  1812.  In  1830  he  became  principal
clerk  of  the  house  of  commons,  which  office  he
held  by  successive  elections  till  1848,  when  he  was
elected  governor.  In  1850  he  was  nominated  again
by  the  Whig  convention,  but  was  defeated. — His
brother,  Basil,  clergyman,  b.  in  Chatham  county,
X.  C.,  28  Jan.,  1798;  d.  in  Greenville,  S.  C.,  21
Dec.,  1868.  was  regularly  licensed  as  a  Baptist
preacher  in  1818.  He  was  graduated  at  South
Carolina  college  in  1821,  ordained  in  March,
1822,  and  was  pastor  of"  churches  in  Edgefield
Court-House,  and  then  Charleston.  There  he
gained  a  high  reputation  as  a  preacher,  and  exert-


i  ed  himself  to  promote  missions  and  education.  In
j  1837  he  resigned  his  pastorate  on  being  chosen
!  president  of  the  University  of  Alabama,  which  post
he  relinquished  in  1855  on  account  of  failing
j  health,  and  again  became  pastor  of  a  church  in
j  Charleston.  Subsequently  he  engaged  in  mission-
i  ary  travels  throughout  Alabama,  and  was  for  some
j  time  a  pastor  in  Montgomery.  Dr.  Manly  led  in
the  movement  that  resulted  in  the  organization  of
!  the  southern  Baptist  convention  in  1845,  and  in
the  effort  to  establish  and  maintain  the  South
ern  Baptist  theological  seminary,  which  was  opened
at  Greenville,  S.  C.,  in  1859.  He  was  the  author
of  occasional  sermons  and  addresses,  and  with
his  son  Basil  published  "The  Baptist  Psalmody"
(Charleston,  1850).  A  "  Memoir,"  by  James  P.
Boyce,  has  been  published  (1809). — Another  broth
er.  Matthias  Evans,  lawyer,  b.  in  Chatham
county,  X.  C.,  13  April.  1800 ;  d.  in  Xew  Berne,
X.  C.,"  16  July,  1881.  was  graduated  at  the  Uni
versity  of  North  Carolina  in  1824,  studied  law  with
his  brother  Charles,  and.  after  admission  to  the
bar,  settled  in  Xew  Berne.  He  was  a  member
of  the  state  house  of  commons  in  1834-'5,  was
elected  in  1840  a  judge  of  the  superior  court,  and
filled  that  office  till  1860,  when  he  was  chosen  a
justice  of  the  supreme  court.  This  post  he  re
signed  at  the  close  of  the  civil  war.  Soon  after
the  termination  of  hostilities  he  was  elected  by  the
legislature  to  represent  the  state  in  the  U.  S.  sen
ate,  but  was  not  allowed  to  take  his  seat.  He  con
tinued  to  practise  law  at  Xew  Berne,  and  was  sub
sequently  chosen  county  judge. — Basil's  son,  Basil,
clergyman,  b.  in  Edgefield  county,  S.  C.,  19  Dec.,
1825.  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Alabama
in  1843,  and  studied  theology  first  at  Newton,  and
then  at  Princeton  seminary,  where  he  was  gradu
ated  in  1847.  He  was  ordained  as  a  Baptist  min
ister  at  Tuscaloosa,  Ala.,  30  Jan..  1848.  and,  after
preaching  at  Providence  and  Tuscaloosa  succes
sively,  became  pastor  of  the  1st  church  in  Rich
mond,  Va.,  in  1850.  In  1854  he  resigned  on  ac
count  of  failing  health,  and  accepted  the  presidency
of  the  Richmond  female  institute.  On  the  organi
zation  of  the  Southern  Baptist  theological  seminary
at  Greenville.  S.  C.,  in  1859,  he  became  one  of  the
original  professors,  taking  the  chair  of  biblical
introduction  and  Old  Testament  interpretation.
In  1871  he  accepted  the  presidency  of  Georgetown
college,  Ky..  and  occupied  that  post  till  1879.  when
he  again  became  a  professor  in  the  Southern  Bap
tist  seminary,  which  had  been  removed  to  Louis
ville,  Ky.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
the  University  of  Alabama  in  1859.  and  that  of
LL.  D.  from  the  Agricultural  college  at  Auburn,
Ala.,  in  1874.  Dr.  Manly  is  the  editor  of  the  "  Kind
Words  Teacher"  for  Sunday-schools,  published  in
Atlanta.  Ga.,  and  author  of  "A  Call  to  the  Minis
try"  (Philadelphia,  1867).

MANN,  Abijah,  congressman,  b.  in  Herkimer
county,  X.  Y.,  24  Sept.,  1793:  d.  in  Auburn,  X.  Y.,
6  Sept.,  1868.  He  was  educated  in  the  public
schools,  and  was  first  a  teacher  and  then  a  trades
man.  He  early  entered  politics  as  a  Republican  of
the  Tompkins  school,  held  several  local  offices  pre
vious  to  1828.  and  at  that  date  became  a  member
of  the  legislature,  and  obtained  notoriety  by  his
hostility  to  the  proposed  Chenango  canal.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Jackson  Democrat  in  1832,
served  till  1837,  and  was  appointed  one,  of  the  com
mittee  to  investigate  the  affairs  of  the  U.  S.  bank.
He  went  to  Philadelphia,  and.  on  being  denied  ac
cess  to  the  institution,  procured  laborers,  and  sent
them  to  excavate  their  way  under  the  building.
This  step  induced  the  officers  to  allovr  his  entrance.


190


MANN


MANN


He  was  in  the  New  York  legislature  in  1837,  and
subsequently,  removing  to  New  York  city,  opened
a  law-office,  represented  Queens  county  in  the  legis
lature,  and  the  next  year  was  an  unsuccessful  can
didate  for  attorney-general  in  the  first  Republican
canvass  that  was  made  in  New  York  state,  lie  was
again  defeated  as  the  candidate  of  the  same  party
for  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1857,  and  after  this  event
retired  from  public  life.

MANN,  Ambrose  Dudley,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Hanover  Court-house,  Va.,  20  April,  1801.  lie  was
educated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  but  re
signed  before  he  was  graduated,  was  consul  to
Bremen  in  1842,  and  was  appointed  to  negotiate
commercial  treaties  with  Hanover,  Oldenburg,  and
Mecklenburg  in  1845,  accredited  to  all  the  Ger
man  states,  except  Prussia,  for  the  same  object  in
1847,  and  became  commissioner  to  Hungary  in

1849.  He  was  U.  S.  minister  to  Switzerland  in

1850,  and  negotiated  a  reciprocity  treaty. On  re
turning  home he became assistant secretary  of
state,  serving  till  1856. Having  devoted  himself
especially  to  the  development  of  the  material  in
terests  of  the  southern  states,  he  was  sent  to  Eu
rope  by  the  Confederate  government  on  a  special
mission,  in  which  he  was  subsequently  joined  by
John  Slidell  and  James  M.  Mason. Since  the  civil
war  he  has  resided  in  Prance,  where  he  has  been
engaged in the preparation of his "Memoirs,"
which  are  now  ready  for  publication  (1888).

MANN,  Cyrus,  clergyman,  b.  in  Orford,  N.  11,.

3  April,  1785  :  d.  in  Stoughton,  Mass.,  9  Feb.,  1859.
He  was graduated  at Dartmouth in 1800,  and
was  tutor  there  in  1809-'14. He  was  pastor  of  a
Congregational  church  in  Westminster,  Mass.,  in
1815-'4l,  at  Plymouth  for  the  next  three  years,
and  in  1852-'6  officiated  at  North  Falmouth.  Mass.
He  published  "  An  Epitome  of  the  Evidences  of
Christianity,"  "History  of  the  Temperance  Refor
mation,"  and  "Memoir  of  Myra  W.  Allen."

MANN,  Horace,  educator,  b.  in  Franklin,  Mass.,

4  May,  1796;  d.  in  Yellow  Springs,  Ohio,  2  Aug.,
1859. His  father  was  a  farmer  in  limited cir
cumstances, and
the  son  was  forced
to  procure  by  his
own  exertions  the
means  of  obtain
ing  an  education.
He earned his
school-books  when
a  child  by  braid
ing  straw," and  his
severe  and  frugal
life taught him
habits  of self-re
liance and inde
pendence. From
ten  years  of  age  to
twenty  he  had  nev
er  more  than six
weeks' schooling
during  any year,
and he describes
his  instructors  as

"  very  good  people,  but  very  poor  teachers."  He
was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1819.  and  the  theme  of
his  oration,  "  The  Progressive  Character  of  the  Hu
man  Race,"  foreshadowed  his  subsequent  career.
After  his  graduation  he  was  tutor  in  Latin  and
Greek  in  Brown,  entered  the  Litchfield,  Conn.,  law-
school  in  1821,  and  in  1823  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  opening  an  office  in  Dedham,  Mass.  He  was
elected  to  the  legislature  in  1827,  and  in  that  body
was  active  in  the  interests  of  education,  public


charities,  and  laws  for  the  suppression  of  intem
perance  and  lotteries.  He  established  through  his
personal  exertions  the  State  lunatic  asylum  at
Worcester,  and  in  1833  was  chairman  of  its  board
of  trustees.  He  continued  to  be  returned  to  the
legislature  as  representative  from  Dedham  till  his
removal  to  Boston  in  1833,  when  he  entered  into
partnership  with  Edward  G.  Loring.  In  the  prac
tice  of  his  profession  he  adopted  the  principle
never  to  take  the  unjust  side  of  any  cause,  and  lie
is  said  to  have  gained  four  fifths  of  the  cases  in
which  he  was  engaged,  the  influence  that  hi-  ex
erted  over  the  juries  being  due  in  a  great  measure
to  the  confidence  that  all  felt  in  his  honesty  of
purpose.  He  was  elected  to  the  state  senate  from
Boston  in  1833,  was  its  president  in  1830-'7,  and
from  the  latter  year  til!  1848  was  secretary  of  the
Massachusetts  board  of  education.  While  in  the
legislature  he  was  a  member  and  part  of  the  time
chairman  of  the  committee  for  the  revision  of  the
state  statutes,  and  a  large  number  of  salutary  pro
visions  were  incorporated  into  the  code  at  his  sug
gestion.  After  their  enactment  he  was  appointed
one  of  the  editors  of  the  work,  and  prepared  its
marginal  notes  and  its  references  to  judicial  de
cisions.  On  entering  on  his  duties  as  secretary  to
the  Massachusetts  board  of  education  he  withdrew
from  all  other  professional  or  business  engage
ments  and  from  politics.  He  introduced  a  thor
ough  reform  into  the  school  system  of  the  state,
procuring  the  adoption  of  extensive  changes  in
the  school  law,  establishing  normal  schools,  and
instituting  county  educational  conventions.  He
ascertained  the  actual  condition  of  each  school  by
"  school  registers,"  and  from  the  detailed  reports
of  the  school  committees  made  valuable  abstracts
that  he  embodied  in  his  annual  reports.  Under
the  auspices  of  the  board,  but  at  his  own  expense,
he  went  to  Europe  in  1843  to  visit  schools,  espe
cially  in  Germany,  and  his  seventh  annual  report,
published  after  his  return,  embodied  the  results  of
his  tour.  Many  editions  of  this  report  were  print
ed,  not  only  in  Massachusetts,  but  in  other  states,
in  some  cases  by  private  individuals  and  in  others
by  legislatures,  and  several  editions  were  issued  in
England.  By  his  advocacy  of  the  disuse  of  cor
poral  punishment  in  school  discipline  he  was  in
volved  in  a  controversy  with  some  of  the  Boston
teachers  that  resulted  in  the  adoption  of  his  views.
By  his  lectures  and  writings  he  awakened  an  in
terest  in  the  cause  of  education  that  had  never
before  been  felt.  He  gave  his  legal  opinions  gra
tuitously,  superintended  the  erection  of  a  few
buildings,  and  drew  plans  for  many  others.  In  his
"  Supplementary  Report  "  (1848)  he  said  :  "  From
the  time  I  accepted  the  secretaryship  in  June,  1837,
until  May,  1848,  when  I  tendered  my  resignation
of  it,  I  labored  in  this  cause  an  average  of  not  less
than  fifteen  hours  a  day;  from  the  beginning  to
the  end  of  this  period  I  never  took  a  single  day  for
relaxation,  and  months  and  months  together  passed
without  my  withdrawing  a  single  evening  to  call
upon  a  friend."  In  the  spring  of  1848  he  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  to  fill  the  vacancy
caused  by  the  death  of  John  Quincy  Adams.  His
first  speech  in  that  body  was  in  advocacy  of  its
right  and  duty  to  exclude  slavery  from  the  terri
tories,  and  in  a  letter  in  December  of  that  year  he
said  :  "I  think  the  country  is  to  experience  serious
times.  Interference  with  slavery  will  excite  civil
commotion  in  the  south.  But  it  is  best  to  inter
fere.  Now  is  the  time  to  see  whet  her  the  Union  is
a  rope  of  sand  or  a  band  of  steel."  Again  he  said :
"  I  consider  no  evil  as  great  as  slavery,  and  I  would
pass  the  Wilmot  proviso  whether  the  south  rebel


MANX


MANNING


191


or  not."  During  the  first  session  he  volunteered
as  counsel  for  Drayton  and  Sayres,  who  were  in
dicted  for  stealing  seventy-six  slaves  in  the  District
of  Columbia,  and  at  the  trial  was  engaged  for
twenty-one  successive  days  in  their  defence.  In
1850  he  was  engaged  in  a  controversy  with  Daniel
Webster  in  regard  to  the  extension  of  slavery  and
the  fugitive-slave  law.  Mann  was  defeated  by  a
single  vote  at  the  ensuing  nominating  convention
by  Mr.  Webster's  supporters :  but,  on  appealing  to
the  people  as  an  independent  anti-slavery  candi
date,  he  was  re-elected,  serving  from  April,  1848,
till  March.  1853.  In  September,  1852.  he  was  nomi
nated  for  governor  of  Massachusetts  by  the  Free-
soil  party,  and  the  same  day  was  chosen  president  I
of  Antioch  college,  Yellow  Springs.  Ohio.  Failing
in  the  election  for  governor,  he  accepted  the  presi
dency  of  the  college,  in  which  he  continued  until
his  death.  He  carried  that  institution  through  pe
cuniary  and  other  difficulties,  and  satisfied  himself
of  the  practicality  of  co-education.  His  death
was  hastened  by  his  untiring  labors  in  his  office.
He  published,  besides  his  annual  reports,  his  lec
tures  on  education,  and  his  voluminous  controver
sial  writings,  "  A  Few  Thoughts  for  a  Young  Man "
(Boston,  1850);  "Slavery:  Letters  and  Speeches"
(1851);  "Powers  and  Duties  of  Woman"  (1853);
and  "Sermons"  (1861).  See  "Life  of  Horace
Mann,"  by  his  wife  (18G5) ;  "  Life  and  Complete
Works  of  Horace  Mann  "  (2  vols.,  Cambridge.  1809) :
and  "Thoughts  selected  from  the  Writings  of
Horace  Mann  "  (1869).  His  lectures  on  education
were  translated  into  French  by  Eugene  de  Guer,
under  the  title  of  "  De  1'importance  do  1'education
dans  une  republique,"  with  a  preface  and  biograph
ical  sketch  by  Edouard  R.  L.  Laboulaye  (Paris,
1873). — His  second  wife,  Mary  Tyler  (PEABODY),
author,  b.  in  Cambridgeport,  Mass..  16  Nov..  1806 ;
d.  in  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass..  11  Feb.,  1887,  was  a
daughter  of  Dr.  Nathaniel  Peabody.  She  resided
in  Salem  during  her  youth,  and  afterward  lived
for  the  most  part  in  or  near  Boston.  During
her  husband's  life  she  shared  in  all  his  benevo
lent  and  educational  work,  and  her  familiarity
with  modern  languages  enabled  her  to  assist  him
greatly  in  his  studies  of  foreign  reforms.  Her
writings,  especially  those  on  the  kindergarten  sys
tem,  with  her  sister,  Elizabeth  Palmer  Peabody.  are
distinguished  for  vigor  of  thought  and  felicity  of
expression.  She  published  "  Flower  People  "  (1838):
"  Christianity  in  the  Kitchen,  a  Physiological  Cook-
Book  "  (Boston,  1857) :  "  Culture  in  Infancy,"  with
Elizabeth  Palmer  Peabody  (1863) ;  "  Life  of  Horace
Mann  "  (18(35) ;  and  "  Juanita,  a  Romance  of  Real
Life  in  Cuba."  published  after  her  death  (1887).

MANN,  James,  physician.  b.inWrentham,  Mass..
22  July.  1759;  d.  on  Governor's  island,  N.  Y.,  7
Nov.,  1832.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1776,
studied  medicine,  and  served  as  surgeon  for  three
years  in  the  Revolutionary  army,  and  visited  Shays's
camp  during  the  rebellion  of  1786-'7,  in  order  to
report  to  Gen.  William  Shepard.  He  subsequently
settled  in  New  York,  and  practised  there  till  the
beginning  of  the  war  of  1812,  when  he  joined  the
17.  S.  army  as  hospital  surgeon,  and  was  afterward
in  charge  of  the  medical  department  on  the  north
ern  frontier.  After  the  peace  he  was  retained  as
S)st-surgeon.  and  became  assistant  surgeon  in  1821.
e  was  a  member  of  the  Society  of  the  Cincin
nati.  Yale  gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1782.
and  Brown  the  same  in  1783,  and  he  was  a  fellow
of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences.  He
published  two  medical  treatises  (New  York,  1804)
that  gained  prizes,  and  "  Medical  Sketches  of  the
Campaigns  of  1812-'14  (New  York,  1816).


MANN,  William  Benson,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bur
lington  county,  N.  J..  27  Oct.,  1816!  He  was  edu
cated  under  his  father.  Rev.  William  Mann,  who
for  many  years  was  at  the  head  of  a  private  school
in  Philadelphia,  read  law,  and  in  1838  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar.  He  early  engaged  in  politics,
and  in  1851-'6  was  assistant  district  attorney  of
Philadelphia.  He  was  then  nominated  for  the  dis
trict  attorneyship  against  Lewis  C.  Cassidy.  The
latter  was  returned,  but  Mr.  Mann  contested  the
election  and  secured  the  office,  which  he  retained
by  successive  re-elections  until  1868 ;  and  he  was
again  elected  in  1871  for  a  further  term  of  three
years.  Ilis  abilities  as  a  prosecuting  officer  were  of
the  highest  order,  and  won  for  him  a  wide  reputa
tion.  For  many  years  Mr.  Mann  was  a  prominent
figure  in  Pennsylvania  politics.  As  a  delegate  to
the  Republican  national  convention  in  1860,  he  op
posed  Simon  Cameron  as  a  presidential  candidate,
and  did  much  to  bring  about  the  nomination  of
Mr.  Lincoln.  His  services  as  a  public  speaker,  dur
ing  the  war  and  since,  have  been  in  great  demand.
In  1861  he  organized  the  2d  regiment  of  Pennsyl
vania  reserves,  which  he  commanded  from  April
until  November  of  that  year.  Since  1874  he  has
been  prothonotary  of  Philadelphia.

MANN,  William  Julius,  theologian,  b.  in
Stuttgart.  Germany,  29  May,  1819.  He  received
his  classical  training  at  Stuttgart,  studied  theology
at  the  University  of  Tubingen,  and  was  ordained
to  the  Lutheran  ministry  in  1841.  He  came  to  this
country  in  1845  with  Dr.  Philip  Schaff.  whose  in
timate  friend  he  has  been  for  years.  In  1850  he
became  assistant  pastor  of  St.  Michael's  and  Zicn's
congregation  in  Philadelphia,  and  from  1863  till
1884  he  was  pastor,  retiring  in  the  latter  year,  as
pastor  emeritus,  in  order  to  devote  his  time  to
literary  labors.  He  has  been  professor  of  Hebrew
ethics  and  symbolics  in  the  Lutheran  theological
seminary  at  Philadelphia  since  its  establishment
in  1864.  He  received  the  honorary  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Pennsylvania  college  in  1857.  Dr.  Mann  is  a
ready  writer  and  an  eloquent  pulpit  orator.  He
enjoys  a  national  reputation  as  an  oriental  scholar,
especially  in  Hebrew.  He  was  the  chairman  of  the
committee  of  the  ministerium  of  Pennsylvania  in
1866  that  reported  favorably  for  the  organization
of  the  general  council,  and  in  the  same  year,  with
others,  he  issued  the  fraternal  address  that  called
all  conservative  Lutheran  synods  to  Reading  for
the  purpose  of  organizing  the  new  body.  He  is
the  author  of  "  Plea  for  the  Augsburg  Confession  "
(Philadelphia.  1856);  "Lutheranism  in  America"
(1857):  "Luther's  Small  Catechism  Explained.''
with  Dr.  Gottlob  F.  Krotel  (1863);  an  abridg
ment  of  Schmid's  "  System  of  Christian  Ethics  "
(1872);  "  Vergangene  Tagen,  aus  den  Zeiten  Miih-
lenbergs "  (Allentown,  1879);  "The  Lutheran
Church  and  its  Confessions"  (1880);  "  Heilsbot-
schaft."  a  volume  of  sermons  (Philadelphia.  1881);
"  Das  Buch  der  Biicher  und  seine  Geschichte "
(Reading,  1885) ;  and  •'  Life  and  Times  of  Henry
Melchior  Miihlenberg"  (Philadelphia,  1887).  He
has  also  assisted  in  editing,  with  notes,  "  Halle'sehe
Nachrichten."  He  writes  the  editorials  of  "  Herold
und  Zeitschrift."  a  German  weekly  published  at
Allentown.  and  frequent  articles  for  periodicals.

MANNING,  Daniel,  secretary  of  the  treasury,
b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y..  16  May.  1831 ;  d.  there.  24  Dec..
1887.  He  was  educated  in  the  public  schools  un
til  his  twelfth  year,  when  he  entered  the  office  of
the  Albany  "  Argus,"  rose  through  the  various
j  grades  to  manager,  and  in  1873  became  president
of  the  company.  He  had  also  become  director  in
several  savings  and  city  banks,  was  vice-president


192


MANNING


MANNING


in  1881,  and  president  the  next  year,  of  the  Na
tional  commercial  bank  of  Albany,  and  was  in
terested  in  the  Susquehanna  and  Albany  railroad.
He  became  active  in  politics  about  1872,  was  a
member  of  the  New  York  state  Democratic  con
ventions  from  1874  till  1884,  and  of  the  Democratic
state  committee  from  the  former  date  till  1885,
being  its  secretary  in  1879-'80,  and  chairman  in
1881-'4.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Demo
cratic  conventions  of  1876,  1880,  and  1884,  serving
as  chairman  of  that  body  in  1880,  and  of  the  New
York  delegation  to  the  convention  of  1884.  He
was  appointed  secretary  of  the  treasury  by  Presi
dent  Cleveland  in  March,  1885,  and  resigned  in
April,  1887.  In  October  of  the  latter  year  he  be
came  president  of  the  Bank  of  New  York.

MANNING,  Jacob  Merrill,  clergyman,  b.  in
Greenwood.  N.  Y.,  31  Dec.,  1824 ;  d.  in  Portland,
Me.,  29  Nov.,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst
in  1850,  studied  theology  at  Andover,  and  was  or
dained  in  1854  as  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church
at  Medford,  Mass.  In  1857  he  became  assistant
pastor  of  Old  South  church,  Boston,  Mass.,  and,
succeeding  to  the  pastorate  in  1872,  held  the  post
until  he  resigned  and  became  pastor  emeritus.
He  was  chaplain  to  the  Massachusetts  state  senate
in  1858-'9,  chaplain  to  the  43d  Massachusetts  regi
ment  in  1862-'3,  a  member  of  the  Boston  school
board,  and  overseer  of  Harvard  in  1860-'6,  trustee
of  the  State  library  in  1865-'82,  and  lecturer  at
Andover  theological  seminary  in  1866-'72.  He  was
held  in  high  repute  as  a  public  speaker,  and  until
his  pastoral  duties  compelled  him  to  decline  other
engagements  his  services  were  in  great  demand  in
the  lecture-field.  Among  his  popidar  lectures  was
one  on  Samuel  Adams,  and  among  his  orations  the
one  that  he  delivered  in  May,  1861,  on  the  raising
of  the  National  flag  upon  the  steeple  of  the  Old
South  church,  and  his  eulogy  on  Henry  Wilson
at  the  state-house,  Boston,  in  1875.  He  published
numerous  sermons  and  addresses.

MANNING,  James,  educator,  b.  in  Elizabeth,
N.  J..  22  Oct.,  1738;  d.  in  Providence.  It.  I.,  29
July,  1791.  He  was  the  son  of  James  and  Grace
Fitz  Randolph  Manning,  who  were  constituent

members  of  the
Scotch  Plains  Bap
tist  church.  He
was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1762,
with  the  second
honors  of  his  class.
On  19  April,  1763,
he  was  publicly
ordained  to  the
ministry.  Having
been  chosen  by
the  Philadelphia
association  a  leader
in  the  enterprise
of  establishing  in
Rhode  Island  a
Baptist  college  '•  in
which,"  to  use  the
words  of  the  historian,  Isaac  Backus,  "  education
might  be  promoted  and  superior  learning  ob
tained,  free  from  any  sectarian  tests,"  he  at  once
set  out  on  his  mission.  In  the  month  of  July,
1763,  he  arrived  at  Newport  and  submitted  his
plans  to  the  deputy  governor  and  other  gentlemen
of  like  views.  The  result  was  an  application  to  the
general  assembly  the  month  following  for  a  charter,
which  was  finally  granted  in  February,  1764.  Im
mediately  after  "tin's  Manning  removed  with  his
wife  to  the  town  of  Warren  and  established  a  Latin-


school,  preaching  statedly  on  the  Sabbath.  On  15
Nov.  a  Baptist  church  was  organized,  over  which  he
was  installed  as  pastor.  This  relation  he  sustained
six  years.  In  1765,  having  been  appointed  presi
dent  of  the  college  by  a  formal  vote  of  the  corpora
tion,  he  began  the  work  of  instruction  with  a  single
pupil,  William  Rogers,  who  was  afterward  a  distin
guished  educator  and  divine.  In  1767  the  Warren
association,  which  owes  its  origin  to  Manning  and
which  is  the  mother  of  all  similar  associations  in
New  England,  held  its  first  meeting  with  the
Warren  church.  The  first  commencement  of  the
college  was  held  in  the  meeting-house  on  7  Sept.,
1769,  and  drew  together  a  large  concourse  of  people
from  all  parts  of  the  colony.  In  the  spring  of  1770
the  college  was  removed  to  Providence,  which  was
the  occasion  for  Manning  to  sever  his  relations
with  the  church  which  he  had  been  instrumental
in  founding.  The  year  following  he  accepted  the
invitation  of  the  1st  Baptist  church  in  Providence
to  become  their  pastor,  and  this  relation  he  sus
tained  for  twenty  years,  discharging  meanwhile,
with  signal  ability  and  zeal,  his  duties  as  the  presi
dent  of  the  college  and  as  an  instructor  of  youth.
In  1774  a  remarkable  revival  of  religion  attended
his  preaching,  which  resulted  in  the  erection  of  the
present  meeting-house.  It  was  dedicated  in  May,
1775.  From  7  Dec.,  1776,  until  27  May,  1782,  "  the
seat  of  Muses  became  the  habitation  of  Mars."
College  studies  were  suspended,  and  the  edifice,
now  called  University  hall,  was  occupied  by  the
soldiers  for  barracks  and  a  hospital.  In  1785
Manning  received  from  the  University  of  Pennsyl
vania  the  degree  of  I).  D.  In  1786  he  represented
Rhode  Island  in  the  congress  of  the  Confederation.
In  this  new  relation  he  acquitted  himself  with
honor,  having  the  pen  of  a  ready  writer,  and  being
thoroughly  familiar  with  the  discussions  and  con
troversies  of  the  day.  He  was  an  active  Federalist,
and  it  was  largely  through  his  influence  that
Rhode  Island  eventually  accepted  the  constitution
and  came  into  the  Union.  He  was  a  promoter  of
public  education,  and  chairman  of  the  school  com
mittee  of  the  town.  One  of  the  last  acts  of  his  life
was  to  draw  up  a  report  in  favor  of  free  schools,
which  forms  the  basis  of  the  present  school  system
of  Providence.  On  Sunday  morning,  24  July,  1791,
while  officiating  at  family  prayers  he  was  seized
with  a  fit  of  apoplexy,  from  which  he  never  re
covered.  He  was  a  man  of  majestic  stature,  of
graceful  person,  and  engaging  manners.  As  a
scholar  and  a  divine  he  had  in  his  day  few  equals.
His  reports,  letters,  and  addresses,  such  as  are  pre
served,  have  been  published  in  "  Life,  Times,  and
Correspondence  of  James  Manning  and  the  Early
History  of  Brown  University,"  by  Reuben  A.  Guild
(Boston,  1864).

MANNING,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  England;  d.
probably  in  New  York,  after  1686.  He  is  thought
by  some  to  be  the  same  Capt.  John  Manning  who
was  in  Boston  about  1650,  and  to  have  been  of  the
family  of  William  Manning,  merchant,  of  Cam
bridge  and  Boston.  His  employment  in  New  York
came  through  the  recommendation  of  Samuel
Maverick,  who,  in  a  letter  of  16  Sept.,  1663,  to  the
Earl  of  Clarendon,  lord  high  chancellor  of  England,
commended  Manning  as  one  "who  hath  many
years  been  a  commander  under  Maj.-Gen.  Morgan,
who  hath  given  him  a  large  and  ample  certificate,
which  he  will  shew  you.  .  .  .  He  is  well  known  and
beloved  in  New  England,  and  will  be  fit  for  any
employment  in  the  militia."  He  came  to  New
York  in  1664,  and  in  the  same  year  accompanied
the  expedition  for  the  reduction  of  Fort  Orange,
where  he  attended  and  was  a  witness  to  the  first


MANNING


MANNING


193


treaty  that  the  English  concluded  with  the  Five
Nations,  and  after  the  surrender  of  the  place  was
left  in  charge  of  the  fort.  He  was  high  sheriff  of
the  city  of  New  York  from  1667  till  1672,  in  1669
was  a  member  of  the  commission  that  was  sent  to
Esopus  to  regulate  the  affairs  of  that  district,  was
judge  of  the  court  for  the  West  Riding  of  York
shire,  and  acted  as  high  sheriff  of  Yorkshire  from
1671  to  1673.  He  enjoyed  the  confidence  of  Gov.
Lovelace,  served  as  a  member  of  his  council,  and
when  the  governor  was  called  to  any  distance  from
the  city,  Fort  James  and  public  affairs  were  placed
in  Manning's  charge.  While  he  was  thus  in  com
mand,  in  1673,  the  Dutch  fleet  arrived  and  de
manded  the  surrender  of  the  fort,  which,  after
some  resistance,  was  given  up.  Hd  sailed  for  Eng
land,  waited  on  the  king  and  Duke  of  York,  and
explained  to  them  the  particulars  of  the  surrender,
on  hearing  which  the  king  turned  to  the  duke  and
said :  "  Brother,  the  ground  could  not  be  main
tained  with  so  few  men."  He  returned  to  New
York  with  Gov.  Andros,  and  was  soon  afterward
tried  by  court-martial  on  charges  of  treachery  and
cowardice.  He  was  acquitted  of  the  former  but
found  guilty  of  cowardice,  and  on  5  Feb.,  1675,
sentenced  to  have  his  sword  broken  over  his  head
and  rendered  incapable  of  again  holding  office
under  his  majesty,  which  sentence  would  scarcely
seem  justified  from  the  facts  of  the  surrender.  He
retired  to  the  island  that  had  been  granted  to  him
in  1688,  then  called  "  Manning's  island,"  but  since
well  known  as  Blackwell's  island,  where  he  was
accustomed  to  entertain  his  friends.

MANNING,  Randolph,  jurist,  b.  in  Plainfield,
N.  J.,  19  May,  1804 ;  d.  in  Pontiac,  Mich.,  31  Aug.,
1864.  His  ancestor,  Jeffrey  Manning,  settled  in
New  Jersey  as  early  as  1676.  He  studied  law  in
New  York  city,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
In  1832  he  removed  to  Michigan,  where  he  settled
at  Pontiac  and  engaged  in  the  practice  of  the  law.
In  1835  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  1st  Constitutional
convention  of  the  state,  was  chosen  state  senator
in  1837,  and  from  1838  till  1840  held  the  office  of
secretary  of  state.  In  1842  he  was  chosen  chan
cellor  of  the  state,  which  office  he  resigned  in  1846
to  resume  the  practice  of  the  law.  At  the  organ
ization  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  state  in  1858
he  was  chosen  an  associate  justice,  and  held  the
office  until  his  death.  In  politics  he  was  a  Demo
crat  until  1854,  after  that  a  Republican.

MANNING,  Richard  Irvine,  governor  of
South  Carolina,  b.  in  Clarendon  county,  S.  C..  1  May,
1789;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1  May,  1836.  He
was  a  son  of  Lieut.  Lawrence  Manning,  who  served
in  the  Revolutionary  army,  at  first  in  the  regiment
that  was  known  as  "  Congress's  own,"  and  after
ward  in  the  corps  of  "  Light-horse  Harry "  Lee.
Interesting  mention  is  made  of  him  in  Lee's  "  Me
moirs  "  and  in  Johnson's  "  Traditions  and  Remi
niscences  of  the  American  Revolution."  The  son
was  graduated  in  1811  at  South  Carolina  college,
served  in  the  war  of  1812  as  captain  of  a  volunteer
company  for  the  defence  of  Charleston,  was  a
member  of  the  legislature,  and  in  1824-'6  governor
of  the  state,  and  while  holding  the  latter  office  he
entertained  at  his  house  Gen.  Lafayette  on  the
occasion  of  his  second  visit  to  this  country.  He
was  subsequently  defeated  as  a  Union  candidate
for  congress,  but  in  1834  was  elected  as  a  Union
Democrat  and  served  till  his  death.  His  wife  bore
the  unusual  distinction  of  being  the  wife  of  a  gov
ernor,  the  sister  of  a  governor,  the  niece  of  a  gov
ernor,  the  mother  of  a  governor,  and  the  aunt  and
foster-mother  of  a  governor. — Their  eldest  son,
John  Lawrence,  governor  of  South  Carolina,  b.

VOL. IV. 13


in  "  Hickory  Hill,"  Clarendon  co.,  S.  C.,  29  Jan.,
1816,  entered  Princeton,  but  was  recalled  before
graduation  by  the  death  of  his  father.  He  was
afterward  graduated  at  South  Carolina  college,  and
while  a  student  there  married  Susan  Frances,
daughter  of  Gen.  Wade  Hampton.  He  was  engaged
for  many  years  in  sugar-planting  in  Louisiana,
and  his  "works  were  among  the  first  on  the  Mis
sissippi  river.  He  entered  public  life  at  an  early
age,  served  several  years  in  the  assembly  and  senate
of  South  Carolina,  when  only  thirty  years  old  was
defeated  in  a  close  contest  for  governor,  and  in  1852
was  elected  governor  by  an  overwhelming  majority.
During  his  term  he  especially  devoted  himself  to
the  advancement  of  education.  He  established
scholarships  in  South  Carolina  college,  and  from
his  own  ample  private  means  aided  the  progress  of
many  impecunious  young  men.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  convention  that  nominated  Buchanan  for
the  presidency,  and  was  one  of  the  committee  that
was  sent  to  wait  on  him  at  "  Wheatlands"  to  in
form  him  of  his  nomination.  Mr.  Buchanan  tend
ered  him  the  mission  to  St.  Petersburg,  which  for
private  reasons  he  declined,  suggesting  for  the
place  Gov.  Francis  Piekens,  who  was  afterward
appointed.  In  the  civil  war  he  served  on  the  staff
of  Gen.  Beauregard,  and  in  1865  was  chosen  U.  S.
senator,  but  with  the  other  southern  senators  of
that  year  was  not  allowed  to  take  his  seat.  He  is
at  present  (1888)  the  only  surviving  ante-bellum
governor  of  the  state.

MANNING.  Robert,  pomologist,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  19  July;  1784;  d.  there,  10  Oct.,  1842.  His
great-great-grandmother,  Anstiss  Manning,  widow
of  Richard  Manning,  of  Dartmoor,  England,  came
to  Massachusetts  with  her  children.  In  1823  he  es
tablished  a  pornological  garden  in  Salem,  which  at
the  time  of  his  death  was  unrivalled  in  the  assort
ment  of  fruits  that  were  then  cultivated,  and  con
tained  nearly  1,000  varieties  of  pears,  besides  sev
eral  hundred  more  of  apples,  peaches,  plums,  and
cherries.  His  principal  object  in  the  formation  of
this  garden  was  rather  to  collect  the  several  spe
cies  for  identification,  to  test  their  qualities,  and  to
correct  the  nomenclature,  which  had  been  in  con
fusion,  than  to  grow  fine  specimens  or  to  originate
new  varieties.  He  was  so  familiar  with  the  names
and  habits  of  the  trees  and  qualities  of  fruits  that
he  could  readily  identify  at  sight  even  the  rarest
kinds.  His  labors  in  the  cause  of  pomological
science,  by  the  introduction  into  general  use  of
the  best  varieties  of  fruits,  fairly  entitle  him  to  be
ranked  among  public  benefactors.  He  was  one  of
the  founders  of  the  Massachusetts  horticultural
society,  and  one  of  its  most  liberal  contributors.
His  sister,  Elizabeth,  became  the  mother  of  Na
thaniel  Hawthorne,  who  was  educated  at  the  ex
pense  of  Mr.  Manning.

MANNING,  Thomas  Conrtland,  jurist,  b.  in
Edenton,  N.  C.,  in  1831 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  11
Oct.,  1887.  His  ancestor  came  from  England  to
Virginia  in  the  17th  century.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  North  Carolina,  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  practised  for  a  time  in  his  native  town.
Removing  in  1855  to  Alexandria,  La.,  he  took  up
his  permanent  residence  there  and  built  up  a  large
practice.  He  was  sent  to  the  Secession  convention
of  1861  as  a  state-rights  Democrat,  and  when  the
convention  adjourned  was  elected  a  lieutenant  in  a
Louisiana  Confederate  regiment.  He  served  with
the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  on  the  staff  of  Gov.
Moore,  and  in  1863  was  appointed  adjutant-general
of  the  state,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.
In  1864  he  was  appointed  an  associate  justice
of  the  supreme  court  of  Louisiana,  and  served


194


MANNING


MANROSS


until  the  close  of  the  civil  war.  In  1872  he  declined
the  nomination  for  governor  and  was  a  presidential
elector,  and  in  1870  he  was  vice-president  of  the
National  convention  that  nominated  Samuel  J.
Tilden.  In  January,  1877,  he  was  appointed  chief
justice  of  the  supreme  court,  serving  until  1880,
when  the  adoption  of  a  new  constitution  displaced
the  whole  state  government.  While  chief  justice
he  was  elected  one  of  the  trustees  of  the  Peabody
educational  fund.  In  1880  he  was  again  presiden
tial  elector,  and  in  the  autumn  of  that  year  was
appointed  U.  S.  senator,  but  was  not  admitted.  In
1883  he  was  placed  for  the  third  time  on  the  su
preme  bench,  and  served  until  the  expiration  of  his
term  in  1886.  He  was  then  appointed  by  President
Cleveland  U.  S.  minister  to  Mexico,  which  office  he
filled  until  his  death.

MANNING,  William,  colonist,  b.  in  England
about  1610;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  14  March,
1693.  He  was  descended  from  an  ancient  family
who  had  their  early  origin  in  Germany  and  went
over,  in  the  4th  century,  from  Saxony  to  England.
His  father,  of  the  same  name,  came  to  Massachu
setts  with  his  family  and  settled  at  Cambridge,
where,  in  1638.  he  purchased  an  estate,  and  became
the  founder  of  a  large  American  posterity.  He
was  one  of  the  chief  men  of  Cambridge,  a  mer
chant,  largely  engaged  in  navigation,  and  a  mem
ber  of  the  first  church,  as  messenger  of  which  he
was  sent  to  England  in  1669  to  invite  the  Rev.
Urian  Oakes  to  become  its  pastor.  Mr.  Manning
was  one  of  the  select-men  of  Cambridge,  and  with
Deacon  John  Cooper,  by  appointment  of  the  Co
lonial  government,  directed  the  erection  of  Harvard
hall,  and  collected  and  disbursed  the  moneys  that
were  raised  for  its  construction.

MANOGL'E,  Patrick,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  De
sert,  County  Kildare,  Ireland,  in  1831.  lie  studied
classics  and  mathematics  in  a  college  in  Callan,
County  Kilkenny,  emigrated  to  the  United  States
in  1856,  and  entered  the  University  of  St.  Mary  of
the  Lake,  Chicago,  where  he  followed  a  course  of
theology  and  philosophy.  After  graduation  he
went  to  California,  and  was  for  some  time  super
intendent  and  part  owner  of  a  mine  in  Moore's
Flat,  Nevada  county,  but  he  afterward  disposed  of
his  interests  and  sailed  for  Europe,  where  he  pre
pared  for  the  priesthood  in  the  Sulpitian  seminary,
Paris,  and  was  ordained  in  1861.  He  was  appoint
ed  pastor  of  Virginia  City  in  1862,  with  jurisdic
tion  over  almost  the  entire  country  which  now
forms  the  state  of  Nevada,  and  where  he  continued
during  his  missionary  life.  He  acquired  great  in
fluence  among  the  miners  of  this  region,  and  also
won  the  affection  of  the  Piute  Indians,  large  num
bers  of  whom  became  converts.  He  was  for  sev
eral  years  vicar-general  of  the  diocese  of  Grass  Val
ley,  and  was  its  administrator  during  the  bishop's
absence.  He  built  one  of  the  finest  churches  on
the  Pacific  coast  in  Virginia  City.  In  1880  he  was
appointed  coadjutor  bishop  of  the  diocese;  and  was
consecrated  bishop  of  Ceramos  in  partibus  infide-
lium  on  16  Jan..  1881.  In  1884  he  succeeded  Bishop
O'Connell.  There  are  now  (1888)  twelve  religious
institutions  in  his  diocese,  with  three  asylums,  a
hospital,  37  churches,  75  stations,  and  a'  Roman
Catholic  population  of  about  10.000.

MANOSALVAS,  Hernan  Venegas  Carillo,
South  American  soldier,  b.  in  Cordova.  Spain :  d.
in  Venezuela  in  1583.  Pie  followed  Gonzalo  Jime
nez  de  Quesada  to  South  America  as  a  private
soldier,  served  in  New  Grenada,  and  rose  rapidly
in  rank.  When  the  governor  of  that  province  re
solved  to  send  an  expedition,  in  1544,  to  conquer
the  Panches  and  Pantagoros  Indians,  whose  lands


were  said  to  contain  gold-mines,  Manosalvas  was
offered  the  command.  He  accepted  it  on  condi
tion  that  he  should  select  his  soldiers,  and  set  out
from  Santa  Fe  early  in  the  year.  He  defeated  the
natives  in  several  engagements,  and.  reaching  the
country  of  the  Panches,  passed  Magdalena  river
and  discovered  the  sites  of  Ibague,  Santa  Agueda,
Ambalema,  and  Mariquita.  and  the  mines  of  Sa-
bandijas  and  Venadillo.  He  then  explored  the
banks  of  Pati  (now  Bogota)  river,  and  founded,  on
6  April,  1544,  the  city  of  Tocaima.  which  soon  be
came  one  of  the  most  prosperous  in  the  colonv,
but  was  afterward  ruined  by  an  inundation.  lie
founded  it  anew  on  a  higher  level,  but  it  did  not
achieve  its  old  prosperity.  In  1547  he  was  sent  to
Spain  by  the  council  of  New  Grenada  to  ask  for
the  revocation  of  certain  laws  that  had  been  en
acted  by  the  governor.  Armendariz,  and  he  returned
in  1548  after  accomplishing  the  object  of  his  mis
sion.  He  was  afterward  sent  at  the  head  of  troops
to  aid  Gasca  (q.  v.)  in  putting  down  the  rebellion  of
Gonzalo  Pizarro  in  Peru ;  but  learning  on  the  way
that  the  rebel  leader  had  been  defeated,  he  returned
to  Santa  Fe.  He  was  afterward  sent  on  several
missions  to  Spain  in  the  interest  of  the  colony.

MANRIQUE,  Jos6  Angel  (man-re'-keh),  Co
lombian  poet,  b.  in  Bogota  in  1777;  d.  in  Cacota
in  1822.  He  studied  at  the  College  of  Nuestra
Senora  del  Rosario  in  Bogota.  He  took  part  in
revolutionary  movements  in  1794.  and  his  youth
alone  saved  him  from  being  sent  to  Spain.  He
afterward  entered  the  church,  and  was  ordained
in  1798.  lie  was  a  zealous  partisan  of  the  revolu
tion  of  20  July,  1810.  and  contributed  greatly  to
rouse  the  enthusiasm  of  the  people.  The  influence
that  he  obtained  on  that  day  he  used  on  a  subse
quent  occasion  in  favor  of  the  wife  of  the  viceroy,
when  she  was  taken  from  the  convent  of  the  En-
senanza  to  prison.  He  retired  afterward  to  his
curacy  at  Manta,  and  was  taken  prisoner  by  Morillo
in  1816.  The  service  that  he  had  rendered  the  wife
of  the  viceroy  saved  his  life.  In  1818,  while  cu
rate  of  Manta,  he  was  brought  to  trial  for  having
preached  in  Tibirita  in  favor  of  the  insurgents,  and
for  having  had  unlawful  dealings  with  them  in  the
town  of  Macheta,  procuring  them  horses,  arms,
and  other  implements  of  war.  In  the  same  year
he  took  part  in  the  guerilla  war  of  the  Almeidas,
and  was  again  taken  prisoner  and  sentenced  to  be
banished  to  Spain.  When  he  was  about  to  embark
at  Santa  Marta,  the  news  of  the  victorious  battle
of  Boyaca,  17  Aug..  1819,  reached  the  city.  He
escaped,  and,  destitute  of  means  and  nearly  blind,
made  his  way  to  Bogota.  Bolivar  offered  him  a
place  in  the  choir  of  the  cathedral  of  that  city,  but
he  refused  it,  and  would  only  accept  the  curacy  of
Cacota.  Manrique  was  the  author  of  the  burlesque
poems  "Tocaimada"  and  "Tunjunada"  (Bogota,
1802),  and  of  several  notable  epigrams.

MANROSS,  Newton  Spanieling1,  mining  engi
neer,  b.  in  Bristol,  Conn.,  20  June.  1825 ;  d.  near
Sharpsburg,  Md.,  17  Sept.,  1862.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Yale  in  1850,  then  studied  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Gottingen,  where  in  1852  he  received
the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  Subsequently  he  visited
mines  and  metallurgical  establishments  in  Europe,
but  returned  to  the  United  States  in  1852.  In  the
autumn  of  1853  he  was  sent  with  an  exploring
expedition  to  South  America,  and  spent  several
months  in  examining  the  gold  region  of  the
Yuruari  between  Orinoco  and  Amazon  rivers.  On
his  way  home,  in  1854,  he  examined  the  Pitch  lake
of  Trinidad,  and  in  1856  he  was  sent  to  the  Isthmus
of  Panama  to  explore  for  coal,  iron-ore,  and  other
minerals.  During  the  same  year  he  visited  Mexi-


MANSFIELD


MANSFIELD


195


oo,  and  was  engaged  in  examining  the  country  be
tween  the  city  of  Mexico  and  the  Pacific  ocean  for
coal  and  iron,  also  visiting  the  celebrated  silver
districts,  and  descending  into  the  craters  of  Jo-
rullo  and  Popocatepetl.  He  returned  in  July,
1857,  to  Bristol,  where  he  remained  for  several
years  engaged  in  perfecting  mechanical  and  chemi
cal  inventions.  In  1861  he  became  acting  profes
sor  of  chemistry  in  Amherst.  but  in  the  summer  of
1862  he  raised  a  company  of  volunteers,  went  to
the  front  as  captain  in  the  16th  Connecticut  regi
ment,  and  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  the  Antietam.
Dr.  Manross  contributed  scientific  papers  to  the
"  American  Journal  of  Science."

MANSFIELD,  Charles  BM  chemist,  b.  in
Hampshire.  England,  in  1819:  d.  in  London,  Eng
land,  in  February,  1855.  He  was  the  son  of  a
clergyman,  and  was  educated  at  Winchester  and
Clare"  Hall.  Cambridge.  From  the  time  he  left
the  university  he  devoted  himself  to  chemistry
and  dynamics,  finding  recreation  in  ornithology,
geology,  mesmerism,  and  even  "  old  magic."  After
many  struggles  he  succeeded,  in  1855.  in  obtaining
a  patent  for  a  valuable  chemical  discovery,  and
while  making  experiments  he  met  with  an  acci
dent  that  caused  his  death.  In  May,  1852.  he
sailed  for  Paraguay,  and  was  one  of  the  first  Eng
lishmen  to  enter  the  country  after  the  fall  of  Juan
Manual  de  Rosas  and  the  British  government  had
decided  to  recognize  its  independence.  After  his
death  Mr.  Mansfield's  private  letters,  descriptive
of  his  journey,  were  published  under  the  title  of
"  Paraguay,  Brazil,  and  the  Platte,"  with  a  memoir
by  the  Rev.  Charles  Kingsley  (London,  1856).
"  The  Constitution  of  Salts."  and  other  of  his  trea
tises,  have  also  been  published  posthumously.

MANSFIELD,  Jared,  mathematician,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  23  May,  1750 ;  d.  there,  3  Feb.,
1830.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1 777,  and  taught
in  New  Haven  and  Philadelphia,  making  a  reputa
tion  as  a  mathematician.  He  entered  the  regular
army  as  captain  of  engineers.  3  May.  1802.  and  was
promoted  major,  11  June,  1805.  and  lieutenant-
colonel,  25  Feb.,  1808.  He  resigned  on  23  July,
1810,  was  U.  S.  surveyor  of  Ohio  and  the  North
west  territory  from  1803  till  1812,  and  professor  of
natural  and  experimental  philosophy  in  the  U.  S.
military  academy  from  the  latter  year  till  he  re
signed  "the  chair,  31  Aug.,  1828.  "in  1825  he  re
ceived  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Yale.  He  is  the
author  of  '-Essays,  Mathematical  and  Physical"
(New  Haven.  1802).— His  son.  Edward  Deeringr,
author,  b.  in  New  Haven.  Conn.,  17  Aug..  1801  :  d.
in  Morrow.  Ohio,  27  Oct.,  1880,  was  graduated  at  |
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1818.  but,  instead  of
entering  the  army,  pursued  a  classical  course  at
Princeton,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1822.  He
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Connecticut  in  1825,
and.  removing  to  Ohio,  practised  in  Cincinnati  un
til  1835,  when  he  accepted  the  professorship  of
constitutional  law  and  history  in  Cincinnati  col
lege.  Retiring  from  the  practice  of  the  law,  he
was  editor  of  the  "  Cincinnati  Chronicle "  from
1836  till  1849.  of  the  "  Atlas"  from  1849  till  1852.
and  of  the  "Railroad  Record"  from  1854  till  1872.
While  editing  the  "Chronicle"  and  "Atlas"  he
introduced  to  the  public  many  young  writers,
among  whom  was  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe.  During
the  last  twenty-five  years  of  his  life  he  was  a  regu
lar  contributor  to  the  Cincinnati  "  Gazette."  He
was  long  the  correspondent  of  a  New  York  jour
nal,  under  the  pen-name  of  "  A  Veteran  Observer."
He  served  as  commissioner  of  statistics  for  Ohio
from  1859  till  1868,  and  was  an  associate  of  the
French  "Societe  de  statistique  universelle."  He


wrote  many  treatises  on  mathematics,  politics,  edu
cation,  and  the  early  history  of  Ohio.  His  most
interesting  production  is  a  volume  of  "  Personal
Memories,"  extending  to  the  year  1841  (1870).  He
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Marietta  col
lege.  Ohio,  in  1854.  He  was  also  the  author  of  "  A
Discourse  on  the  Utility  of  Mathematics";  "A
Treatise  on  Constitutional  Law  "and  "A  Political
Grammar  of  the  United  States  "  (Cincinnati.  1835)  ;
"  The  Legal  Rights.  Duties,  and  Liabilities  of
Married  Women"  (Salem,  1845);  "The  Life  of
Gen.  Winfield  Scott"  (New  York.  1848);  "The
History  of  the  Mexican  War"  (1849);  "American
Education"  (1851);  "The  Memoirs  of  Daniel
Drake  "  (Cincinnati.  1855)  ;  and  "  A  Popular  Life
of  Gen.  Ulysses  S.  Grant"  (1868).

MANSFIELD,  John  Brainard,  author,  b.  in
Andover,  Windsor  co.,  Vt,  6  March,  1826;  d.  in
Effingham,  Atchison  co..  Kan..  29  Oct.,  1886.  He
received  an  academic  education,  and  was  for  sev
eral  years  engaged  in  canvassing  for  books  and
maps.  He  published,  with  Austin  J.  Cooledge.  the
first  volume  of  a  "History  of  the  New  England
States,"  embracing  Maine,  New  Hampshire,  and
Vermont  (Boston.  1860),  but  the  civil  war  prevent
ed  the  appearance  of  the  second  and  remaining
volume,  which  had  been  prepared  for  the  press.
After  establishing  a  weekly  paper  called  the  "  New
England  Meridian,"  in  each  number  of  which  the
muster-roll  of  one  of  the  New  England  regiments
was  published,  he  acted  as  war  correspondent  for
that  journal,  and  subsequently  served  twenty
months  as  hospital  steward,  until  December,  1864,
when  he  was  mustered  put  of  the  service  for  dis
ability.  In  1866  he  published  in  Washington,  D.  C..
"  The  American  Loyalist."  in  which  were  printed
biographies  and  speeches  of  members  of  the  39th
congress.  After  publishing  a  campaign  paper  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1867,  he  returned  to  Washing
ton  and  was  employed  in  the  government  printing-
office  for  several  years.  In  1882  he  removed  to
Kansas  on  account  of  impaired  health.  While  in
Washington  he  began  the  preparation  of  "A
Sketch  of  the  Political  History  of  the  United
States  of  America  "  from  the  settlement  of  James
town  to  the  present  time,  which  he  completed,  but
it  still  remains  in  manuscript.

MANSFIELD,  Joseph  King  Fenno,  soldier,
b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  22  Dec.,  1803;  d.  near
Sharpsburg.  Md.,  18  Sept.,  1862.  He  was  appointed
to  the  U.  S.  mili
tary  academy,  where
during  part  of  the
fourth  year  he  acted
as  assistant  profes
sor  of  natural  phi
losophy,  and  was
graduated  in  1822,
standing  second  in  a
class  of  forty.  He
was  assigned  to  the
engineer  corps,  and
for  the  next  three
years  was  an  assist
ant  to  the  board
of  engineers,  then
assembled  m  New
York  and  engaged
in  planning  fortifi-
cations  for  the  defence  of  the  harbors  and  cit
ies  on  the  coast.  In  1832  he  was  promoted  1st
lieutenant,  and  on  7  July,  1838.  he  was  appointed
captain.  He  served  in  the  Mexican  war  as  chief
engineer  under  Gen.  Taylor,  was  brevetted  major
for  gallant  and  distinguished  services  in  the  de-


*


MANSFIELD


MANSO DE VELASCO


fence  of  Fort  Brown,  Tex.,  which  he  built,  in  1846,
and  the  following  September  was  brevetted  lieu
tenant-colonel  for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct
in  the  engagements  at  Monterey,  where  he  received
seven  severe  wounds.  In  1847  he  was  brevetted
colonel  for  meritorious  services  at  Buena  Vista.
On  28  May,  1853,  he  was  appointed  inspector-gen
eral  of  the  U.  S.  army,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,
and  in  May,  1861,  he  was  commissioned  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  and  placed  in  command  of
the  Department  of  Washington.  He  fortified  the
city  on  every  side  and  crowned  the  heights  of  Ar
lington  with  earthworks.  On  the  return  of  Gen.
Wool  to  Fortress  Monroe  he  was  sent  to  Hatteras,
and  afterward  to  Camp  Hamilton  and  Newport
News.  On  10  May  he  marched  with  a  division  to
the  attack  on  Norfolk,  and,  after  the  capture  of
that  place,  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  Suf
folk,  Va.,  where  he  acted  as  military  governor.
After  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run  he  was  sum
moned  to  the  court  of  inquiry  at  Washington,  and
during  the  delay,  becoming  impatient  for  active
duty,  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  corps
formerly  under  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks.  At  the
battle  of  Antietam  he  fell  mortally  wounded  early
in  the  day  while  cheering  on  his  troops  in  a  charge.
On  the  18th  of  the  previous  July  he  had  been  pro
moted  major-general  of  volunteers.

MANSFIELD,  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
Haven,  Conn.,  1  Oct.,  1723;  d.  in  Derby,  Conn.,  12
April,  1820.  He  was  prepared  to  enter  Yale  when
he  was  only  eleven  years  of  age,  but  waited  until
he  was  fourteen,  and  remained  there  two  years  as  a
resident  graduate.  During  this  period  he  renounced
Congregationalism  and  became  an  Episcopalian.
After  teaching  three  years  in  New  Haven,  he  sailed
for  England  in  1748  to  obtain  ordination.  Return
ing  the  following  year,  he  became  rector  of  Derby,
Conn.,  in  connection  with  West  Haven,  Waterbury,
and  Northbury.  About  1755  he  relinquished  the
care  of  the  three  last-named  churches,  and  from
that  time  until  his  death  he  remained  in  charge  of
those  at  Derby  and  Oxford.  He  was  rector  of  the
parish  of  Derby  for  the  almost  unprecedented  period
of  seventy-two  years.  During  the  Revolution  his
sympathies  were  strongly  enlisted  on  the  side  of
the  mother-count ry.  In  a  letter  dated  29  Dec.,
1775,  he  writes:  "As  soon  as  these  sparks  of  civil
dissension  appeared,  which  have  since  been  blown
up  into  a  devouring  flame,  I  did,  as  I  thought  it
my  duty,  inculcate  on  my  parishioners,  both  from
the  pulpit  and  in  private  "conversation,  the  duty  of
peaceableness  and  quiet  subjection  to  the  king  and
to  the  parent  state.  .  .  .  That  my  endeavors  and
influence  have  had  some  effect  appears  from  hence,
that  out  of  130  families,  which  attended  divine
service  in  our  two  churches,  it  is  well  known  that
110  of  them  are  steadfast  friends  to  government,
and  that  they  detest  and  abhor  the  present  un
natural  rebellion."  Having  subsequently  addressed
a  letter  to  Gov.  William  Tryon,  expressing  the
opinion  that,  in  case  the  king's  troops  were  sent  to
protect  the  loyalists,  several  thousand  men  in  the
three  western  counties  of  the  colony  of  Connecticut
would  join  them,  and  the  contents  of  the  letter
haying  been  communicated  to  the  committee  of  in
quiry,  orders  were  given  for  Mansfield's  arrest,  but
he  escaped  to  Long  Island.  Dr.  Mansfield  was  an
excellent  classical  scholar,  a  man  of  winning  man
ners,  exceedingly  hospitable,  and  a  sound  and  in
structive  preacher.  He  was  tall,  and  always  wore
a  large  white  wig,  a  broad,  flat-brimmed  hat.  small
clothes,  and  shoes.  A  friend  of  his  once  said,  when
a  gust  of  wind  blew  off  the  old  gentleman's  hat  as
he  was  riding  by,  that  "  it  seemed  as  if  they  were


laughing  at  an  angel."  He  was  also  well  known
for  his  politeness.  Passing  some  children  of  his
flock,  whose  rapid  growth  surprised  him,  he  ex
claimed  :  "  Why,  my  dear  children,  you  grow  like
weeds — no,  1  should  have  said,  like  flowers  in  the
garden ! "  He  was  given  the  degree  of  D.  D.  by
Yale  in  175)2. — His  wife,  ANNA  HULL,  was  an  aunt
of  Gen.  William  Hull.

MANSHIP,  Andrew,  clergyman,  b.  in  Caroline
county,  Md.,  23  June,  1824.  He  left  school  in
1837,  and  in  1843  was  admitted  to  the  Philadel
phia  conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church.
He  was  made  deacon  in  1845  and  elder  in  1847,
held  various  charges,  and  in  1856  was  appointed
tract  agent  of  the  Philadelphia  conference ;  but  in
1863  he  was  again  assigned  to  regular  pastoral
work.  Since  that  period  he  has  been  engaged  in
missionary  work  in  Philadelphia.  At  present  (1888)
he  is  an  evangelist  in  that  city,  his  last  pastoral
connection  having  terminated  in  1879.  In  1866-'7
he  edited  the  "Home  Missionary  and  Tract  Maga
zine."  He  is  the  author  of  "  Thirteen  Years  in  the
Itineracy"  (Philadelphia,  1856,  now  in  its  16th
thousand);  "Cherished  Memories "(1859);  "Remi
niscences  from  the  Saddle-Bags  of  a  Methodist
Preacher"  (1878);  and  "History  of  Gospel-Tents
and  Experience  "  (1884).  He  has  compiled  "  The
Patriot's  Hymn-Book"  (1862)  and  "National  Jew
els"  (1866), "and  is  at  present  (1888)  writing  "  Forty
Years  in  the  Wilderness,"  which  will  be  a  complete
review  of  his  life.

MANSO,  Alonso  (man'-so).  Spanish  R.  C.  bish
op,  b.  in  the  province  of  Rioja  about  1470 :  d.  in
Saint  John's,  Porto  Rico,  in  1540.  He  was  canon  of
Salamanca  and  chaplain  of  the  prince  Don  Juan,
and  on  8  May,  1512,  the  king  appointed  him  to  the
first  bishopric  of  the  New  World,  Porto  Rico.  He
was  consecrated  on  26  Sept.,  1512,  in  Seville,  and
at  the  beginning  of  1513  went  to  Caparra,  then  the
capital  of  the  island,  to  take  possession  of  his  bish
opric,  appointing  canons  and  other  officers  of  the
cathedral  and  establishing  tithes  for  its  mainte
nance.  The  colonists  resisted  the  payment  of  the
tithes,  and  the  bishop  being  obliged  to  return  to
Spain,  resolved  to  retire  to  his  canoncy  of  Sala
manca;  but,  at  the  king's  request,  he  returned  to
Porto  Rico  with  the  additional  character  of  in
quisitor  of  the  Indies  and  abandoned  the  exaction
of  the  tithes.  He  held  these  places  during  twenty-
seven  years,  being  the  first  who  occupied  them  in
America.  He  founded  the  hospital  of  San  Ilde-
fonso,  which  before  being  used  in  that  capacity
was  dedicated  to  the  teaching  of  children.  His
body  was  buried  in  the  cathedral  of  Saint  John's,
but  his  mausoleum  was  destroyed  afterward  by  the
Dutch  under  Bodnyn  Hendricks.

MANSO  DE  VELASCO,  Jos6  Antonio,  count
of  Superunda,  viceroy  of  Peru,  b.  in  Biscay  late  in
the  17th  century;  d.  in  Spain  about  1770.  He
served  in  the  royal  guard  regiment,  rose  to  the
rank  of  brigadier,  and  was  appointed  in  1735  gov
ernor  of  the  Philippine  islands,  but  was  retained
in  Spain,  as  his  services  there  were  indispensable.
He  was  appointed  in  1736  president  of  the  audi
ence  of  Chili,  soon  afterward  promoted  major-gen
eral,  and.  after  the  earthquake  of  1737  in  Valdivia,
did  important  service  in  relieving  distress  and
founded  several  towns.  After  his  promotion  to
lieutenant-general  he  took  possession  in  1745  of
the  viceroyalty  of  Peru.  In  the  following  year  oc
curred  a  terrible  earthquake,  which  destroyed  the
city  of  Lima  and  inundated  Cailao,  killing"  10,000
people.  He  was  very  active  in  helping  the  victims
and  in  rebuilding  the  cities.  On  10  Feb.,  1747,  he
founded  the  city  of  Bellavista.  In  1750  the  Indi-


MANSON


MAXZO


197


ans  formed  a  conspiracy  for  the  overthrow  of  Span
ish  rule  in  Peru  :  but  Manso  discovered  the  plot  in
time  and  ordered  the  leaders  tto  be  hanged.  On  30
May,  1755,  he  began  the  cathedral  of  Lima.  He
also  ordered  the  palace  offices,  colleges,  hospitals,
and  other  public  buildings  to  be  rebuilt,  assisted
the  missions  of  Peru,  and  fostered  the  commerce
of  the  colony.  Gen.  Manuel  Amat,  who  was  at
that  time  president  of  Chili,  succeeded  him  in  the
viceroyalty  on  12  Oct.,  1761.  Manso  held  power
for  sixteen  years  and  three  months,  a  longer  period
than  any  other  viceroy.  When  he  sailed  for  Spain,
27  Oct..  1761,  he  touched  at  Havana  while  an  Eng
lish  fleet  was  attacking  that  port  and  took  an  active
part  in  the  defence  of  the  city,  which  finally  ca
pitulated  in  1762.  The  governor,  Juan  Prado,  and
others  were  tried  by  court-martial  in  Spain,  and
serious  charges  were  also  made  against  Manso,  who
suffered  a  long  imprisonment  and  the  confiscation
of  his  property.  He  lived  afterward  in  poverty
and  in  such  strict  retirement  that  the  exact  date  of
his  death  is  unknown.

MAXSON,  Mahlon  D.,  soldier,  b.  in  Piqua,
Miami  co..  Ohio,  20  Feb.,  1820.  He  received  a
common-school  education,  studied  pharmacy,  and
settled  in  Crawfordsville,  Ind.  He  served  during
the  Mexican  war  as  captain  of  the  5th  Indiana  vol
unteers,  sat  in  the  legislature  in  1851-'2,  and,  en
listing  as  a  private  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war,  was  at  once  made  colonel  of  the  10th  Indiana
regiment,  which  he  commanded  at  the  battle  of
Rich  Mountain,  W.  Va.,  in  July,  1861.  He  led
the  2d  brigade,  1st  division,  of  the  Army  of  the
Ohio  into  action  at  Mill  Springs,  Ky.,  in  January.
1862,  and  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  vol
unteers  in  the  following  March.  In  August  of  the
same  year  he  commanded  the  National  forces  at
Richmond,  Ky.,  where  he  was  wounded  and  taken
prisoner,  but  was  exchanged  in  December.  He  was
again  in  command  during  the  Morgan  raid  in  In
diana  and  Ohio  in  July,  1863,  and  in  September
was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  23d  army  corps.  He
took  part  in  the  siege  of  Knoxville.  Jenn.,  and  in
various  engagements  in  that  state.  He  was  severe
ly  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Resaca  and  compelled
to  resign.  On  his  return  home,  after  being  nomi
nated  as  lieutenant-governor  and  secretary  of  state,
he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving
from  4  March.  1871.  till  3  March,  1873.

MAXTILLA.  Luis  Felipe  (man-tee'-vah).  edu
cator,  b.  in  Havana.  Cuba,  in  1833;  d.  in  New  York
city  in  September,  1878.  He  studied  in  the  Uni
versity  of  Seville,  Spain,  and  afterward  returned  to
his  native  city,  where  he  devoted  his  time  to  teach
ing  and  the  furthering  of  public  education.  In
1862  he  fixed  his  residence  in  the  United  States,
and  was  appointed  professor  in  the  University  of
the  city  of  New  York.  Mantilla  was  an  honorary
member  of  the  Mexican  society  of  geography  and
of  the  Scientific  and  literary  society  of  Guatemala.
He  published  "Libros  de  Lectura"  (3  vols.);  "Me-
todo  Bilingiie,"  in  English  and  Spanish  (Xew  York,
new  ed.,  1885) ;  "  Catecismo  de  Moral  Universal  "  ;
"  Elementos  de  Fisiologia  e  Higiene";  "  Historia
Universal  " ;  and  many  other  educational  works
which  had  a  wide  circulation  in  Spanish-American
countries.

MAXUCY,  Dominic,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  St.  Au
gustine,  Fla,.  20  Dec.,  1823 ;  d.  in  Mobile,  Ala.,  4
Dec.,  1885. He  studied  in  Spring  Hill  college,  near
Mobile,  and,  after  finishing  his  theological  course,
was  ordained  priest  in  1850. He  was  for  some  time  •
stationed  at  the  Cathedral  of  the  Immaculate  Con
ception,  Mobile,  and  in  1864  was  appointed  pastor  '
of  Montgomery,  where  he  continued  for  ten  years,  j


In  1874  he  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Dulma  in
pnrtibus  infidtlium,  and  appointed  vicar-apostolic
of  the  newly  formed  vicariate  of  Brownsville,  com
prising  all  that  part  of  Texas  lying  south  of  Xueces
river  and  along  the  Rio  Grande.  The  country  was
principally  occupied  by  roving  Mexicans,  and  Bish
op  Manucy  sought  for  priests  that  would  consent
to  adopt  the  same  life,  and  finally  succeeded  in  ob
taining  the  services  of  the  Oblate  Fathers  for  this
purpose.  He  built  nine  churches  shortly  after  his
arrival,  and  introduced  the  Ursuline  nuns,  who
took  charge  of  schools  at  Laredo,  and  the  Sisters  of
the  Incarnate  Word,  who  did  the  same  at  Browns
ville  and  Corpus  Christi.  Academies  under  the
Sisters  of  Mercy  were  founded  at  San  Patricio  and
Refugio,  and  several  free  parochial  schools  were
established,  as  well  as  an  Oblate  college  in  Browns
ville  and  a  high-school  in  Laredo.  At  his  death
there  were  in  the  vicariate  thirty-three  churches
and  chapels,  seven  convents,  six  academies,  two
hospitals,  and  over  40,000  Roman  Catholics.  He
was  transferred  to  the  see  of  Mobile  on  9  March,
1884,  still  retaining  the  vicariate.  After  a  short
time  he  resigned  both  posts,  and  was  made  titular
bishop  of  Maronea.

MAXZAXO,  Juan  Francisco  (man-thah'-no),
Cuban  poet,  b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  in  1797;  d.  in
1854.  He  was  a  negro  slave  by  birth,  and  remained
in  servitude  till  1837,  when  he  was  liljerated  with
money  that  was  raised  by  a  subscription  among
some  young  admirers  of  his  talents.  Manzano
found  many  obstacles  in  the  way  of  satisfying  his
desire  for  knowledge,  but  managed  to  publish  dur
ing  the  days  of  his  slavery  a  small  collection  of
poems  in  1821,  and  another  in  1830  with  the  title
of  "  Flores  pasajeras."  In  1840  his  autobiography
("Apuntes  biograficos  ")  was  translated  into  English
by  Richard  Maddens  and  published  in  London,  to
gether  with  a  selection  of  his  poems.  In  1842  his
drama  "Zafira"  was  published.  He  was  implicated
in  1844  in  the  trial  for  high  treason  that  cost  the
poet  Plaeido  his  life,  but  was  set  at  liberty  after
several  months  of  imprisonment.  In  his  last  years
he  was  very  poor.  Some  of  Manzano's  poems  have
been  translated  into  French  and  German.

MAXZO,  Jos6  (man'-tho),  Mexican  artist,  b.  in
Puebla  in  1789  ;  d.  in  Mexico  about  1840.  Show
ing  in  his  youth  a  decided  artistic  talent,  he  was
sent  to  study  painting  under  Salvador  del  Huerto,
with  whom  he  remained  scarcely  a  year,  as  he  be
gan  to  apply  himself  entirely  to  engraving  and
chasing,  in  which  he  soon  excelled.  Among  the
many  works  that  were  executed  by  him  for  churches,
the  most  noteworthy  are  the  monstrance  of  the
Church  of  Santa  Clara,  in  Puebla,  and  the  taber
nacle  of  the  cathedral,  which  satisfied  Bishop  Perez
so  well  that  he  charged  Manzo  with  the  direction
of  the  artistic  restoration  of  that  building.  When
the  National  academy  of  design  was  established  in
1814,  Manzo  was  appointed  its  director,  and  he  was
afterward  charged  with  the  decoration  of  the  cham
ber  of  congress.  In  1824  he  was  attached  to  the
embassy  to  Rome,  and  on  the  way  visited  the
United  States,  London,  and  the  Netherlands.  He
fell  sick  in  Paris,  and.  although  ordered  home,  re
mained  there  to  perfect  his  knowledge  of  engrav
ing  and  to  acquire  the  art  of  lithography.  On  his
return  in  1827  he  brought  the  necessary  instru
ments,  presses,  and  stones,  and  was  the  founder  of
this  industry  in  Mexico.  In  view  of  his  work,  con
gress  granted  him  a  sum  of  money  to  teach  this  art
and  that  of  printing  from  copper-plates.  Notwith
standing  the  constant  revolutions,  he  obtained  from
congress,  on  16  Sept.,  1828,  the  use  of  the  Caroline
college  for  establishing  his  presses  and  a  school  of  en-


198


MAPES


MARANHAO


graving,  and  for  a  museum  and  conservatory  of  art.
He  enriched  the  musem  by  many  specimens  of  art
and  natural  history,  and  was  appointed  a  member
of  the  Mexican  athenaeum.  Marizo  was  also  well
versed  in  architecture,  and  was  director  of  the  peni
tentiary  building  in  Mexico,  which  was  left  unfin
ished  at  his  death.

MAPES,  James  Jay,  chemist,  b.  in  New  York
city,  29  May,  1806  ;  d.  there,  10  Jan.,  186(5.  He  re
ceived  a  common-school  education  and  had  some
knowledge  of  the  classics,  but  developed  a  fond
ness  for  chemistry.  For  many  years  he  was  a  clerk,
but  on  attaining  his  majority  entered  business  for
himself.  In  1882  he  invented  a  new  system  of
sugar-refining,  many  features  of  which  are  still  in
general  use,  and  he  subsequently  devised  an  appa
ratus  for  manufacturing  sugar  from  the  cane,  which
was  extensively  employed  in  the  southern  states
and  the  West  Indies.  His  process  for  the  manu
facture  of  sugar  from  West  India  molasses  was  used
in  nearly  every  state  in  the  Union,  and  he  himself
followed  the  business  of  sugar-refining,  but  unsuc
cessfully.  He  was  appointed  professor  of  chemis
try  and  natural  philosophy  in  the  National  acade
my  of  design  of  New  York,  and  delivered  courses
of'lectures  there  on  the  chemistry  of  colors.  Mean
while  he  invented  a  method  of  tanning  hides  and
numerous  technical  processes  with  machines.  Sub
sequently  he  was  appointed  professor  of  chemistry
and  natural  philosophy  in  the  American  institute,
and  delivered  before  that  body  lectures  on  natural
philosophy,  mechanical  philosophy  as  applied  to  the
useful  arts,  and  chemistry.  His  analyses  of  beer,
made  for  the  New  York  senate,  and  of  beer  and
wine  for  temperance  societies,  were  long  regarded
as  standard,  and  he  also  made  numerous  improve
ments  in  distilling,  dyeing,  tempering  steel,  color-
making,  and  in  other  industries.  In  addition  to
his  knowledge  of  chemistry,  he  was  proficient  in
civil  engineering,  and  was  one  of  the  first  of  that
profession  to  open  an  office  for  consulting  purposes.
He  held  high  rank  as  an  expert,  and  was  frequent
ly  called  into  court  on  patent  cases.  In  1847  he
removed  to  Newark,  N.  J.,  where  during  the  re
maining  years  of  his  life  he  devoted  much  atten
tion  to  agriculture.  The  manufacture  of  artificial
fertilizers  was  one  of  his  inventions,  and  he  origi
nated  the  use  of  super-phosphates  in  the  United
States,  receiving  a  patent  for  his  process  in  1859.
Conspicuous  among  the  machines  and  implements
invented  by  him  is  the  lifting  subsoil  plow.  Early
in  life  Prof.  Mapes  took  considerable  interest  in
military  affairs,  and  was  captain  and  then  colonel  of
militia.  His  command  was  subsequently  merged
into  the  state  national  guards,  as  the  7th  regiment.
He  was  elected  president  of  the  Mechanics'  in
stitute  in  1844,  was  vice-president  for  many  years
of  the  American  institute,  and  active  in  its  work,
and  organized  the  Franklin  institute  of  Newark.
Prof.  Mapes  was  a  member  of  scientific  societies
both  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  and,  besides
being  a  member  of  the  principal  clubs,  was  presi
dent  of  the  Novelty  club,  a  body  of  men  who  had
made  their  mark.  His  addresses  before  agricul
tural  societies  exceeded  150  in  number.  As  the
editor  and  publisher  of  "  The  American  Repertory
of  Art,  Sciences,  and  Manufactures"  (New  York,
1840),  he  encouraged  the  application  of  science  to
the  useful  arts.  Later  he  was  associated  in  the  edi
torship  of  the  "  Journal  of  Agriculture,"  and  subse
quently  edited  "The  Working  Farmer"  for  nearly
fifteen  years,  beginning  in  1850.  Horace  Greeley
wrote  of  him  :  "  Few  men  have  delivered  more  ad-
dresses  at  agricultural  fairs,  or  done  more  lasting
good  by  them.  Certainly  American  agriculture


owes  as  much  to  him  as  to  any  man  who  lives  or
has  ever  lived." — His  son,  Charles  Victor,  agri
cultural  chemist,  b.  in  New  York  city,  4  July,
1830,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1857,  and  has
since  devoted  his  efforts  to  the  realization  of  the
theories  on  artificial  fertilizers  that  were  advanced
by  his  father.  His  work  has  included  the  study  of
the  composition  of  the  soil,  determining  the  ingre
dients  required  for  certain  crops,  and  the  subse
quent  preparation  of  fertilizers  that  have  the  de
sired  materials.  The  future  of  successful  agricul
ture  depends  upon  artificial  fertilizers,  and  it  has
been  Mr.  Mapes's  mission  to  reduce  the  discoveries
and  investigations  of  chemistry  to  actual  practice.
He  has  published  various  articles  and  pamphlets
on  this  subject,  and  has  held  the  office  of  presi
dent  of  the  New  York  fertilizer  and  chemical  ex
change  since  its  organization.

MAR,  Juan  Manuel  del  (mar).  Peruvian  states
man,  b.  in  Cuzco  in  1806;  d.  in  Lima,  15  June,
1862.  He  received  an  excellent  education  in  his
native  city,  and  then  entered  the  University  of  San
Marcos,  Lima,  where  in  1825  he  became  professor
of  philosophy,  and  in  1830  was  graduated  as  doctor
in  law,  and  began  to  practise  at  the  bar.  In  1832
he  was  appointed  assessor  of  the  superior  court  and
was  elected  successively  deputy  to  congress,  judge
of  the  supreme  court,  senator,  and  minister  in  all
the  different  branches  of  the  administration.  In
1855,  while  secretary  of  war,  he  proposed  and  car
ried  a  law  to  annul  the  unjust  measure  by  which
the  victorious  officers  of  Ayacucho  had  been  de
prived  of  their  rank,  and  thereby  contributed  to
conciliate  contending  parties.  As  president  of  the
ministry  in  1856-'7,  during  the  revolution  of  Vi-
vanco,  he  sustained  order  in  the  capital  by  his  en
ergy,  and  during  the  absence  of  President  C'astilla
from  the  republic  in  his  invasion  of  Ecuador  he
was  in  charge  of  the  executive  as  vice-president
from  September,  1859,  to  March,  1860.  At  the  ex
piration  of  Castilla's  term  in  Mav,  1862,  when  the
country  prepared  to  reward  Del  Mar's  services  by
his  election  to  the  presidency,  he  fell  sick  and  re
tired  from  the^candidacy.

MARANHAO,  Jeroiiimo  de  Alburquerque
(mar-an-yong'),  Brazilian  soldier,  b.  in  Olinda  in
1548;  d.  in  Maranhao,  11  Feb.,  1618.  His  mother
was  the  daughter  of  the  cacique  Arco- Verde  Morn-
bixaba,  and  his  father  was  a  Portuguese  nobleman.
The  son  accompanied  his  father  on  the  latter's  ex
peditions  till  he  was  fifteen  years  of  age,  with
out  any  education,  but  afterward  he  entered  the
Jesuit  college,  and  made  rapid  progress.  At  the
age  of  eighteen  he  subdued  the  warlike  tribes  of
Parahyba.  In  1598  he  raised  an  expedition  at  his
own  expense,  and  conquered  the  province  of  Rio
Grande,  taking  several  chiefs  prisoners  in  1599.
In  1613  he  was  sent  by  the  government  to  Ceara,
and  founded  the  city  of  Nossa  Senhora  do  Roza-
rio.  Hearing  there  that  a  French  expedition  had
landed  and  taken  possession  of  the  island  of  Ma
ranhao,  he  prepared  his  small  army  to  attack  the
intruders.  The  government  sent  aid  and  appoint
ed  Alburquerque  commander-in-chief.  The  French
forces  had  founded  the  city  of  St.  Luiz,  now  the
capital  of  the  province  of  Maranhao,  and  had  forti
fied  it.  Alburquerque,  though  his  forces  were
inferior  in  number,  attacked  them  in  December,
1614.  and  was  victorious.  Ravardiere,  the  French
commander,  asked  for  an  armistice  of  one  year,
and.  on  account  of  the  inferiority  of  his  forces,  Al
burquerque  was  obliged  to  accept.  Portugal  and
France  disapproving  the  treaty  and  sending  re-
enforcements,  Alburquerque  gave  battle  to  the
French,  who,  after  a  desperate  resistance,  were  de-


MARBAU


MARCADET


199


feated  in  January,  1615,  and  the  Portuguese  occu
pied  the  city.  In  a  few  months  more  the  whole
island  and  all  the  French  colonies  in  Brazil  were
in  his  power,  and  from  that  time  Alburquerque
took  the  name  of  Maranhao,  which  is  still  used  by
his  descendants  in  Brazil.

MARBAU,  Pedro  de  (mar-bow'),  Spanish  mis
sionary,  b.  in  Toledo,  Spain,  about  1080 ;  d.  in
Lima  about  1700.  He  went  to  South  America  in
1005,  and  was  attached  to  the  missions  of  Bolivia.
In  1075  he  became  assistant  to  the  superior  of  the
Bolivian  missions,  and  was  charged  by  him  with
the  exploration  of  the  vast  territory  of 'the  Moxos
Indians,  situated  between  13°  and  16°  of  south  lati
tude.  The  mission  was  successful.  The  Jesuits
were  kindly  received  by  the  natives,  and  organized
them  into  villages.  A  few  years  later  20,000  Indi
ans  composed  the  new  Moxos  missions,  and  the
country  possessed  churches  and  factories.  Marbau
held  for  a  few  years  the  post  of  superior  general  of
the  Moxos  missions,  but  his  health  failed  and  he
retired  to  Lima,  where  he  became  chaplain  to  his
kinsman,  the  Count  of  Montclova,  the  viceroy.  He
published  "  Arte  de  la  Lengua  Moxa  con  su  vo-
cabulario  y  Catecismo  "  (Lima,  1701).

MARBLE,  Danford,  actor,  b.  in  East  Windsor,
Conn.,  in  1807;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  13  May,  1849.
He  made  his  first  appearance  on  the  stage  in  1831
as  Rollin  Roughhead  in  "Fortune's  Frolic,"  at
Chatham  garden,  New  York  city,  and  then  visited
all  the  important  cities  in  the  United  States,  being
successful  as  a  delineator  of  American  character.
He  went  to  England  in  1845,  and  played  at  the
Strand  theatre  as  Deuteronomy  Dutiful.  —  His
wife,  Anna  Warren,  actress,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  1  Dec.,  1815.  first  appeared  at  the  Holliday
street  theatre  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  as  Rosalie  Sinn
ers  in  "  Town  and  Country."  She  married  Mr.
Marble  in  183G,  and  for  many  years  was  a  popular
actress.  Her  last  appearance  was  in  Chicago,  111.,
in  the  winter  of  l868-'9.

MARBLE,  Manton,  journalist,  b.  in  Worcester,
Mass.,  16  Nov.,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Rochester  in  1855,  soon  afterward
became  connected  with  the  Boston  "Journal,"  and
subsequently  edited  the  "Traveller."  lie  removed
to  Xew  York  city  in  1858,  joined  the  staff  of  the
"  Evening  Post,"  and  in  1859  went  to  the  Red  river
country  as  its  correspondent,  contributing  also
three  papers,  descriptive  of  his  journey,  to  "  Har
per's  Magazine."  He  was  connected  with  the  "  Xew
York  World"  on  its  establishment  in  1860,  and  in
1802  became  its  proprietor  and  editor,  making  it  a
free-trade  Democratic  journal.  He  retired  from
the  editorial  management  of  the  paper  in  1876.
In  1885  he  was  sent,  to  Europe  as  a  delegate  to  the
Bi-metallic  congress.  He  has  published  "A  Secret
Chapter  of  Political  History ;  the  Electoral  Com
mission;  the  Truth  concerning  Samuel  J.  Tilden,
President  de  jure,  disclosed  and  stated  against  some
False  Representations  of  his  Action,  Advice,  and
Conduct,  during  the  Winter  of  187G-'7  "  (New  York,
1878).  Mr.  Marble  is  now  (1888)  president  of  the
Manhattan  club.

MARBOIS,  Francois  de  Barbe\  Marquis  de.
French  diplomatist,  b.  in  Metz,  France.  31  Jan.,
1745;  d.  in  Paris.  14  Jan.,  1837.  His  father  was
director  of  the  mint  at  Metz.  The  son  excelled  in
literary  studies  and  in  jurisprudence,  and  at  an
early  age  was  appointed  tutor  to  the  children  of
the  Marquis  de  Castries,  minister  of  marine,
through  whom  he  obtained  in  1779  the  post  of  sec
retary  of  legation  to  the  United  States  during  the
Revolution.  Martxris  was  the  principal  agent,  in
the  most  important  operations  of  the  embassy,  and,


on  the  return  of  Luzerne  to  France,  remained  in
this  country  as  charge  d'affaires  until  1785,  and
organized  all  the  French  consulates  in  the  United
States.  He  married  in  Philadelphia,  in  1783,  the
daughter  of  Gov.  William  Moore,  of  Pennsylvania.
In  1785  he  became  intendant  of  Santo  Domingo,
where  he  administered  justice  with  a  firm  hand,
and  reorganized  the  finances.  The  troubles  in  1789
induced  him  to  retire,  and  in  1792  he  was  sent  by
Louis  XVI.  as  ambassador  to  the  German  diet.  In
1790  he  was  summoned  before  the  constituent  as
sembly  as  being  a  party  to  the  famous  "  Pacte  de
famine,"  or  wheat-ring,  and  as  having  stored  enor
mous  quantities  of  that  grain  in  the  warehouses  of
his  father-in-law,  Moore.  He  presented  a  refuta
tion  of  this  charge,  signed  by  the  most  influential
citizens  of  Philadelphia.  In  September,  1797,  the
Republican  members,  who  composed  the  minority
of  the  two  assemblies,  condemned  Marbois,  with  52
other  deputies,  to  be  transported  to  Guiana,  but  no
true  bill  of  indictment  was  found  against  him.  On
his  return  he  became  first  councillor  of  state  in
1800,  and  in  1801  secretary  of  the  treasury.  In
1803  he  was  appointed  to  cede  Louisiana  to  the
United  States  for  50,000.000  francs,  but  was  suc
cessful  in  obtaining  80,000,000,  a  diplomatic  meas
ure  for  which  he  was  liberally  rewarded  by  Napo
leon.  He  was  president  of  the  Cour  des  comptes
in  1808,  senator  in  1813-' 14,  and  in  1814  was  the
first  to  vote  for  the  deposition  of  Napoleon.  Louis
XVIII.  created  him  a  peer.  He  was  keeper  of  the
seals  in  1815-?1G,  and  soon  afterward  was  created
marquis.  Just  before  Lafayette's  death  Marbois  in
vited  him,  with  the  American  minister  and  several
of  the  latter's  compatriots,  including  Col.  Nicolas
Fish,  to  dine  with  him.  Before  the  repast  the  com
pany  was  shown  into  a  room  that  was  in  strong  con
trast  with  the  other  elegant  apartments.  It  looked
like  a  large  room  in  a  Dutch  or  Belgian  farm-house.
On  a  long,  rough  table  was  spread  a  dinner  in  keep
ing  with  the  room  :  a  single  dish  of  meat,  uncouth
pastry,  and  wine  in  bottles  and  decanters,  accom
panied  by  glasses  and  silver  goblets.  "Do  you
know  where  we  are  i "  said  Marbois  to  Lafayette
and  the  other  guests.  The  marquis  looked  at  the
low  ceiling  with  its  heavy,  bare  beams,  and,  after  a
brief  pause,  exclaimed  :  "  Ah  !  the  seven  doors,  and
the  one  window,  and  the  silver  goblets,  such  as  the
marshal  of  France  used  in  my  youth  !  My  friends,
we  are  in  Washington's  headquarters  on  the  Hud
son  fifty  years  ago."  Marbois  published, several
essays  on  agriculture  and  finance,  and  "Etatdes
finances  de  Saint  Domingue"  (Paris,  1789);  "Des
reflexions  sur  la  colonie  de  St.  Domingue  "  (Paris,
1796);  "Complot  d'Arnold  et  de  Sir  Henry  Clinton
centre  les  Etats-Unis  d'Amerique"  (1810;  trans
lated,  with  notes,  by  William  B.  Lawrence.  Phila
delphia,  1830);  ''L'Histoire  de  la  Louisiane  et  de
la  cession  de  cette  colonie  "  (1828 ;  translated,  with
notes,  bv  William  B.  Lawrence,  Philadelphia,  1830) ;
and  "  Memoires  de  ma  vie  "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1835).

MARCADET,  Elienne  Edonard  (mar-kah-
day),  French-American  magistrate,  b.  in  Cayenne
in  "1773  ;  d.  there  in  1838.  He  entered  the  magis
tracy  in  1795  as  assistant  district  attorney  of  Ca
yenne,  and  became  in  1801  judge  of  the  court  of
common  pleas,  in  1806  attorney-general  of  the
colony,  and  in  1817  judge  of  the  supreme  court,
which  post  he  held  till  his  death  in  1838.  He
published  several  valuable  treatises  on  colonial
legislation,  including  "  Recueil  des  lois  et  regle-
ments  en  vigueur  a  la  Guiane  francaise  sous  I'an-
cienne  monarchic  "(2  vols.,  Paris,  1821);  "Traite
de  legislation  coloniale  "  (1823) :  "  La  Guiane  doit-
elle  etre  astreinte  aux  memes  lois  que  la  metro-


200


MARCH


MARCHAL


pol,"  in  which  the  author  shows  that  Guiana
needed  a  separate  legislature  (1824) ;  "  La  Guiane
examinee  au  point  de  vue  de  colonie  de  deporta
tion  "  (1826) ;  "  De  1'influence  de  la  revolution
francaise  dans  la  Guiane  francaise  "  (1829) ;  "  His-
toire  du  gouvernement  de  Victor  Hugues  a  Ca
yenne,  do  1800  a  1811 "  (2  vols.,  1830).

MARCH,  Alden,  surgeon,  b.  in  Sutton,  Wor
cester  co.,  Mass.,  20  Sept.,  1795;  d.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  17  June,  1869.  His  early  life  was  passed  on
a  farm,  and  he  received  his  education  in  the  pub
lic  schools,  in  which  he  afterward  taught  for  a
short  time.  He  subsequently  attended  medical
lectures  in  Boston  and  at  Brown,  where  he  was
graduated  in  medicine  in  1820.  He  then  settled
in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  was  professor  in  the  Vermont
academy  of  medicine  in  1825-'31,  in  Albany  med
ical  seminary  in  1827-'33,  in  Albany  medical
school  in  1833-'4,  and  in  1834  established  a  school
of  practical  anatomy.  The  three  last-named  insti
tutions  were  the  forerunners  of  Albany  medical
college,  of  which  he  was  a  founder  and  its  pro
fessor  of  surgery  from  1839  until  his  death.  He
was  also  a  founder  of  the  Albany  city  hospital,  to
which  he  bequeathed  $1,000,  and  he  left  a  similar
sum,  with  his  pathological  museum,  to  Albany
medical  college.  He  was  president  of  the  New
York  state  medical  society  in  1857,  was  a  founder,
and  in  1864  president,  of  the  American  medical
association,  and  an  honorary  member  of  the  chief
medical  societies  in  the  United  States.  Williams
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  I),  in  1868.  Dr.  March
was  a  bold  and  skilful  operator,  and  originated,
among  other  important  surgical  appliances,  an  im
proved  splint  for  use  in  hip-disease  (1853) ;  im
proved  hare-lip  forceps  (1855) ;  instruments  for  the
removal  of  dead  bone  (1860) ;  and  a  new  instru
ment  for  removing  urinary  calculi  (1867).  His
numerous  essays  on  medical  subjects  are  of  perma
nent  value  to  the  profession.  He  also  published
"Wounds  of  the  Abdomen  and  Larynx"  (Phila
delphia,  1854),  and  "  Improved  Forceps  for  Hare-
Lip  Operations"  (1855).

MARCH,  Charles  Wainwrigrht,  author,  b.  in
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  15  Dec.,  1815;  d.  in  Alexan
dria,  Egypt,  24  Jan.,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1837.  studied  law,  and  practised  in
Portsmouth,  N.  H.  He  served  for  some  time  in
the  legislature,  but,  removing  to  New  York  city,
he  became  an  editorial  writer  on  the  "Tribune"
and  the  "  Times,"  and  was  a  correspondent  of  the
"Boston  Courier"  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Pe-
quot."  His  later  years  were  passed  in  Egypt.  Mr.
March  was  a  brilliant  essayist.  His  publications
include  "Daniel  Webster  and  his  Contemporaries"
(New  York,  1850),  and  "  Sketches  in  Madeira,  Por
tugal,  and  Spain"  (1856).

MARCH,  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Millburv,
Mass.,  21  July,  1816.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1840,  studied  theology,  and  was  ordained  in
1845,  and  since  that  date"  has  had  charge  of  Pres
byterian  and  Congregational  churches.  The  Uni
versity  of  western  Pennsylvania  gave  him  the  de
gree  of  S.  T.  D.  in  1864.  "His  publications  include
"Walks  and  Homes  of  Jesus"  (Philadelphia,
1866) :  "  Night  Scenes  in  the  Bible  "  (1868) ;  "  Our
Father's  House"  (1870);  "From  Dark  to  Dawn"
(1873) ;  and  '•  Home  Life  in  the  Bible  "  (1875).

MARCH,  Francis  Andrew,  author,  b.  in  Mill-
bury,  Mass.,  25  Oct..  1825.  He  was  graduated  at
Amherst  in  1845.  and.  after  serving  as  a  tutor  there
in  1847-'9.  studied  law  in  New  York,  and  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar.  After  teaching  in  Fredericks-
burg,  Va.,  in  1852-'5,  he  became  tutor  in  Lafayette
college,  where  he  was  made  adjunct  professor  in


1856,  professor  of  the  English  language  and  com
parative  philology  in  1857,  and  in  1877  lecturer  in
the  law  department.  He  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Princeton  in  1870,  and  from  Amherst
in  1871,  and  that  of  L.  H.  D.  from  Columbia  in
1887.  In  1873  he  was  elected  president  of  the
American  philological  association,  and  in  1876  he
became  president  of  the  Spelling  reform  associa
tion.  He  is  an  honorary  member  of  the  London
philological  society,  a  member  of  the  American
philosophical  society,  and  a  vice-president  of  the
London  new  Shakespeare  society.  He  has  con
tributed  articles  on  philology  to  the  "  Transac
tions  "  of  that  body,  to  the  National  educational  as
sociation,  the  United  States  bureau  of  education,  to
the  "Jahrbuch  fur  romanische  und  englische  Litera-
tur"  in  Berlin,  and  articles  on  jurisprudence  and
psychology,  including  discussion  of  Sir  William
Hamilton's  theory  of  perception  and  his  philoso
phy  of  the  conditioned  to  the  "  Princeton  Review  "
(1860;  reprinted  in  London,  1861).  His  other  pub
lications  include  "  A  Method  of  Philological  Study
of  the  English  Language"  (New  York,  1865);
"Parser  arid  Analyzer  for  Beginners"  (1869);
"Anglo-Saxon  Grammar"  (1870);  and  "Introduc
tion  to  Anglo-Saxon"  (1871).  He  has  edited  a
series  of  college  text-books  of  the  Greek  and  Latin
Christian  authors,  including  "Latin  Hymns"
(1874);  "Eusebius"  (1874):  "Tertullian"  (1875);
"Athenagoras"  (1876):  "Justin  Martyr"  (1877);
and  has  superintended  the  work  of  the  American
readers  for  the  historical  dictionary  of  English,
now  publishing  for  the  University  of  Oxford  for
the  philological  society  (1879  et  se#.)have  appeared.

MARCHAIS,  Etienne  Renaud,  Chevalier  des
(mar-shay),  French  navigator,  b.  in  Sevres  in  1683;
d.  in  Versailles  in  1728.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a
midshipman  when  he  was  fifteen  years  old,  and  be
came  a  lieutenant  in  1704,  but  resigned  to  enter
the  service  of  the  Company  of  the  hidics.  For
several  years  he  made  voyages  from  Cayenne  to  the
coast  of  Guinea  in  Africa  to  procure  negro  slaves
for  that  French  possession.  In  1724  he  became
representative  of  the  company  in  Cayenne,  and  re
sided  there  for  several  years,  returning  to  France
only  a  few  months  before  his  death.  He  left  a
narrative  of  his  travels,  which  was  published  after
ward  by  Labat  (q. v.),  and  later  in  the  "Collection
generale  des  voyages,"  under  the  title  of  "  Voyages
faits  par  le  Chevalier  Renaud  des  Marchaisen  Gui-
nee,  aux  iles  voisines  et  a  1'ile  de  Cayenne,  dunmt
les  annees  1724,  1725,  1726,  contenant  une  descrip
tion  tres  exacte  des  pays  parcourus,  et  suivis  de
renseignements  precis  sur  le  commerce  qui  s'y
fait"  (4  vols.,  Paris,  1730;  Amsterdam.  1731).  He
also  wrote  "  Relation  du  voyage  fait  a  la  cote  de
G'linee  et  aux  iles  des  Antilles  et  Cayenne  par  le
Chevalier  Renaud  des  Marchais  en  1704,  suivie
d'une  description  des  mceurs  des  habitants  de  ces
pays"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1730;  Amsterdam,  1731).

MARCHAL,  Nicolas  (mar-shall'),  Dutch  trav
eller,  b.  in  Groningen  in  1731  ;  d.  in  Amsterdam
in  1802.  He  entered  the  Dutch  colonial  service,
and  resided  many  years  in  Java  and  Sumatra.  In
1783  he  became  lieutenant-governor  of  Dutch
Guiana,  and  afterward  was  sent  on  missions  to  the
West  Indies  and  South  America  to  ascertain  how
the  Dutch  government  might  peacefully  recover  its
former  possessions  there.  He  ascertained  every
where  that  the  descendants  of  the  Dutch  colo
nists  were  satisfied  with  their  present  condition
and  entertained  no  desire  to  return  to  Dutch  do
minion.  The  French  revolution  and  the  troubles
that  ensued  in  the  West  Indies  put  a  stop  to  the
travels  of  Marchal,  but  he  nevertheless  assisted  the


MARCHAND


MARCO U


201


French  in  many  ways  in  their  strife  against  the
English,  and  carried  to  Victor  Hugues  (q.  v.)  in
Guadeloupe,  in  1794.  re-enforcements  and  supplies,
which  enabled  him  to  drive  out  his  enemies.  He
afterward  entered  the  service  of  the  French  repub
lic,  and  held  various  commands  in  the  West  Indian
colonies.  He  was  sent  in  1797  to  Louisiana  as
agent  of  the  French  to  study  public  opinion,  and
having  reported  that  the  people  were  willing  to  re
turn  to  French  rule  provided  slavery  were  main
tained  in  their  territory,  the  government  began  ne
gotiations  for  the  retrocession  of  that  colony,  which
took  place  in  1800.  Having  become  almost  blind
in  1799,  Marchal  returned  home,  where  he  died  a
few  years  later.  His  notes  and  manuscripts  were
published  afterward,  but,  owing  to  subsequent
events  in  Europe,  they  were  scarcely  noticed.  His
works  include  "  Rapport  au  directoire  de  la  re-
publique  Francaise  sur  1'opinion  publique  en
Louisiana"  (Paris,  1798);  ''Peregrinations  d'un
touriste  a  travers  les  principales  Antilles  "  (2  vols.,
1804);  and  "  Histoire  des  colonies  Hollandaises
dans  1'Amerique"  (3  vols.,  Amsterdam,  1807).

MARCH  AND,  Etienne  (mar-shan).  West  In
dian  navigator,  b.  in  the  island  of  Granada,  13
July,  1755;  d.  in  Mauritius,  15  May,  1793.  He
was  a  merchant,  trading  with  both  Americas,  and
in  1788  resolved  on  a  voyage  around  the  world  for
commercial  purposes.  Sailing  from  Marseilles  on
14  Dec..  1790,  on  the  ship  "  Le  Solide,"  he  sighted
Staten  island  on  1  April,  passed  it,  and  sailed  for
twenty  days  around  Tierra  del  Fuego,  making  sur
veys  and  soundings  along  the  coasts.  He  arrived
on  20  June  at  the  Marquesas,  and.  after  visiting
other  islands  of  Polynesia,  he  returned  to  the  coast
of  America.  He  afterward  visited  the  northern
coast  of  China  and  Siberia,  and  returned  to  Europe
in  1792.  Charles  Fleurien  (q.  v.)  has  published  a
narrative  of  Marchand's  voyage,  with  the  marine
charts  that  were  prepared  by  that  navigator  (Paris,
1798).  The  narrative  contains  some  new  and  in
teresting  information  about  the  northwest  coast  of
North  America.  Marchand's  astronomical  obser
vations  in  Berkley  sound  and  along  the  coasts  of
Tierra  del  Fuego  and  Patagonia  are  among  the
most  complete  ever  made  in  those  regions.

MARCHAND,  Felix  Gabriel,  Canadian  author,
b.  in  St.  John's,  Lower  Canada,  9  Jan.,  1832.  He
was  educated  at  St.  Hyacinthe  college,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  as  a  notary  in  1855.  He  was
appointed  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  Richelieu  light
infantry  in  I860,  was  in  active  service  during  va
rious  Fenian  raids,  and  was  sent  to  re-enforce
Lieut.-Col.  Osborne  Smith  at  the  time  of  that  at
Eccles  Hill  in  1870.  He  retired  from  active  ser
vice  in  1880,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.
He  was  first  elected  to  the  legislative  assembly  of
the  province  of  Quebec  in  1867  for  the  county  of
St.  John's,  and  has  been  rechosen  at  every  suc
cessive  election.  He  became  a  member  of  the  ex
ecutive  council,  and  provincial  secretary  on  8  j
March.  1878,  which  portfolio  he  retained  till  he
was  appointed  commissioner  of  crown  lands  on  19
March,  1879.  He  resigned  this  office  on  30  Oct.,
1879.  and  was  elected  speaker  of  the  legislative  as
sembly.  29  Jan.,  1887.  Mr.  Marc-hand  aided  in
establishing  the  St.  John's  manufacturing  com
pany,  the  St.  John's  woollen  factory,  the  St.  John's  j
building  society,  and  the  Banque  de  St.  Jean.  He
founded,  in  I860,  and  was  for  several  years  editor
and  proprietor  of,  "  Le  Franco-Canadien  "  news
paper  at  St.  John's,  was  chief  editor  of  the  Liberal
daily  "  Le  Temps,"  of  Montreal,  and  has  contrib
uted  to  many  of  the  French  Canadian  newspapers.
He  received  from  the  French  government  the  dec


oration  of  an  officer  of  public  instruction  in  1879,
has  been  appointed  a  member  of  the  Royal  society
of  Canada,  section  of  French  literature",  and  was
elected  president  of  that  section  in  May,  1884.
Mr.  Marchand  has  written  much  for  the  stage.
Among  other  works  he  is  the  author  of  the  prose
comedies  "  Fatenville  "  and  "  Erreur  n'est  pas
compte"  ;  the  comedies  in  verse  "  Un  bonheur  en
attire  un  autre  "  and  "  Les  faux  brilliants  "  ;  and
"Le  lauriat  de  1'universite,"  a  comic  opera.

MARC'HAND,  John  Bonnett,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Greensbo rough.  Pa..  27  Aug.,  1808;  d.  in  Car
lisle,  Pa.,  13  April,  1875.  He  entered  the  U.  S.
navy  in  1828  as  midshipman,  and  was  promoted
lieutenant  in  1840,  commander  in  1855,  captain  in
1862,  and  commodore  in  1866.  He  commanded
the  steamer  "  Van  Buren  "  in  the  operations  against
the  Seminole  Indians  in  1841-'2,  participated  in
the  bombardment  of  Vera  Cruz  and  the  capture
of  Tuspan  in  1847,  and  had  charge  of  the  steam
er  "  Memphis "  in  the  Paraguay  expedition  of
1859-?60.  During  the  civil  war  he  commanded  the
steamer  "  James  Adger ''  in  the  South  Atlantic
blockading  squadron  in  1862,  participated  in  the
capture  of  Fernandini,  and  was  slightly  wounded
while  reconnoitring  in  Stone  river  in  March  of
that  year.  He  had  charge  of  the  sloop  "  Lacka-
wanna,"  of  the  Eastern  Gulf  squadron,  in  1863-'4,
and  participated  in  the  battle  of  Mobile  Bay,  5
Aug.,  1864.  during  which  he  twice  rammed  the
iron-clad  "Tennessee."  In  August,  1870,  he  was
retired  from  active  service.

MARCH  ANT,  Dalton  Edward,  artist,  b.  in
Edgartown.  Mass  .  16  Dec..  1806 :  d.  in  Asbury  Park,
X.  J.,  15  Aug.,  1887.  He  first  exhibited  in  1829.  at
the  National  academy  of  design.  He  went  to  the
west  about  1843,  followed  his  profession  with  suc
cess  in  several  cities,  and  resided  chiefly  in  Nash
ville.  Tenn.  He  settled  in  Philadelphia  in  1845,
and  painted  many  portraits.  Among  them  are  that
of  John  Quincy  Adams,  from  which  the  portrait  in
the  first  volume  of  this  work  is  engraved,  Henry
Clay,  Andrew  Jackson,  Bishop  Meade,  and  that  of
President  Lincoln,  now  in  the  council-chamber  of
Independence  hall,  Philadelphia.  Many  of  his  other
works  are  in  the  building  of  the  L'nion  league
club  of  that  city,  of  which  he  was  a  member.

MARCHANT,  Henry,  member  of  the  Conti
nental  congress,  b.  in  Martha's  Vineyard,  Mass.,
in  April,  1741 ;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  30  Aug.,  1796.
He  was  graduated  at  Philadelphia  college  in  1762,
studied  law  under  Edmund  Trowbridge  in  Cam
bridge.  Mass..  and  settled  in  Newport.  R.  I.  He
was  attorney-general  of  that  state  in  1770-'7,  and
a  member  of  the  assembly.  He  was  an  ardent  pa
triot,  and  foremost  in  the  pre- Revolutionary  move
ments,  serving  as  chairman  of  the  committee  to
prepare  instruction  to  the  delegates  in  congress.
He  was  a  member  of  that  body  in  1777-'80  and
1783-'4.  and  afterward  of  the  state  convention
that  adopted  the  U.  S.  constitution.  From  1790
until  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  judge  of  the
L".  S.  district  court  of  Rhode  Island.  Yale  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1792.

MARCOU,  Jules  (mar-koe),  geologist,  b.  in
Salins,  Jura,  France,  20  April,  1824.  He  studied
at  the  college  of  Besancon.  and  that  of  St.  Louis
in  Paris,  after  which  failing  health  led  to  his  mak
ing  excursions  into  Ssvitzerland,  where  he  acquired
a  fondness  for  natural  science.  In  1845  he  became
associated  with  Jules  Thurmann  in  his  work  on  the
geology  of  the  Jura  mountains,  and  while  engaged
in  this  undertaking  met  Louis  Agassiz.  He  was
appointed  assistant  in  the  mineralogical  depart
ment  of  the  Sorbonne  in  1846,  and  also  classified


202


MARCOUX


MARCY


its  collection  of  fossils.  In  1847  he  was  made
travelling  geologist  for  the  Jardin  des  plantes,  and
was  sent'to  study  the  United  States  and  the  Eng
lish  possessions  in  North  America.  He  accompa
nied  Louis  Agassiz  to  Lake  Superior,  visited  the
copper-mines  of  Keweenaw  point,  Lake  Huron,
and  Niagara,  returning  to  Cambridge  after  six
months'  exploration  and  sending  to  Paris  valuable
collections  of  minerals.  In  January,  1849,  he  di
rected  his  attention  to  the  geology  of  New  Jersey,
Pennsylvania,  and  Virginia.  Later  he  crossed  the
Alleghany  mountains,  visiting  the  Mammoth  cave
and  other  localities,  and  then  traversed  Canada
and  the  adjacent  provinces.  He  returned  to  Eu
rope  in  1850.  but  soon  came  back  to  the  United
States,  and  was  occupied  with  the  preparation  of
his  "Geological  Map  of  the  United  States  and
British  Provinces  of  North  America  "  (2  vols.,  Bos
ton,  1853).  In  1853  he  entered  the  U.  S.  service,
was  the  first  geologist  that  crossed  the  United
States,  being  attached  to  the  Pacific  railroad  ex
ploration  of  the  35th  parallel,  and  made  a  section
from  the  Mississippi  river  to  the  Pacific  ocean.
Failing  health  compelled  his  return  to  Europe,
and  in  1855-'9  he  was  professor  of  geology  in  the
Polytechnic  school  of  Zurich.  In  18(J1  he  re
turned  to  the  United  States,  and  was  associated
with  Louis  Agassiz  in  the  foundation  of  the  Mu
seum  of  comparative  zoology,  having  charge  of  the
paleontological  division  in  1860-'4.  Subsequently
he  devoted  himself  to  scientific  research  until  1875,
when  he  again  entered  the  National  service  in  his
professional  capacity.  He  is  a  member  of  scien
tific  societies,  and  was  decorated  with  the  cross  of
the  Legion  of  honor  in  1867.  Since  the  death  of
Ebenezer  Emmons  (q.  v.),  Prof.  Marcou  has  been
the  strongest  supporter  of  the  Taconic  system  of
New  York,  publishing  nearly  a  dozen  important
papers  on  that  system  in  Vermont  and  Canada.
In  addition  to  numerous  scientific  memoirs,  he  has
published  •'  Recherches  geologiques  sur  la  Jura
Salinois"  (Paris,  1848);  "Geology  of  North  Ameri
ca"  (Zurich,  1858) ;  "  Lettres  sur  les  roches  du  Jura
et  leur  distribution  geographique  dans  les  deux
hemispheres"  (Paris,  1800);  "Geological  Map  of
the  World"  (Winterthur,  1861;  2d  ed.,  Zurich,
1875);  "De  la  science  en  France"  (Paris,  1809);
and  "A  Catalogue  of  Geological  Maps  of  Ameri
ca  "  (Washington,  1884) ;  and  "  The  Taconic  System
and  its  Position  in  Stratigraphic  Geology  "  (Cam
bridge,  1885).  In  geography  he  has  explained  the
origin  of  the  name  American  in  "Origin  of  the
Name  America"  (Boston,  1875,  and  Paris,  1887),
and  "  First  Discoveries  of  California,  and  the  Ori
gin  of  its  Name  "  (Washington,  1878).

MARCOUX,  Joseph,  Canadian  missionary,  b.
in  Canada  about  1770;  d.  there  in  1855.  After  his
ordination  he  labored  among  the  Iroquois  tribes,
and  was  finally  stationed  at  Caughnauaga,  or  Sault
St.  Louis,  in  1819.  After  many  trials  he  succeeded
in  rendering  the  Indians  of  his  mission  sober  and
industrious.  He  built  a  fine  church  in  1845,  a
large  school-house,  and  obtained  for  his  flock  all
the  advantages  that  were  enjoyed  by  the  whites.
His  long  intercourse  with  the'  tribe  gave  him  a
thorough  mastery  of  their  language.  He  composed
an  Iroquois  grammar  and  French-Iroquois  and
Iroquois-French  dictionaries,  and  also  published  a
"Life  of  Christ,"  written  in  Iroquois,  a  prayer-
book  (1852),  and  a  catechism  (1854).

MARCY,  Oliver,  educator,  b.  in  Coleraine,
Mass.,  13  Feb.,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at  Wes-
leyan  in  1840.  and  then  taught  natural  science  in
various  academies.  In  1862  he  became  professor
of  natural  history  in  Northwestern  university,  and


has  since  held  that  chair,  also  acting  as  president
since  1876.  During  1866  he  was  geologist  on  the
government  road  from  Lewiston,  Idaho,  to  Vir
ginia  City,  Montana.  He  is  a  member  of  various
scientific  societies,  and  in  1870  received  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  from  the  University  of  Chicago.  Prof.
Marcy  has  published  scientific  articles  and  ad
dresses,  and  also  a  "  Record  of  the  Marcy  Family  "
in  the  "  New  England  Historical  and  Genealogical
Register"  for  July,  1875.

MARCY,  Randolph  Barnes,  soldier,  b.  in
Greenwich,  Mass.,  9  April,  1812 ;  d.  in  Orange,
N.  J.,  22  Nov.,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1832,  and  served  in
the  Black  Hawk  expedition  of  that  year,  also
on  frontier  duty  with  the  5th  infantry.  During
the  war  with  Mexico  he  participated  in  the  bat
tles  of  Palo  Alto  and  Resaca  de  la  Palma,  and
was  made  captain  in  May,  1840,  after  which  ho
served  on  recruiting  service.  Subsequently  he
was  engaged  in  the  exploration  of  the  Red  river
country  in  1852-'4,  in  the  Florida  hostilities
against  the  Seminole  Indians  in  1857,  and  in  the
Utah  expedition  of  1857-'8,  having  command  of
a  detachment  that  was  sent  to  New  Mexico  in  No
vember,  1857,  and  returning  in  March,  1858,  after-
great  suffering.  In  1859  he  was  promoted  major
on  the  staff  and  served  as  paymaster  of  the  north
western  posts  in  1859-'61,  becoming  inspector-gen
eral  with  the  rank  of  colonel  on  9  Aug.,  1861.
During  the  civil  war  he  served  as  chief  of  staff
to  his  son-in-law,  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan,  and
acted  in  that  capacity  in  McClellan's  campaigns
of  western  Virginia,  in  the  peninsular  campaign,
and  in  the  Maryland  campaign  until  November,
1862.  He  had  been  made  brigadier-general  of  vol
unteers  on  23  Sept.,  1861.  He  was  then  assigned
to  inspection  duties  in  the  departments  of  the
Northwest,  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Mississippi,  and  the
Gulf  until  1865,  when  he  became  inspector-general
of  the  military  division  of  the  Missouri.  In  1869
he  was  transferred  to  Washington,  and  became  in
spector-general  of
the  U.  S.  army  with
the  rank  of  briga
dier-general,  to  date
from  12  Dec.,  1878,
continuing  in  that
office  till  his  retire
ment  on  2  Jan.,
1881.  He  received
the  brevets  of  brig
adier-general  and
of  major-general  on
13  March,  1865,  for
services  during  the
civil  war.  He  had
the  reputation  of
being  a  famous
sportsman,  spend
ing  much  time  in
hunting  in  the
Rocky  mountains.
Gen.  Marcy  has  contributed  to  magazines,  and
published  "  Exploration  of  the  Red  River  in  1852"
(Washington,  1853);  "The  Prairie  Traveller,  a
Handbook  for  Overland  Emigrants  "  (New  York,
1859);  "Thirty  Years  of  Army  Life  on  the  Bor
der"  (1866);  and  "Border  Reminiscences"  (1871).
— His  brother,  Erastus  Edgerton,  physician,  b.
in  Greenwich,  Mass..  9  Dec.,  1815,  was  gradu
ated  at  Amherst  in  1834,  and  at  Jefferson  medical
college  in  1837.  During  the  ten  ensuing  years  he
practised  in  Hartford,  but  in  1847,  after  becoming
a  convert  to  homoeopathic  views,  he  came  to  New


MARCY


MARfiCHAL


203


York,  where  he  has  acquired  an  extensive  and  lu
crative  practice,  ranking  among  the  first  of  his
school  in  the  United  States.  In  1852  he  estab
lished  the  "  North  American  Journal  of  Home
opathy,"  which  he  edited  until  1865.  Dr.  Marcy
has  written  numerous  essays  on  medical  and  chem
ical  subjects,  besides  which  he  has  published  in
book-form  "Theory  and  Practice  of  Medicine"
(New  York,  1850) ;  "  Homoeopathy  rs.  Allopathy"
(1852);  "Theory  and  Practice  of  Homoeopathy  "
(2  vols.,  1858) ;  "  Christianity  and  its  Conflicts "
(1867) ;  and  "  Life  Duties  "  (1869) ;  and  he  has  also
edited  "  Hahnemann's  Lesser  Writings"  (1856).

MARCY,  William  Learned,  statesman,  b.  in
Southbridge,  Mass.,  12  Dec.,  1786;  d.  in  Ballston
Spa.,  N.  Y.,  4  July,  1857.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1808,  and'  then  studied  law  in  Troy.  N.  Y.,
where,  after  being  admitted  to  the  bar,  he  opened
an  office.  The  war  with  Great  Britain  soon  be
gan,  and  young  Marcy,  holding  a  lieutenancy  in
a  light-infantry  company,  tendered  the  services
of  his  command  to  the  governor  of  New  York.
This  offer  was  accepted,  and  the  company  was
sent  to  French  Mills,  on  the  northern  frontier.
On  the  night  of  23  Oct.,  1812,  he  surprised  and  cap
tured  the  Canadian  forces  that  were  stationed  at
St.  Regis.  These  were  the  first  prisoners  taken  on
land,  and  their  flag  was  the  first  captured  during
the  war.  This  exploit  gained  for  him  recognition
from  Gen.  Henry  Dearborn,  and  his  command  was
attached  to  the  main  army,  but,  after  serving  the
time  for  which  he  had  enlisted,  he  returned  to  his
practice,  having  attained  the  rank  of  captain.  In
1816  he  was  appointed  recorder  of  Troy,  but  his
opposition  to  De  Witt  Clinton  led  to  his  removal
from  office,  and  remains  as  one  of  the  earliest
cases  of  political  proscription  in  the  history  of
New  York.  He  then  became  editor  of  the  "  Troy
Budget,"  a  daily  newspaper,  whicli  he  soon  made
a  well-known  organ  of  the  Democratic  party.  The
earnest  support  that  he  gave  to  Martin  Van  Bu-
ren  resulted  in  his  affiliation  with  the  division  of
the  Democratic  party  of  which  Van  Buren  was
leader,  and  in  1821  he  was  made  adjutant-general  of
the  state  militia.  He  was  a  member  of  the  "  Albany
regency."  (See  CAGGER,  PETER.)  His  political  capa
bilities  showed  themselves  to  advantage  in  the  pas
sage  of  the  act  that  authorized  a  convention  to  revise
the  constitution.  He  became  in  1823  comptroller
of  the  state,  an  important  office  at  that  time,  owing
to  the  large  expenditures  on  the  Erie  and  Cham-
plain  canals,  and  the  increase  of  the  stiite  debt.  In
1829  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  associate  justices
of  the  supreme  court  of  New  York,  and  in  that
capacity  presided  over  numerous  important  trials,
among  "which  was  that  of  the  alleged  murderers
of  William  Morgan  (q.  r.).  He  continued  on  the
bench  until  1831,  when  he  was  elected  as  a  Demo
crat  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  serving  from  5  Dec.,  1831,
and  becoming  chairman  of  the  judiciary  committee.
His  maiden  speech  was  in  answer  to  Henry  Clay's
aspersions  on  Martin  Van  Buren,  and  was  followed
soon  afterward  by  his  answer  to  Daniel  Webster's
speech  on  the  apportionment.  His  career  as  a
senator  gained  for  him  a  strong  hold  on  the  confi
dence  of  the  people  of  his  state  and  elsewhere.
He  resigned  in  1833  to  fill  the  governorship  of
New  York,  to  which  he  had  been  elected,  and  held
that  office  through  three  terms,  until  1839.  For  a
fourth  time  he  was  nominated,  but  he  was  defeated
by  William  H.  Seward.  In  1839  he  was  appointed
by  Martin  Van  Buren  one  of  the  commissioners
to  decide  upon  the  claims  against  the  government
of  Mexico,  under  the  convention  of  that  year,  and
w*is  so  occupied  until  1842.  He  presided  over  the


Democratic  state  convention  at  Syracuse  in  Sep
tember,  1843.  and  during  the  subsequent  canvass
he  used  his  influence  in  causing  the  state  of  New
York  to  cast  its  votes  for  James  K.  Polk,  by  whom,
after  his  election,  he
was  invited  to  be
come  secretary  of
war.  The  duties  of
that  office  were  per
formed  by  him  with
signal  ability,  espe
cially  during  the
Mexican  war.  The
difficulties  of  his  task
were  somewhat  in
creased  by  the  fact
that  the  two  victo
rious  generals.  Win-
field  Scott  and  Zach-
ary  Taylor,  were  of
the  opposing  politi
cal  party,  and  charged  Mr.  Marcy  with  using  his
official  power  to  embarrass  and  retard  their  mili
tary  operations.  These  accusations  were  made  so
persistently  and  openly  that  it  became  necessary
for  him  to  defend  himself  against  such  attacks,
which  he  did  with  so  much  force  that  he  completely
silenced  all  censure.  During  his  term  of  office  he
exerted  his  diplomatic  powers  to  advantage  in  the
settlement  of  the  Oregon  boundary  question',  also
advocating  the  tariff  of  1846,  and  opposing  all  in
terference  on  the  slavery  question.  At  the  close  of
his  term  of  office  he  retired  to  private  life,  but  in
1853  he  returned  to  Washington  as  secretary  of
state  under  Franklin  Pierce.  While  in  this  office
he  carried  on  a  correspondence  with  the  Austrian
authorities  in  reference  to  the  release  of  Martin
Koszta  by  Capt.  Duncan  N.  Ingraham  (q.  v.).  The
questions  that  were  involved  were  in  a  measure  new,
and  affected  all  governments  that  recognized  the
laws  of  nations.  His  state  papers  on  Central  Ameri
can  affairs,  on  the  enlistment  question,  on  the  Dan
ish  sound  dues,  and  on  many  other  topics  of  na
tional  interest,  still  further  exhibited  his  ability  as
a  writer,  statesman,  and  diplomatist.  On  the  close
of  Pierce's  administration,  he  again  retired  to  pri
vate  life,  and  four  months  afterward  he  was  found
dead  one  evening  in  his  library  with  an  open  vol
ume  before  him.  Mr.  Marcy  had  the  reputation  of
being  a  shrewd  political  tactician,  and  probably
has  never  been  surpassed  in  this  respect  by  any
one  in  New  York  except  Martin  Van  Buren.  He
was  regarded  among  his  countrymen  of  all  parties
as  a  statesman  of  the  highest  order  of  adminis
trative  and  diplomatic  ability.

MARECHAL,  Ambrose  (mah-ray-shal),  arch
bishop,  b.  in  Ingre,  near  Orleans,  France,  5  Dec.,
1768  ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  29  Jan.,  1828.  He  was
educated  in  a  college  in  Orleans,  and  early  mani
fested  a  desire  to  enter  the  clerical  profession,  but
yielded  to  the  views  of  his  parents  and  studied
law.  Afterward,  gaining  his  parents'  consent,  he
entered  on  a  course  of  ecclesiastical  studies  in  the
Sulpitian  seminary  of  Orleans.  He  went  to  Paris
toward  the  end  of  1791,  but  was  forced  to  fly  from
the  city  early  in  1792.  and  was  ordained  priest  in
Bordeaux  at  the  risk  of  his  life.  Immediately
afterward  he  was  forced  to  disguise  himself,  fled  to
Havre,  and  embarked  for  the  United  States,  arriv
ing  in  Baltimore.  24  June,  1792.  His  first  mission
was  in  St.  Mary's  county,  Maryland,  where  he  re
mained  for  a  few  years.  He  was  then  assigned  to
the  Bohemian  station  on  the  eastern  shore  of  this
state,  where  he  labored  till  1799.  He  was  next
appointed  professor  of  theology  in  St.  Mary's


204


MAREST


MARGGRAF


seminary,  Baltimore,  at  tlie  same  time  filling  the
chair  of  philosophy  in  Georgetown  college  for
several  months.  He  was  recalled  to  France  by
his  superiors  in  1803,  in  order  to  assist  in  reorgan
izing  the  institutions  of  the  Sulpitian  order,  and
taught  theology  in  Aix  and  Lyons  successively
till  1811,  when,  the  Sulpitians  having  been  sup
pressed  by  an  imperial  decree,  he  was  sent  back  to
the  United  States,  and,  resuming  his  chair  in  St.
Mary's,  was  for  a  time  president  of  the  institution.
Shortly  after  his  return  he  was  nominated  bishop
of  Philadelphia,  but  declined.  He  was  afterward
nominated  coadjutor  to  the  Archbishop  of  Balti
more,  and  consecrated  in  that  city,  14  Dec.,  1817.
Disturbances  had  arisen  in  the  diocese,  owing  to
the  claim  of  lay  trustees  to  a  voice  in  the  appoint
ment  of  priests.  Archbishop  Marechal  showed
much  wisdom  and  prudence  in  defence  of  what  he
considered  his  rights,  and  succeeded  in  restoring
peace.  On  31  May.  1821,  he  dedicated  the  cathe
dral  of  Baltimore, 'which  had  been  begun  by  Arch
bishop  Carroll  in  1806.  The  walls  of  this  structure
had  stood  for  several  years  only  a  few  feet  above
the  ground,  and  its  completion  was  entirely  due  to
Archbishop  Marechal.  The  marble  altar  was  a
present  from  the  priests  of  Marseilles,  who  had
studied  theology  under  him,  and  the  paintings  and
other  fine  objects  of  art  were  also  sent  to  him  from
France  by  some  of  his  old  pupils.  In  October,  1821,
he  went  to  Rome  in  the  interests  of  his  diocese,
and  he  visited  Canada  in  1826  with  the  same  object.
On  his  return  he  went  to  Emmettsburg,  Md.,  where
he  was  attacked  by  the  disease  of  which  he  died.
Besides  being  thoroughly  versed  in  theology,  Arch
bishop  Marechal  was  well  acquainted  with  general
literature  and  mathematics.  He  left  various  manu
scripts  behind  him  treating  of  several  branches  of
the  latter  science.  He  published  "  Pastoral  Let
ters  of  Archbishop  Carroll  to  the  Congregation  of
Trinity  Church.  Philadelphia,  in  1797,  and  of  Arch
bishop"  Marechal  to  that  of  Norfolk  in  1819  "  (3d
ed.,  Baltimore,  1819).

MAREST,  or  MARET,  Gabriel  (mah-ray),
French  missionary,  b.  in  France;  d.  near  Peoria,
III.,  in  1715.  He  was  sent  as  a  missionary  to  Cana
da,  and  labored  successfully  among  the  Illinois  In
dians  in  1697,  after  acquiring  a  good  knowledge  of
their  language.  He  then  established  his  mission
permanently  near  Fort  Peoria,  and  most  of  the
tribes  in  the  neighborhood  became  Christians.  He
was  much  annoyed  by  the  French  in  the  Illinois
country,  who  were  profligate  and  made  light  of
his  reproofs,  and  in  1711  he  appealed  to  Gov.  Bien-
ville,  who  sent  him  a  sergeant  and  twelve  men  to
maintain  order.  Father  Marest  is  the  author  of
two  narratives  that  have  been  published  in  the
"  Lettres  edifiantes."  The  first  gives  an  interest
ing  account  of  a  journey  that  he  made  to  Hudson
bay  in  1694  in  company  with  Iberville;  the  sec
ond,  dated  9  Nov.,  1712,  from  the  Illinois  country,
contains  several  curious  details  as  to  the  settlement
of  the  French  and  the  progress  of  Christianity
among  the  Indians  on  the  Mississippi.

MAREUIL,  Peter  de,  French  missionary,  b.  in
France ;  d.  there  in  1742.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Society  of  Jesus  and  was  stationed  among  the
Onondagas  in  1708,  when  he  informed  the  Marquis
de  Vaudreuil,  the  governor-general  of  Canada,  that
the  Iroquois,  at  the  instigation  of  the  English,  were
about  to  declare  war  against  the  French  colony.
No  attention  was  paid  to  his  letter.  War  began  in
the  following  year,  and  Col.  Peter  Schuyler  went
from  Albany  to  Onondaga  to  persuade  the  mission
ary  to  accompany  him  thither  on  his  return.  Ma-
reuil.  unable  to  go  to  Canada,  as  the  roads  were  be


set  by  war-parties,  accepted  the  offer,  and  retired
to  Albany,  where,  in  spite  of  the  penal  laws  against
Roman  Catholic  priests,  he  was  welcomed  as  a
friend,  and,  by  a  resolution  of  the  assembly,  main
tained  at  the  public  expense,  although  as  a  state
prisoner.  He  visited  New  York,  where  he  witnessed
the  English  preparations  for  the  Chambly  expedi
tion.  In  1710  there  was  an  exchange  of  prisoners,
and  he  was  allowed  to  return  to  Montreal,  which
he  reached  in  April,  1711.  He  afterward  returned
to  France,  and  was  employed  in  the  College  Louis
le  Grand,  where  he  died.  '  lie  was  the  last  Jesuit
missionary  that  was  stationed  among  the  Iroquois.

MARETZEK,  Max, opera-manager,  b.  in  Brunn,
Austria,  28  June,  1821.  He  was  educated  at  the
University  of  Vienna,  and  later,  in  that  city,  pur
sued  a  course  of  musical  training  under  the  noted
chapel-master.  I.  X.  Seyfried.  Some  years  after
ward  he  became  connected  with  the  Italian  opera
in  London  as  chorus-master,  and  within  that  time
wrote  the  music  of  several  dances  and  ballets.  He
came  to  New  York  city  in  1848,  where  he  began
his  career  as  leader  of  the  orchestra  at  the  Italian
opera.  Of  this  establishment  he  soon  became
manager,  continuing  as  such  for  many  years  at
the  Astor  place  and  Grand  opera-houses,  and  the
Academy  of  music,  with  occasional  visits  to  other
cities,  Cuba  and  Mexico.  Maretzek's  administra
tion  was  characterized  by  the  production  of  many
novelties,  and  the  introduction  of  some  native  vo
calists  that  have  since  become  famous.  Ho  also
established  sundry  reforms,  and  was  the  one  im
presario  that,  for  a  term  of  years,  succeeded  in
placing  Italian  opera  on  an  enduring  and  ssitisfac-
torv  footing.  Maretzek  wrote  two  operas,  "  Ham
let*'  and  "  Sleepy  Hollow."  The  first  was  produced
in  Germany,  the  second  in  this  country.  He  has
been  a  frequent  contributor  of  musical  sketches  to
American.  French,  and  German  periodicals,  and
has  published  "  Crotchets  and  Quavers,"  a  volume
of  operatic  reminiscences  (New  York.  1858).

MARGGRAF,  George  (marg-graf),  German
traveller,  b.  in  Liebstaedt,  Saxony,  in  1610  ;  d.  on
the  coast  of  Guinea  in  1644.  He  studied  mathe
matics,  and  in  1636  accompanied  to  Brazil  Dr.
William  Pison,  the  newly  appointed  governor  of
the  Dutch  possessions  in  that  country.  He  after
ward  entered  the  service  of  Count  Maurice,  of  Nas
sau,  whose  liberality  supplied  him  with  the  means
of  exploring  a  considerable  part  of  Brazil.  He
spent  six  years  in  travelling  through  the  countries
between  Rio  Grande  and  Pernambuco  rivers,  dur
ing  which  he  collected  a  great  number  of  facts  in
geography,  natural  history,  and  astronomy.  With
a  view  to  increasing  his  knowledge,  he  went  to  the
coast  of  Guinea,  where  he  fell  a  victim  to  the  cli
mate.  Fearing  that  through  some  accident  an
other  might  appropriate  his  materials,  he  wrote  his
manuscripts  on  natural  history  in  cipher.  These
were  deciphered  by  Jan  Laet  (q.  v.),  who  published
the  observations  of  Pison  and  Marggraf,  with  notes,
under  the  title  "  G.  Pisonis,  de  medicina  Brasiliensi
libri  quatuor ;  Georgii  Marggravii  historian  rerum
naturaliurn  Brasilia?  libri  octo  "  (Amsterdam,  1648).
The  work  contains  an  immense  number  of  new
plants,  to  which  he  gave  the  names  that  were  cur
rent  among  the  natives  of  Brazil.  Most  of  them
have  since  been  discovered  again,  and  the  descrip
tions  of  Marggraf  have  been  recognized  by  nat
uralists  as  generally  correct.  Pison  published  a
work  in  1658  which  combined  the  observations  of
himself  and  Marggraf,  in  which  there  is  inserted  a
treatise  of  the  latter  entitled  "  Tractatus  topo-
graphicus  et  meteorologicus  Brasilia^,  cum  eclipsi
solari ;  quibus  additi  suut  illius  et  aliorum  Com-


M ARGIL OF  JESUS


MARIN


205


mentarii  de  Brasiliensium  et  Chilensium  indole  et
lingua."  Marggrafs  premature  death  prevented
him  from  completing  a  great  work,  the  title  of
which,  as  given  by  Laet,  was  "  Progymnastica
mathematica  Americana  tribus  sectionibus  com-
prehensa."  It  was  intended  to  contain  everything
relating  to  the  astronomy,  geography,  and  geodesy
of  Brazil.  A  creeping-plant  of  the  Antilles,  be
longing  to  the  guttiferous  family,  has  been  named
Marggravia  in  honor  of  its  discoverer.

MARGIL  OF  JESUS,  Anthony,  clergyman,
b.  in  Valencia,  Spain,  18  Aug.,  1055 ;  d.  in  the  city
of  Mexico.  6  Aug.,  1726.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he
entered  a  Franciscan  convent  of  the  strictest  kind,
where  he  was  noted  for  his  piety  and  cheerful  dis
position.  He  finished  his  theological  studies  at
the  convent  of  Denia,  and  began  his  missionary
career  at  Onda,  where  he  became  celebrated  as  a
pulpit  orator.  With  the  consent  of  his  superiors,
he  offered  his  services  for  the  American  mission,
and  after  a  long  voyage  landed  at  Vera  Cruz,
which  had  just  been  destroyed  by  French  pirates.
He  then  set  out  on  foot  for  the  convent  of  the  Holy
Cross,  in  Queretaro.  which  he  reached  in  August,
1683.  He  was  employed  in  missionary  work  in
Mexico,  Yucatan,  and  Central  America,  and  con
verted  large  numbers  of  Indians.  He  established  a
missionary  college  in  the  city  of  Guatemala,  became
its  guardian,  and  then  went  to  Zacatecas,  where  he
founded  an  apostolic  college.  He  afterward  estab
lished  missions  in  Nayarit,  and  then  went  to  Texas  at
the  head  of  a  band  of  Franciscans.  He  established
various  missionary  stations  there  and  within  what
is  now  the  state  of  Louisiana,  and  travelled  fifty
miles  on  foot  to  minister  to  the  French  of  Natchi-
toches,  who  were  without  a  priest,  and  then  re
turned  to  Xacogdoches,  where  he  labored  four  years,
refusing  the  office  of  guardian  of  the  College  of
Zacatecas.  to  which  he  had  been  elected.  His  mis
sions  were  attacked  by  the  French  from  New  Or
leans,  and  Father  Margil  was  obliged  to  abandon
them  for  a  time,  but  he  returned  in  March,  1721,
restored  some  of  the  stations,  and  rebuilt  the  church
of  Guadeloupe,  which  had  been  destroyed.  He  sent
one  of  his  monks  to  found  the  mission  of  San  Jose,
on  San  Antonio  river,  which  became  the  most
prosperous  of  all.  In  1722  he  was  appointed  pre
lect  of  the  missions  de  propaganda  fide,  and  dur
ing  the  same  year,  by  his  directions,  a  chapel  and
convent  were  built  on  the  site  of  La  Salle's  fort  on
Espiritu  Santo  bay.  Shortly  afterward  he  was
elected  guardian  of  the  College  of  Guadeloupe  at
Zacatecas.  On  completing  his  term,  he  resumed  his
missionary  labors  in  Mexico  and  continued  them
until  he  was  stricken  down  with  the  illness  of
which  he  died.  The  Spaniards  and  Indians  be
lieved  that  he  had  worked  miracles,  and  the  city  of
Mexico  petitioned  the  Roman  see  for  his  canoni
zation.  The  cause  was  examined  into  some  years
after  his  death,  and  he  was  declared  venerable  by
Pope  Gregory  XVI.  in  1836,  but  has  not  yet  been
declared  beatified.  Numerous  biographies  of  Father
Margil  have  been  written  in  Spanish  and  Italian,
including  "  Vida  Portentosa  del  Americano  Septen
trional  Apostol,  El  V.  P.  F.  Anto.  Margil"  (Mad
rid,  1775),  and  "  Notizie  della  vita  del  ven.  servo  di
Dio.  Fr.  Antonio  Margil  de  Jesus  "  (Rome,  1836).

MARGUERITTES,  Julie  de,  author,  b.  in
London,  England,  in  1814  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
21  June,  1866.  She  was  the  daughter  of  an  emi
nent  English  physician,  and  married  the  Count  de
Marguerittes,  who  was  expelled  from  France  on
the  establishment  of  the  second  republic,  and  came
to  New  York,  where  she  supported  him^  by  her
pen.  When  he  was  recalled  by  Louis  Napoleon


j  he  abandoned  his  wife,  who obtained  a  divorce,

i  and  afterward  married  George  G.  Foster,  an  author
and  publisher  of  New  York  city,  who  died  in  1850.
The  widow  gave  concerts  and  readings,  and  on  9
March,  1852,  made  her  appearance  on  the  operatic
stage  at  the  Broadway  theatre,  New  York,  in  the
opera  of  "  La  Gazza  Ladra."  She  performed  in
the  same  piece  at  the  Chestnut  theatre,  Philadel
phia,  made  that  city  her  home,  and,  retiring  from
the  stage,  became  the  dramatic  critic  of  the  "  Sun
day  Transcript."  She  afterward  married  Samuel
J.  Rea,  a  journalist  of  Philadelphia.  She  was  a
copious  writer  for  the  press,  and  published  in
book-form  "  The  Ins  and  Outs  of  Paris "  (Phila
delphia,  1855)  ;  "  Italy  and  the  War  of  1859 "
(1859) ;  and  "  Parisian  Pickings,  or  Paris  in  all
States  and  Stations  "  (1860).  —  Her  daughter,
No£mie,  made  her  debut,  at  the  Halliday  street
theatre,  Baltimore,  in  the  "  Ambassador's  Wife,"
but  afterward  withdrew  from  the  stage,  and  suc
ceeded  her  mother  as  dramatic  critic  of  the  Boston
'•  Sunday  Transcript."

MARIANNA  OF  JESUS,  surnamed  the  LILY
OF  QUITO,  a  saint  of  the  Roman  Catholic  church,
b.  in  Quito,  Ecuador,  31  Oct.,  1618  ;  d.  there,  26
May,  1645.  The  name  of  her  family  was  Paredes
y  Flores.  She  began  to  practise  austerity  at  a  very
early  age.  On  the  death  of  her  mother  she  was
confided  to  the  care  of  an  aunt,  who  lived  in  the
suburbs  of  Quito.  At  length  her  friends  decided
to  send  her  to  be  educated  in  the  convent  of  St.
Catharine  of  Sienna,  but  she  declared  that  she  had
a  revelation  that  she  was  to  remain  with  her  family.
She  spent  most  of  her  time  in  prayer,  and  fre
quently  remained  for  days  without  food.  In  1645
the  city  was  afflicted  with  terrible  epidemics  and
frequently  recurring  earthquakes.  She  rose  in
church  on  25  March  of  that  year,  and  in  a  few
words  declared  that  a  victim  was  required,  and  of
fered  her  life  for  the  salvation  of  the  people.  It  is
said  that  earthquakes  ceased  after  this  act  of  self-
devotion,  arid  that  the  violence  of  the  plague  gradu
ally  decreased,  until  after  her  death  the  epidemic
disappeared  altogether.  She  was  buried  with  great
pomp  on  28  May,  and  it  was  reported  that  miracles
were  wrought  at  her  tomb.  A  petition  for  her  can
onization  was  presented  at  Rome,  and  in  1850  her
beatification  was  decreed  by  Pope  Pius  IX.

MARIGNY,  Charles  Ren6  Louis,  Viscount  de
BERNARD  DE  (mah-reen'-ye).  French  naval  officer,  b.
in  Seez,  Normandy,  1  Feb.,  1740 ;  d.  in  Brest,  25  July,
1815.  He  became  a  midshipman  in  1755,  and  lieu
tenant  in  1757,  and  served  in  Santo  Domingo  from
1767  till  1774.  In  1775  he  made  an  extended  cruise
through  the  West  Indies,  and  in  1778  he  commanded
the  frigate  "  La  Belle  Poule,"  on  which  Benjamin
Franklin  returned  to  the  United  States.  They  en
countered  two  English  men-of-war,  but  Marignv
eluded  their  pursuit.  He  captured  an  English  ship
at  the  battle  of  Ouessant  in  1778,  became  post-
captain  and  a  knight  of  St.  Louis  in  the  following
year,  and  served  under  De  Guichen,  D'Estaing,  and
De  Grasse  at  the  battles  off  St.  Christopher,  25  and
26  Jan.,  1782.  He  participated  in  seven  naval  bat
tles  during  the  war  of  American  independence.
Afterward  he  served  as  naval  commander  in  Brest,
and  became  rear-admiral  in  1792,  but  resigned  a

''  few  months  later,  and  was  imprisoned  during  the
reign  of  terror.  Louis  XVIII.  appointed  him  vice-
admiral  and  knight-commander  of  St.  Louis  in

s  1814,  but  he  refused  to  re-enter  the  service.

MARIN,  Jose"  Gaspar  (mah-reen'),  Chilian  pa
triot,  b.  in  Serena  in  1772  ;  d.  in  Santiago,  24  Feb.,
1839.  He  studied  in  the  College  of  San  Carlos,
where  he  was  graduated  very  young  as  doctor  in


206


MARINA


MARINO


theology,  and  later  in  civil  and  canonical  law.  He
was  appointed  professor  of  jurisprudence  in  that
college,  and  was  at  the  same  time  president  of  the
College  of  lawyers.  In  1808  he  became  counsellor
to  the  tribunal  of  commerce,  and  in  1810,  on  the
deposition  of  President  Carrasco,  the  new  ruler,
Toro  Zambrano,  appointed  Marin  his  legal  adviser.
When  independence  was  resolved  upon,  the  first
governing  junta  elected  him  secretary,  18  Sept..
1810,  and  as  such  he  formulated  the  declaration  of
independence,  and  arranged  the  details  of  the  new
administration.  On  15  Nov.,  1811,  Carrera  made
him  his  associate  in  the  second  governing  junta,
and  in  1814,  after  the  defeat  of  Rancagua,  he  went
to  Buenos  Ayres,  where  he  worked  assiduously  for
the  emancipation  of  his  country,  and  returned  with
San  Martin.  In  1823  he  was  appointed  by  Gen.
O'Higgins  attorney-general,  but  declined,  and  was
elected  by  congress  judge  of  the  supreme  court.
In  1825  he  was  banished  by  the  dictator,  Ramon
Freire,  but  in  1827  recalled  by  congress  and  elected
deputy  for  San  Fernando.  He  proposed  the  law
for  the  recall  of  Gen.  O'Higgins,  was  one  of  the
promoters  of  the  new  liberal  constitution  in  1828,
and  before  1837  was  several  times  deputy  to  con
gress  and  president  of  that  body.

MARINA,  or  MALINTZIN  (mah-ree'-nah),
Mexican  woman,  b.  in  Painala,  province  of  Coatza-
coalco,  in  the  beginning  of  the  16th  century ;  d.  in
Mexico  after  1550.  Her  father  was  a  vassal  of  the
Mexican  emperor  and  cacique  of  several  districts.
Shortly  after  his  death  her  mother  married  again
and  had  a  son.  In  order  that  he  might  succeed  to
the  property  that  Marina  inherited  from  her  father,
her  mother  and  step-father  spread  a  report  of  her
death  and  sold  her  as  a  slave  to  some  rneVchants  of
Xicalanco.  The  merchants  sold  Marina  to  the  ca
cique  of  Tabasco,  who  gave  her  as  a  present  to
Cortes,  with  nineteen  other  Indian  women,  to  pre
pare  Indian  corn  for  the  Spanish  troops.  She  was
baptized  with  her  companions,  and  received  the
name  of  Marina.  She  is  said  by  Diaz  del  Castil
lo  to  have  been  singularly  beautiful.  In  addition
to  the  language  of  her  country  she  understood  the
Maya  dialect  of  Yucatan  and  Tabasco,  and  in  a
short  time  she  had  mastered  Castilian,  which
rendered  her  very  useful  to  her  new  masters.  When
the  Spaniards  landed  at  Chahchiuhcuecan,  now
Vera  Cruz,  21  April,  1519,  they  found  that  the  in
terpreter,  Aguilar,  was  of  no  service  to  them,  as
he  spoke  only  Maya.  Cortes  was  in  great  embar
rassment,  when  an  accident  led  to  the  discovery
that  Marina  understood  the  language  of  the  coun
try.  The  general,  says  Castillo,  took  her  aside  and
promised  her  not  only  her  freedom,  but  other  ad
vantages  if  she  would  be  a  faithful  interpreter.
Then  he  learned  from  her  the  particulars  of  her
life,  and  from  that  time  she  gained  an  influence
over  him  that  she  never  lost.  She  was  not  only
the  medium  of  negotiation  between  the  Spaniards
and  the  Mexicans,  the  Tlascaltecs,  and  the  other
tribes  of  Anahuac,  but  she  often  saved  their  lives
by  warning  them  of  the  dangers  that  surrounded
them.  They  owed  their  escape  at  Cholula  entirely
to  her  ingenuity.  In  Mexico  she  was  constantly
the  intermediary  between  Cortes  and  Montezuma
and  his  subjects,  and  it  was  by  her  address  that  the
monarch  was  finally  induced  to  put  himself  in  the
power  of  the  Spaniards.  She  accompanied  the  con
queror  in  all  his  expeditions  as  interpreter  and
counsellor.  During  a  laborious  and  perilous  jour
ney  that  she  made  with  him  in  the  province  of
Honduras  in  1524  she  travelled  through  her  native
land.  Her  mother  and  brother  presented  them
selves  before  her  i:i  great  terror,  lest  she  should


avenge  the  wrong  they  had  done  her,  but  she  re
ceived  them  with  affection.  After  the  conquest
she  married  Juan  de  Jaramillo,  a  Spanish  gentle
man.  She  had  a  son  by  Cortes  who  was  named
Don  Martin,  and  who,  notwithstanding  his  illegiti
macy,  was  made  a  knight  of  Calatrava  in  consid
eration  of  the  nobility  of  his  mother.  In  1568
he  was  accused  of  rebellion  on  a  vague  suspicion,
and  put  to  the  torture  in  Mexico,  notwithstanding
the  services  that  his  mother  had  rendered  to  the
Spanish  nation.  Nothing  is  known  of  her  further
life  except  that  in  1550  she  presented  a  petition  to
the  viceroy,  Antonio  de  Mendoza,  complaining  that
the  Indians  of  her  commandery  of  Jilantongo  re
fused  to  pay  her  tribute  or  render  personal  service,
as  they  were  obliged  to  do.

MARINHO,  Jos6  Antonio  (mah-reen'-yo),  Bra
zilian  educator,  b.  in  Salgado,  7  Oct.,  1803  ;  d.  in
Rio  Janeiro,  3  March,  1853.  He  was  of  mulatto
parentage,  and  had  many  difficulties  in  obtaining
an  education.  He  intended  to  study  for  the  min
istry,  but  was  refused  at  first  because  of  his  Afri
can  descent.  Later  he  was  accepted  by  recom
mendation  of  the  Marquis  of  Caravellas  in  1820.
In  1831  he  was  ordained  priest,  and  in  1832  he  ob
tained  the  chair  of  philosophy  in  the  city  of  Oiiro
Preto.  In  1839  he  was  appointed  preacher  to  the
imperial  chapel,  and  in  1840  counsellor  in  ecclesi
astical  matters.  He  belonged  to  the  most  ad
vanced  Liberal  party,  and  in  1835  and  1837  suf
fered  as  a  friend  of  reforms.  In  1842  he  took  part
in  the  revolution  of  Minas,  and,  after  the  defeat  of
the  insurgents  in  Santa  Luzia,  he  was  persecuted
and  took  refuge  in  the  country,  where  he  wrote  his
"  Historia  da  revolugao  de  Minas."  In  1844  he  re
turned,  having  obtained  a  pardon  from  the  em
peror.  In  1845  he  established  a  school  in  Rio  Ja
neiro,  where  he  introduced  the  newest  educational
methods.  The  fame  of  this  institution  brought
many  students  from  the  empire  and  also  from  the
Argentine  Republic,  Uruguay,  and  Paraguay,  and
he  numbered  among  his  pupils  nearly  all  the  Bra
zilians  that  have  attained  note  in  later  years.

MARINO,  Santiago  (mah-reen'-yo),  Venezuelan
soldier,  b.  in  the  island  of  Margarita  in  1788  :  d.  in
Victoria,  4  Sept.,  1854.  He  entered  the  military
service  in  his  youth,  and  in  1810,  joining  the  popu
lar  party,  was  appointed  captain  by  the  supreme
junta  of  Caracas.  He  was  afterward  promoted  to
the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  and  appointed  com
mander  of  the  coast  of  Guiria,  for  his  valiant  de
fence  of  which  he  was  made  colonel.  After  the
capitulation  of  Gen.  Francisco  Miranda  (q.  v.),  he
retired  to  his  estate  of  Chacachacare,  in  the  island
of  Trinidad,  but  when  the  terms  of  that  capitula
tion  were  violated  by  the  Spaniards,  with  forty-
four  companions  he  sailed  in  two  open  boats.  12
Jan.,  1813,  for  the  coast  of  Guiria,  where  he  armed
a  battalion  from  the  slaves  of  his  estates,  and  cap
tured  on  the  following  day  the  town  of  Guiria.
After  defending  Maturin  against  the  royalists,  he
attacked  and  conquered  Antonanzas,  in  Cumana,
on  3  Aug.,  and  took  Barcelona  on  19  Aug.  He  de
feated  Gen.  Jose  Boves  in  Bocachica,  31  March,
1814,  and  effected  his  union  with  Bolivar.  After
the  defeat  of  Aragua  on  12  Aug.,  they  embarked  in
the  vessels  of  the  privateer  "  Bianchi,"  reached
Carupano,  and  on  8  Sept.  sailed  for  Cartagena.
Marino  accompanied  Bolivar  in  the  expedition
from  Les  Cayes,  30  March,  1816,  and  on  7  May
was  appointed  second  in  command  of  the  army.
On  1  June,  Marino  marched  to  Guiria,  and  was  vic
torious  at  Yaguaraparo  and  afterward  at  Rio  Cari-
be,  Carupano,  and  Cariaco.  In  1817  he  refused  to
recognize  the  authority  of  Bolivar,  and  in  May  was


MARIO


MARION


207


appointed  by  the  congress  of  Cariaco  general-in-
cliief,  but  was  taken  prisoner  by  Bermudez  in  Sep
tember  and  allowed  to  retire  to"  Trinidad.  He  re
turned  in  1819,  recognizing  Bolivar,  and.  when  the
latter  resolved  on  his  expedition  to  Xew  Granada,
he  ordered  Marino,  on  2  May,  1819,  to  the  eastern
provinces,  where,  on  12  June,  at  Cantaura  he
fought  against  the  royalist  Col.  Arama.  He  was  a
member  of  the  congress  of  Angostura,  and  was
proclaimed  Jel'e  del  Oriente,  22  May,  1821.  Dur
ing  the  revolution  of  1827  in  Venezuela,  he  was
sent  by  Paez  as  commissioner  to  confer  with  Sucre
and  Bishop  Estevez  about  peace.  The  commis
sioners  proposed  to  divide  the  republic  of  Colom
bia  into  three  independent  states,  but  this  plan  was
not  realized  until  1830.  Subsequently  Marino  re
tired  from  public  life,  but  in  1848  he  became  mili
tary  commander  of  Caracas.

MARIO,  Giuseppe,  Italian  opera-singer,  b.  in
Cagliari.  Sardinia,  18  Oct.,  1810;  d.  in  Rome,  11
Dec.,  1883.  He  was  titular  Marquis  of  Candia,
and  in  early  manhood  an  officer  in  the  service  of
the  Sardinian  government.  After  a  brief  term  of
service  he  left  the  army  and  went  to  Paris.  Here
his  means  soon  became  exhausted  and  he  was  in
duced  to  accept  an  engagement  as  tenor-singer  at
the  French  opera-house.  In  1838  he  made  his  first
appearance  in  the  leading  part  of  Meyerbeer's
"  Robert  le  Diable."  In  the  following  "year  he
united  with  the  troupe  of  the  Italian  opera-house,
and  soon  became  a  rival  to  the  distinguished  Ru-
bini.  From  1839 until  1844  Mario  sang  in  London
and  Paris,  and  in  1845  he  visited  Russia,  where  he
was  professionally  engaged  for  five  years.  During
twenty-five  years  his  time  was  divided  between
Paris,  London,  and  St.  Petersburg.  He  came  to
the  United  States  in  1854,  in  company  with  Sig-
nora  Grisi,  under  a  six  months'  engagement  with
James  H.  Hackett.  At  this  time  Mario  was  in  the
zenith  of  his  reputation  and  made  a  great  artistic
and  pecuniary  success.  In  1873  he  again  returned
to  this  country  to  repeat  his  former  success ;  but
his  voice  and  appearance  only  indicated  how  ruth
lessly  time  can  deal  with  the  graces  of  personality
and  the  musical  endowments  of  a  great  vocalist.
Mario  had  a  voice  of  remarkable  sympathetic
quality  under  perfect  control.  In  the  delivery  of
romanzas  and  serenatas  he  was  entirely  unequalled,
but  in  skill  and  method  he  was  far  surpassed  by
his  rival,  Rubini.  He  created  no  roles,  invented
no  embellishments,  and  never  rose  to  inspired  exe
cution.  His  best  performances  were  the  principal
tenor  parts  in  '•  Don  Pasquale,"  "  The  Barber  of
Seville,"  "  Robert  le  Diable."  and  "  The  Hugue
nots."  On  his  retirement  he  lived  in  Rome  in
partial  seclusion,  subsisting  on  a  moderate  income,
a  part  of  which  was  devoted  to  the  welfare  of  his
needy  and  oppressed  countrymen.

MARION,  Francis,  soldier,  b.  in  Winyaw.  near
Georgetown.  S.  C.,  in  1732 ;  d.  at  Pond  Bluff,  in  St.
John's  parish,  Berkeley  co.,  S.  C.,  27  Feb.,  1795.
He  was  a  grandson  of  Benjamin  Marion  and  Louise
d' Aubrey,  Huguenots,  who  were  driven  from
France  and  came  to  South  Carolina  in  1690.  Their
son  Gabriel  married  Esther  Cordes,  and  Francis
was  the  youngest  of  the  six  children  of  this  mar
riage.  At  birth  he  is  said  to  have  been  small
enough  to  put  into  a  quart  mug,  and  during  his
childhood  he  was  so  frail  and  puny  that  it  was
hardly  thought  he  would  live.  After  he  had  passed
his  twelfth  year  he  grew  strong  and  hardy,  and  soon
gave  evidence  of  remarkable  energy.  Like  many
boys,  he  conceived  a  passion  for  the  sea,  and  at
the  age  of  sixteen  embarked  for  the  West  Indies  in
a  small  craft  manned  by  a  crew  of  only  six  sailors.


The  vessel  was  wrecked,  and  the  six  men,  escaping
in  the  jolly-boat,  without  food  or  water,  were  tossed
about  on  the  waves  for  a  week.  Two  had  died  of
starvation  when  Marion  and  the  others  were  picked
up  by  a  passing
ship. "  Returning
home,  young  Mar
ion  assisted  his
father  in  the  care
of  his  small  plan
tation.  In  1759.  a
year  or  two  after
his  father's  death,
he  became  the
owner  of  a  plan
tation  at  Pond
Bluff,  which  was
his  home  for  the
rest  of  his  life.
But  he  scarcely
had  time  to  be
come  settled  in  his
new  home  when
a  war  with  the
Cherokees  was  be
gun.  It  is  sup
posed  that  Mari
on  took  part  in
Col.  Montgomery's  expedition  to  the  Indian  coun
try  in  1760,  but  there  is  some  uncertainty  on  this
point.  In  1761  the  command  in  South  Carolina
devolved  upon  Col.  James  Grant,  of  the  Royal
Scots,  and  he  was  assisted  by  a  regiment  of  1,200
state  troops  under  Col.  Middleton.  In  this  regi
ment  Marion  served  as  lieutenant,  under  the  imme
diate  command  of  Capt.  William  Moultrie.  Among
the  other  officers  of  this  regiment  who  won  national
distinction  in  the  Revolutionary  war  were  Henry
Laurens,  Andrew  Pickens.  and  Isaac  Huger.  The
army,  numbering  about  2,600  men,  marched  from
Fort  Prince  George,  7  June,  1761,  and  a  few  days
afterward  fought  a  sanguinary  battle  with  the  In
dians  at  Etchoee.  The  fight  was  won  chiefly  by  the
valor  of  a  forlorn  hope  of  thirty  men.  led  by  Mar
ion,  who  stormed  the  principal  Indian  position
with  a  loss  of  twenty-one  men.  After  this  victory
fourteen  Cherokee  villages  were  laid  in  ashes,  and
the  red  men  were  forced  to  sue  for  peace.  From
this  time  until  1775  Marion  seems  to  have  lived
quietly  on  his  plantation.  He  was  much  admired
by  his'  neighbors  for  integrity,  ability,  courage,  and
rare  sweetness  of  disposition.

In  1775  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Provincial  con
gress  of  South  Carolina,  which,  shortly  after  the  bat
tle  of  Lexington,  resolved  to  raise  1,500  infantry,
in  two  regiments,  besides  a  regiment  of  450  horse.
Marion  was  appointed  captain  in  the  second  of
these  regiments,  of  which  Moultrie  was  colonel.
His  commission  was  dated  21  June,  1775.  His
friend.  Peter  Horry,  who  afterward  wrote  a  biogra
phy  of  him,  received  a  captain's  commission  at  the
same  time  and  in  the  same  regiment.  Marion  took
part  in  the  bloodless  capture  of  Fort  Johnson,  14
Sept.,  1775,  when  Lord  William  Campbell,  the
royal  governor,  fled  to  a  British  ship  in  the  harbor.
He  was  soon  afterward  promoted  major,  and  during
the  next  few  months  showed  so  much  skill  in  or
ganization  and  discipline  that  he  was  called  "  the
architect  of  the  second  regiment."  In  the  brilliant
victory  of  28  June,  1776.  which  drove  the  British
fleet,  "shattered  and  crestfallen,  from  Charleston
harbor.  Marion  played  an  important  part,  and  was
soon  afterward  promoted  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant-
colonel  in  the  Continental  army.  The  victory  was
so  decisive  as  to  relieve  the  southern  states  from


208


MARION


MARION


anything  like  systematic  attack  for  more  than  two
years.  During  part  of  this  time  Col.  Marion  com
manded  the  fortress  on  Sullivan's  island,  which
ever  since  the  famous  battle  has  been  known  as
Fort  Moultrie.  In  September,  1779,  he  took  part
in  the  ill-managed  and  disastrous  expedition  of
Lincoln  and  D'Estaing  against  Savannah.  It  was
his  opinion  that  the  allied  commanders,  by  proper
swiftness  of  movement,  might  easily  have  prevented
the  British  from  gaining  their  advantage  of  posi
tion.  His  friend  Horry  declares  that  he  never  saw
Marion  so  angry.  "  Great  God !  "  he  exclaimed,
"  who  ever  heard  of  anything  like  this  before  t
First  allow  your  enemy  to  intrench,  and  then  fight
him  ! "  Such  an  error  has  often  been  committed  by
military  commanders,  of  whom  there  have  been
very  few  in  history  so  quick  in  perception  and  so
prompt  in  movement  as  Marion.  In  the  murderous
assault  of  9  Oct.  he  showed  heroic  bravery ;  under
a  terrible  fire  his  regiment  pressed  into  the  ditch  of
the  Spring  Hill  redoubt,  and  its  colors  were  for  a
few  moments  planted  upon  the  parapet,  but  the
fire  proved  too  hot  to  be  endured.  It  was  in  rescu
ing  these  colors  that  the  famous  Sergeant  Jasper
and  Lieutenants  Bush  and  Grey  were  successively
slain ;  they  were  at  length  recovered  and  carried
down  the  hill  in  safety  by  Sergeant  Macdonald.
Nearly  1,100  men  were  lost  in  this  fruitless  assault.
The  French  fleet  then  sailed  away,  and  Gen.  Lin
coln  retreated  to  Sheldon,  where  he  left  Col.  Marion
in  temporary  command  of  the  army,  while  he  him
self  went  to  Charleston  to  look  after  its  defences.

In  the  following  February,  Marion  was  placed
in  command  of  a  training-camp  at  Bacon's  Bridge,
on  Ashley  river;  it  was  thought  that  no  one  else
could  so  speedily  organize  an  army  out  of  raw  ma
terials.  Before  the  investment  of  Charleston  by
the  British  was  quite  completed,  he  happened  one
evening  to  be  supping  with  a  party  of  friends  in
that  city.  In  a  spirit  of  droll  hospitality  the  host
turned  the  key  upon  his  guests,  so  that  none  might
leave  the  room  while  the  wine  held  out.  Col.
Marion  was  abstemious  in  his  habits,  and  had  busi
ness  on  hand.  Wishing  to  retire  without  disturb
ing  the  company,  he  stepped  quietly  to  an  open
window  and  jumped  out.  His  agility  was  like  that
of  a  squirrel,  but  on  this  occasion  it  did  not  save
him  from  a  broken  ankle.  In  the  beleaguered  city
there  was  no  room  for  officers  unfit  for  active  duty,
and,  while  egress  was  still  possible,  Col.  Marion  was
carried  out  on  a  litter  and  taken  to  his  home  at
Pond  Bluff.  The  accident  turned  put  to  be  a  bless
ing  in  disguise,  for  it  saved  Marion  from  being
cooped  up  in  Charleston  with  the  army,  which  was
soon  surrendered  to  Sir  Henry  Clinton"  After  that
catastrophe,  as  soon  as  he  was  able  to  mount  a
horse,  Col.  Marion  set  out  with  a  few  friends  for
North  Carolina,  to  meet  the  army  that  Washington
had  sent  to  the  rescue  under  Baron  de  Kalb.  When
Marion  reached  the  army  he  found  that  able  com
mander  already  superseded  by  the  weak  and  vain
glorious  Gates,  who  had  no  sense  of  the  value  of
partisan  warfare  and  did  not  know  how  to  make  use
of  such  talents  as  Marion's.  The  latter  officer  ac
cordingly  soon  returned  to  South  Carolina,  and  be
gan  raising  and  organizing  the  force  thenceforth
known  as  "  Marion's  brigade."  After  the  crushing
defeat  of  Gates  at  Camden,  16  Aug.,  and  of  Sumter
at  Fishing  Creek  two  days  later,  this  was  the  only
American  force  worth  mentioning  in  South  Caro
lina.  It  was  armed  and  equipped  as  the  fortune  of
war  permitted.  Some  of  the  men  carried  old  saws
that  had  been  wrought  at  a  country  forge  into  the
rude  likeness  of  sabres,  while  many  of  the  bullets
were  cast  from  melted  pewter  mugs  and  dishes.


With  such  a  command,  Marion,  now  commissioned
brigadier-general,  undertook  to  harrass  the  enemy
in  the  northern  and  eastern  districts  of  South  Caro
lina.  On  20  Aug.  he  attacked  two  regiments  of
British  regulars  on  their  way  from  Camden  to
Charleston  with  150  prisoners  of  the  Maryland  line  :
with  a  loss  of  only  one  man  killed  and  one
wounded,  he  threw  the  enemy  into  some  disorder,
killed  and  wounded  twenty-seven  of  their  number,
and  set  free  all  the  prisoners.  His  swiftness  of
movement  seemed  superhuman.  When  hard  pressed
he  would  suddenly  disband  his  force  and  take
to  the  woods ;  and  while  the  enemy  were  vainly
searching  for  him  he  would  in  some  incomprehen
sible  way  have  collected  his  men  and  struck  a  stag
gering  blow  at  some  distant  and  ill-guarded  point.
This  surprising  celerity  was  favored  by  the  ease
with  which  he  and  his  men  endured  hardship.
Their  food  was  of  the  simplest.  Marion's  ordinary
diet  was  hominy  and  potatoes,  and  a  favorite  drink
with  him  was  water  flavored  with  a  few  drops  of
vinegar.  The  story  of  his  once  inviting  a  British
officer  to  dinner  and  regaling  him  with  baked  sweet
potatoes  is  known  to  every  school-boy,  like  Wash
ington's  cherry-tree  and  Newton's  apple.  He  en
dured  the  extremes  of  heat  and  cold  with  indiffer
ence,  and  usually  slept  on  the  ground  without  a
blanket.  He  was  very  kind  to  his  men,  while  main
taining  perfect  discipline,  He  never  would  allow
them  to  burn  or  plunder  houses;  and  in  his  whole
career  no  specific  instance  of  rapacity  or  cruelty  was
ever  alleged  against  him.  In  view  of  the  brutality
with  which  the  war  was  at  that  time  waged  by  both
parties,  such  a  fact  bears  striking  testimony  to  his
wonderful  control  over  his  men.

In  the  course  of  August  and  September,  1780,
Marion  was  engaged  in  two  skirmishes  of  consid
erable  dimensions,  in  one  of  which  he  defeated  a
strong  force  of  Tories  at  the  Black  Mingo  river;
in  the  other  he  routed  and  dispersed  a  detachment
of  regulars  under  Col.  Tynes  at  Tarcote.  The  rest
of  his  work  consisted  largely  in  cutting  off  the  ene
my's  supplies,  intercepting  despatches,  and  break
ing  up  recruiting  parties.  On  one  occasion  he  led
Tarleton  a  long  and  fruitless  chase,  till  that  com
mander  is  said  to  have  exclaimed,  "  Come,  boys,  let
us  go  back  and  find  the  game-cock  [Sumter];  as
for  this  d — d  swamp-fox,  the  d — 1  himself  could
not  catch  him."  These  epithets  were  afterward
commonly  applied  to  the  two  great  partisan  chiefs.
After  the  brilliant  victory  of  the  western  militia
at  King's  Mountain  the  Whigs  in  South  Carolina
took  fresh  courage,  and  recruits  came  to  swell  the
numbers  of  Marion's  brigade.  In  December  he
made  his  first  unsuccessful  attempt  upon  George
town,  in  which  his  nephew,  Gabriel  Marion,  was
taken  prisoner  and  murdered  in  cold  blood.
After  this  he  retired  to  Snow's  island,  at  the  con
fluence  of  Lynch's  creek  with  the  Pedee  river,  and
made  this  the  starting-point  for  his  rapid  move
ments.  When  Gen.  Greene  in  December  took  com
mand  of  the  remnants  of  Gates's  army  collected  at
Charlotte,  he  advanced  with  his  main  force  to  the
Pedee,  and  put  himself  in  communication  with
Marion.  On  12  Jan.,  1781,  Col.  Henry  Lee  arrived
with  his  legion,  and  next  day,  in  concert  with  him,
Marion  made  a  second  attempt  upon  Georgetown,
which  was  unsuccessful,  although  the  Americans
got  so  far  as  to  enter  the  town  and  carry  off  the
commandant  and  several  other  officers  as  prison
ers.  During  Greene's  movement  into  North  Caro
lina,  Marion  remained  in  the  neighborhood  of  the
Pedee  river,  engaged  almost  incessantly  in  opera
tions  against  the  enemy's  partisan  officers,  Wat
son  and  Doyle.  Upon  Greene's  return  in  April,


MARION


MARISCAL


209


1781,  he  directed  Marion  to  co-operate  with  Lee  in
reducing  Fort  Watson,  which  commanded  the
communications  of  Lord  Rawdon  at  Caraden.  Fort
Watson  stood  upon  a  mound  forty  feet  high  in  the
middle  of  a  wide,  flat  plain.  At  the  suggestion
of  one  of  Marion's  officers,  Maj.  Mayham,  a  rude
wooden  tower  was  built,  which  commanded  the
fort  so  as  to  make  it  untenable.  On  23  April,
Fort  Watson  surrendered  at  discretion,  and  Raw
don,  finding  his  communications  severed,  was
obliged  to  evacuate  Caniden  and  retreat  to  Monk's
Corner.  The  enemy's  grasp  upon  the  interior  of
South  Carolina  was  thus  seriously  loosened.  Marion
then  proceeded  to  besiege  and  capture  Fort  Motte,
and  afterward,  in  concert  with  Sumter,  undertook
to  hold  Rawdon  in  check  while  Greene  laid  siege
to  Ninety-Six.  In  the  course  of  these  operations
Marion  made  his  third  attempt  upon  Georgetown,
and  captured  the  place.  The  arrival  of  British
re-enforcements  enabled  Rawdon  to  escape  and
raise  the  siege  of  Ninety-Six,  but  Marion  and  Sum
ter,  moving  upon  his  communications,  made  it
necessary  for  him  to  abandon  that  post  and  retreat
upon  Orangeburg.  In  a  sharp  fight  at  Quimby
Bridge,  17  July,  the  two  American  generals  tried
to  sever  his  communications  and  force  him  from
Orangeburg,  but  this  attempt  did  not  succeed.  In
the  Eutaw  campaign,  a  month  later,  Gen.  Marion
made  a  brilliant  and  useful  raid,  traversing  200  miles
of  country,  making  a  complete  circuit  about  the
British  army,  and  in  an  action  at  Parker's  Ferry,  31
Aug.,  struck  a  blow  at  the  enemy's  cavalry  which
crippled  it  for  the  rest  of  the  campaign.  At  the
decisive  battle  of  Eutaw  Springs,  8  Sept.,  Marion
commanded  the  right  of  the  first  line,  and  after
the  victory  he  joined  with  Lee  in  the  pursuit,  in
which  great  numbers  of  prisoners  were  taken.
From  this  time  until  the  evacuation  of  Charleston
by  the  British,  14  Dec.,  1782,  though  there  were  no
serious  campaigns,  there  was  more  or  less  desultory
fighting,  in  which  Marion  had  a  hand  to  the  last.
Before  he  had  time  to  undertake  the  restoration  of
his  modest  estate,  which  had  suffered  greatly  dur
ing  the  war,  he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate,
where  he  was  kept  by  re-elections  till  1790.  In
1784  he  was  appointed  commandant  of  Fort  John
son,  and  in  the  same  year  he  married  Miss  Mary
Videau.  He  had  no  children.  In  1790  he  was  a
member  of  the  convention  for  framing  a  constitu
tion  for  the  state  of  South  Carolina,  after  which

he  retired  from
public  life.  In
the  senate  he  was
conspicuous  for
his  advocacy  of
gentle  measures
toward  the  Tories,
and  for  his  ener
getic  condemna
tion  of  the  con
fiscation  act  of
1782.

In  person  Gen.
Marion  was  short
and  slight,  but  ex
tremely  lithe  and
sinewy. His  ha
bitual  gravity  of
manner was re
lieved  by  flashes  of  keen  humor. His  dark  eyes
were at once  soft and brilliant. With an  al
most womanly delicacy,  he had a  commanding
dignity  of  manner. He  was  invariably  courteous,
kind,  and  humane,  and  his  character  was  of  spot
less  purity. He  was  the  perfect  ideal  of  a  true
VOL.  iv. — 14


knight  and  Christian  gentleman.  The  accompany
ing  illustration  represents  Marion's  grave.  H'is
biography  has  been  written  by  his  old  companion-
in-arms,  Gen.  Horry,  assisted  by  the  eccentric
Mason  Weems  (Baltimore,  1815 ;  new  ed.,  Philadel
phia,  1824) ;  also  by  W.  D.  James  (Charleston.  1821) ;
and  by  William  Gilmore  Simms  (New  York,  1844).
See  also  ''Moultrie's  Memoirs"  (New  York,  1802);
'•  Henry  Lee's  Memoirs  "  (Philadelphia,  1812) ;
"  Drayton's  Memoirs "  (Charleston,  1821) ;  and
"  Tarl'eton's  History  of  the  Campaigns  of  1780  and
1781 "  (London,  1797).

MARISCAL,  Isrnacio,  b.  in  Oajaca,  Mexico,  5
July,  1829.  He  studied  in  his  native  city,  and
practised  law  in
the  city  of  Mexi
co,  where  he  was
admitted  to  the
bar  of  the  supreme
court  in  December.
1849.  InlSoO  here-
turned  to  Oajaca,
and  was  appointed
solicitor  -  general
of  that  state,  in
which  capacity  he
remained  until
March,  1853.  when
the  revolution  that
placed  Santa-An
na  in  power  ex
pelled  him  as  a
Liberal  from  his
native  city.  Then
he  went  again  to  the  city  of  Mexico,  where  he  prac
tised  his  profession.  In  1856  he  was  elected  a
member  of  the  National  congress  that  made  the
constitution  of  1857,  which  is  now  in  force  in  Mexi
co.  During  1859  he  was  supernumerary  judge  of
the  supreme  court  of  Oajaca.  In  1860  he  was  Fed
eral  judge  for  the  circuit  of  the  three  states  of
Vera  Cruz,  Puebla,  and  Oajaca.  In  1861-'2  he  was
representative  for  Oajaca  in  congress.  Early  in
1861  he  had  been  appointed  counsellor  of  the  gov
ernment  for  the  execution  of  the  laws  regarding
the  alienation  of  property.  At  the  end  of  1862  he
was  appointed  by  President  Juarez,  according  to
extraordinary  powers  from  congress,  supernumerary
judge  ad  interim  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  re
public.  At  the  beginning  of  1863  he  left  the  su
preme  court,  being  appointed  assistant  secretary  of
state  ad  interim  by  Don  Juan  Antonio  de  la  Fuente,
then  the  secretary.  Mr.  Mariscal  went  in  this
capacity,  with  President  Juarez  and  his  cabinet,  to
San  Luis  Potosi,  in  May  of  that  year,  on  the  ap
proach  of  the  French.  In  August  he  resigned  his
temporary  office,  and  came  to  the  United  States  as
secretary  of  the  Mexican  legation,  remaining  in
Washington  until  October.  1867.  when  he  was  ac
credited  as  charge  d'affaires  ad  interim.  In  the
spring  of  1868  he  went  to  Mexico,  having  been  ap
pointed  by  President  Juarez  minister  of  justice.
Shortly  afterward  he  was  elected  representative  to
congress,  and  later  judge  of  the  supreme  court,
which  post  he  held  until  July  of  the  same  year,
when  President  Juarez  appointed  him  secretary  of
justice  and  of  public  instruction.  Having  studied
English  jurisprudence  during  his  stay  in  the  Unit
ed  States,  he  advocated  in  Mexico  the  establish
ment  of  criminal  juries,  and  succeeded  in  securing
it.  Mr.  Mariscal  was  appointed  in  June,  1869,
Mexican  minister  to  the  United  States,  and  re
mained  as  such  until  May,  1871,  when  he  went
home  to  fill  the  appointment  of  secretary  of  for
eign  affairs.  He  returned  to  Washington  in  July,


210


MAEKHAM


MARKHAM


1872,  and  held  the  post  of  minister  again  until
1877,  after  the  triumph  of  the  Tuxtepec  revolution,
headed  by  Gen.  Diaz,  against  Lerdo's  government,
when  he  returned  to  Mexico.  After  the  Tuxtepec
revolution  had  been  sanctioned  by  the  country  and
Gen.  Diaz  was  elected  president,  Mariscal  was  ap
pointed  magistrate  of  the  court  of  appeals  of  the
Federal  district,  and  in  December,  1879,  secretary
of  justice  and  of  public  instruction.  He  succeeded
at  that  time  in  reforming  the  codes  of  proceedings
that  he  had  before  introduced  at  the  department
of  justice.  On  22  Nov.,  1880,  he  was  appointed  sec
retary  of  foreign  affairs,  and  he  arranged  shortly
afterward  the  renewal  of  diplomatic  relations  be
tween  Mexico  and  Prance.  This  post  he  held  until
May,  1883,  when,  an  agreement  having  been  made
for  "the  renewal  of  official  relations  between  Mexi
co  and  Great  Britain,  he  was  appointed  minister
at  the  court  of  St.  James.  He  remained  in  Lon
don  until  1  Dec.,  1884,  when  Gen.  Diaz,  who  had
been  re-elected  president,  appointed  him  secretary
of  foreign  affairs,  which  post  he  still  (1888)  holds.
During  Mariscal's  service  at  the  state  department
in  Mexico,  several  questions  of  the  greatest  gravity
were  settled,  including  that  of  the  boundary  dis
pute  with  Guatemala.

MARKHAM,  Clements  Robert.  English  ex
plorer,  b.  in  Still ingfleet,  near  York,  20  July.  1830.
He  was  educated  at  Westminster  school,  entered
the  navy  in  1844,  and  became  a  lieutenant  in  1850,
but  resigned  the  following  year  on  returning  from
an  expedition  in  search  of  Sir  John  Franklin.  In
1852-'4  he  explored  Peru  and  the  forests  of  the
eastern  Andes.  Subsequently  he  entered  the  civil
service  and  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  geographi
cal  department  of  the  India  office  in  1868.  He  be
came  secretary  of  the  Hakluyt  society  in  1858  and
of  the  Royal  geographical  society  in  1863,  arid  in
1872-'8  edited  the  "  Geographical  Magazine."  Mr.
Markham  introduced  the  cultivation  of  the  cin
chona-plant  into  India  and  Ceylon  in  I860-'!.  He
aided  in  preparing  a  manual  of  arctic  discoveries
and  other  information  for  the  use  of  the  expedition
to  the  north  pole  that  was  sent  out  under  his  brother,
Commander  Albert  H.  Markham,  in  May,  1875.
He  is  the  author  of  many  works  on  geographical
and  historical  subjects,  including  "  Franklin's  Foot
steps  *'  (London,  1852) :  "  Cuzco  and  Lima  "  (1856) ;
"  Travels  in  Peru  and  India  "  (1862) ;  "  A  Quichua
Grammar  and  Dictionary"  (1863);  "Ollanta,  a
Quichua  Drama"  (1871);  "The  Threshold  of  the
Unknown  Region1'  (1874):  "A  Memoir  of  the
Countess  of  Chinchon  "  (1875) ;  "  Peruvian  Bark  "
(1880) ;  and  "  The  War  between  Chili  and  Peru  "
(1883).  He  has  translated  several  Spanish  accounts
of  the  conquest  of  Peru  for  the  Hakluyt  society
and  superintended  many  of  its  other  publications.

MARKHAM,  Jared  Clark,  architect,  b.  in  Ty-
ringham,  Mass.,  18  Nov.,  1816.  He  is  a  direct  de
scendant  of  Sir  Robert  Markham,  a  knight  of
Queen  Elizabeth's  time.  He  was  educated  in  the
common  schools  and  under  private  tutors,  and
read  law,  but  abandoned  it  for  architecture.  He
is  the  architect  of  the  Saratoga  monument,  and
designer  of  the  bronze  allegorical  interior  bas-re
liefs.  (See  GATES,  HORATIO.)  He  published  and
edited  at  Troy,  N.  Y.,  in  1860,  under  the  auspices
of  the  Saratoga  county  agricultural  society,  a
magazine  devoted  to  the  industrial  interests  of
New  York  state,  and  is  the  author  of  an  "  Appeal
to  the  American  People  in  Behalf  of  National
Monuments  "  (New  York,  1872) ;  "  Monumental
Art"  (1884) ;  and  "  Historic  Sculpture  "  (1886) ;  be
sides  frequent  contributions  to  architectural  pe
riodicals.  He  is  now  (1888)  engaged  on  a  work  to


be  entitled  "  Elementary  Principles  of  Art :  its
Nature  and  Uses  in  the  Development  of  Individual
and  National  Character."

MARKHA'M,  William,  colonial  governor,  b.  in
England  about  1635 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  12
June,  1704.  He  was  a  first  cousin  of  William
Penn,  who,  after  obtaining  the  charter  for  Penn
sylvania,  appointed  him,  on  10  April,  1681,  his
d'eputy,  with  authority  to  establish  courts,  settle
boundaries,  sell  lands,  and  exercise  every  right
that  was  granted  to  Penn  except  that  of  calling  a
legislative  assembly.  Markham  sailed  for  Boston
soon  after  obtaining  his  commission  and  made  his
way  thence  to  New  York,  where  he  exhibited  his
credentials  and  received  from  the  acting  governor
a  letter  to  the  local  officials  on  the  Delaware,  noti
fying  them  of  the  transfer  of  authority.  He  ar
rived  at  Upland  (now  Chester),  the  only  town  then
in  Pennsylvania,  and  on  3  Aug.,  1681,  constituted
a  council  composed  of  six  Quakers  and  three  of
the  earlier  settlers.  At  the  end  of  the  year,  with
surveyors  that  had  been  sent  by  Penn  to  lay  out  a
great  town  of  10,000  acres,  he  selected  the  site  for
Philadelphia.  On  15  July,  1682,  he  purchased
from  the  Indians  the  site  of  Pennsbury  Manor  and
adjoining  lands  on  Delaware  river.  Soon  after
Markham's  arrival,  Lord  Baltimore  came  to  Up
land  to  confer  with  him  regarding  the  boundary-
line  between  the  respective  grants,  which  was  de
fined  in  one  charter  as  the  thirty-ninth  and  in  the
other  as  the  fortieth  parallel.  On  the  coming  of
William  Penn,  27  Oct.,  1682,  the  commission  of
his  deputy  lapsed.  Markham  was  chosen  a  mem
ber  of  the  council,  and  in  the  following  summer
went  to  England  to  represent  the  proprietor  in
the  controversy  with  Lord  Baltimore,  which  was
brought  before  the  lords  in  council,  but  was  not
arranged  till  after  Penn's  death,  and  not  finally
settled  till  the  drawing  of  Mason  and  Dixon's  line.
In  1684,  when  Penn  went  to  England  to  try  his
cause  before  the  government,  Markham  returned
to  this  country  and  became  secretary  of  the  prov
ince.  He  also  acted  as  secretary  to  the  proprie
tary  till  1699,  and  was  appointed  a  commissioner
to  sell  lands  in  1686,  and  in  1689  an  auditor  of  ac
counts.  He  was  an  adherent  of  the  Church  of
England,  and  sympathized  with  the  Swedish,
Dutch,  and  earlier  English  emigrants  in  their  dis
putes  with  the  Quakers.  In  the  conflict  between
Capt.  John  Blackwell  and  Thomas  Lloyd  he  sided
with  the  former.  In  1691  the  territories  that  com
pose  the  present  state  of  Delaware  were  separated
from  the  province,  and  Markham  was  appointed
deputy  governor  over  them.  When  the  crown  as
sumed  the  administration  of  Pennsylvania  in  1693,
he  acted  as  Gov.  Benjamin  Fletcher's  deputy,  and,
on  the  restoration  of  the  province  to  Penn  in'  Au
gust,  1694,  was  commissioned  lieutenant-governor,
and  administered  both  the  province  and  the  terri
tories  till  the  arrival  of  the  proprietor  for  the  sec
ond  time  at  the  close  of  1699.  The  assembly  that  he
convened  in  September,  1695,  assumed  that  the  old
constitution  had  expired,  and  passed  new  funda
mental  laws  of  a  democratic  character.  Markham
dissolved  the  assembly,  but  did  not  renew  the  con
test  when  the  legislature  of  October,  1696,  framed
a  constitution  that  made  the  people  the  source  of
honor  and  of  power  and  reduced  the  governor  to  a
mere  presiding  officer  in  the  council.  In  opening
the  next  assembly  in  May,  1697,  he  said:  "You
are  met  not  by  virtue  of  any  writ  of  mine,  but  of
a  law  made  by  yourselves."  During  his  adminis
tration  of  the  government  he  was  accused  by  the
surveyor-general  of  customs  of  conniving  at  piracy,
neglecting  to  enforce  forfeitures  of  bonds,  and  ad-


MARKOE


MABMADUKB


211


journing  the  courts  for  the  benefit  of  fraudulent
debtors.  Pirates  and  privateers  took  refuge  in
Delaware  bay,  and  even  made  captures  there  and
openly  transacted  their  business  in  Philadelphia ;
but  the  governor  was  powerless  against  them,  hav
ing  no  efficient  constabulary  force  in  the  city  and
being  unable  to  obtain  from  Lord  Bellomont  a  ves
sel  of  war  to  guard  the  harbor.  William  Penn
complained  of  various  transactions  of  Markham  in
his  fiduciary  relations  with  himself.  Nevertheless
in  1703  he  directed  the  deputy  governor  to  ap
point  his  kinsman  register-general  of  wills;  but
the  legality  of  the  appointment  was  contested.

MARKOE,  Abram,  capitalist,  b.  in  the  Danish
West  Indies  in  1729;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  28
Aug.,  1806.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Count  Marco,
a  leader  among  the  Huguenots,  who  became  a
planter  in  Santa  Cruz.  He  emigrated  to  Philadel
phia  in  early  manhood.  His  family  was  largely
interested  in  the  sugar  business,  and  he  with  his
brothers  was  engaged  in  that  enterprise  in  the  isl
and  of  Santa  Cruz,  W.  I.,  trading  between  that
place  and  this  country.  In  1774  he  was  active  in
organizing  the  light  horse  troop  of  Philadelphia,
since  known  as  the  "city  troop,"  and  was  chosen
its  first  captain,  remaining  in  command  until  the  i
spring  of  177G,  when  the  neutrality  edict  of  Chris
tian  VII.,  of  Denmark,  forced  him  to  resign  his
captaincy.  In  the  summer  of  1775  he  presented
the  troop  with  a  flag  which  has  historic  interest
as  being  the  first  that  bore  the  thirteen  stripes
symbolizing  the  thirteen  colonies  that  were  then
asserting  their  rights.  He  was  the  owner  of  large
landed  interests  in  Philadelphia,  notably  a  block
of  ground  where  now  stand  the  new  U.  S.  govern
ment  buildings,  on  which  he  erected  the  building
that  was  intended  for  the  executive  mansion  of
the  president  of  the  United  States,  and  which  was
in  1800  sold  to  the  University  of  Pennsylvania. —
His  son.  Peter,  poet.  b.  in  Santa  Cruz,  W.  I.,
about  1753;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  about  1792,
was  educated  at  Trinity  college.  Dublin,  read  law
in  London,  and.  returning  to  Philadelphia  about
1783,  devoted  himself  to  literary  pursuits.  He
wrote  under  the  pen-name  of  •'  A  Native  of  Al
giers,"  and  published  a  tragedy  entitled  "The  Pa
triot  Chjef"  (Philadelphia.  1783):  "Miscellaneous
Poems  "  (1787) :  a  poem  called  "  The  Times  "  (1788) ;
and  "Reconciliation,"  a  comic  opera  (1790).

MARKOE,  Thomas  Masters,  surgeon,  b.  in
Philadelphia.  Pa.,  13  Sept.,  1819.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Princeton  in  1830  and  at  the  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons  in  New  York  in  1841.  For
several  years  he  was  professor  of  anatomy  in  Castle-
ton  medical  college,  Vt.,  and  in  1852  he  accepted
the  chair  of  pathological  anatomy  in  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  the  city  of  New
York,  which  he  held  until  1854.  In  1860  he  was
elected  adjunct  professor  of  surgery  in  the  medical
department  of  Columbia  college,  and  in  1870  he
succeeded  to  the  full  chair,  but  in  1879,  on  its  di
vision,  he  became  professor  of  the  principles  of
surgery.  Dr.  Markoe  has  published  "A  Treatise
on  Diseases  of  the  Bone  "  (New  York.  1872).

MARKS,  Elias,  educator,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C.,  2  Dec.,  1790 ;  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C..  in  June.
1886.  Pie  received  a  classical  education  in  New
York  city,  studied  medicine  in  the  College  of  phy
sicians  and  surgeons,  graduating  in  1815,  and  was
for  a  time  associated  in  practice  with  Dr.  Valentine
Mott,  but  returned  to  South  Carolina,  became
president  of  Columbia  female  college,  and  subse
quently  founded  Barhamville  collegiate  institute,
near  Columbia,  and  conducted  it  till  a  short  time
before  the  civil  war.  He  published,  besides  many  |


fugitive  poems,  a  translation  from  the  Latin  of
Verhoofd  of  the  '•  Aphorisms  "  of  Hippocrates,  with
notes  (New  York,  1818),  and  "  Elfreide  of  Guldal,
a  Scandinavian  Legend,  and  other  Poems "  (Co
lumbia,  1850),  and  left  an  historical  novel  and  a
treatise  on  philosophy.

MARKS,  William,  senator,  b.  in  Chester
county,  Pa,,  13  Oct.,  1778 ;  d.  in  Beaver,  Pa.,  10
April,  1858.  During  his  infancy  his  father  settled
in  Beaver,  in  the  midst  of  a  wilderness,  and  the
son  grew  up  with  scanty  opportunities  for  educa
tion.  He  was  a  tanner  by  occupation,  was  sent
to  the  legislature  in  1809,  and  was  a  member  of
that  body  until  1814.  In  1821  he  was  elected  to
the  senate,  and  served  till  1825,  being  speaker  dur
ing  the  entire  period.  In  the  legislature  he  was
active  in  promoting  the  system  of  internal  im
provements.  While  still  speaker  of  the  senate  he
was  elected  a  U.  S.  senator,  and  served  from  5
Dec.,  1825,  till  3  March,  1837.  In  congress  he  as
sisted  in  framing  tariff  measures  and  the  law  for
distributing  the  proceeds  of  sales  of  public  lands.

MARMADUKE,  Meredith  Miles,  governor  of
Missouri,  b.  in  Westmoreland  county,  Va.,  28  Aug.,
1791 ;  d.  near  Arrow  Rock,  Saline  co.,  Mo.,  26
March,  1864.  He  was  educated  in  the  public
schools,  and  when  but  twenty-two  years  of  age  was
commissioned  as  colonel  of  the  regiment  that  was
raised  in  his  county  for  defensive  service  in  the
war  of  1812.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  ap
pointed  U.  S.  marshal  for  the  eastern  district  of
Virginia,  served  for  several  years  in  that  office,  and
was  subsequently  elected  clerk  of  the  circuit  court.
He  removed  to  Missouri  in  1824  for  his  health,  was
engaged  in  the  Santa  Fe  trade  six  years  at  Frank
lin,  Howard  co.,  and  then  settled  near  Arrow  Rock,
where  he  became  a  large  and  successful  farmer.
He  was  the  originator  and  president  of  the  first
state  fair,  and  filled  the  office  of  surveyor,  and
subsequently  that  of  county  judge.  In  1840  he
was  elected  lieutenant-governor,  and  in  1844  be
came  acting  governor  by  the  death  of  Thomas
Reynolds.  In  1847  he  was  a  member  of  the  State
constitutional  convention.  During  the  crisis  of
I860-'!,  though  his  sons  embraced  the  Confeder
ate  cause,  he  was  a  stanch  Unionist,  without  up
holding  the  energetic  acts  of  the  Federal  authori
ties  in  Missouri. — His  son.  John  Sappington,  sol
dier,  b.  near  Arrow  Rock,  Mo.,  14  March,  1833;
d.  in  Jefferson  City.
Mo.,  28  Dec.,  1887,
was  brought  up  on  his
father's  farm  till  the
age  of  seventeen,  when
he  entered  Yale  col
lege.  After  studying
two  years  there  and
one  year  at  Harvard,
he  was  appointed  a
cadet  in  the  U.  S.  mili
tary  academy,  where
he  was  graduated  in
1857.  In  the  spring
af  1858  he  joined  the
expedition  that  was
sent  under  Gen.  Al
bert  S.  Johnston  to
quell  the  Mormon  re
volt.  He  served  for

two  years  in  Utah,  and  was  then  stationed  in  New
Mexico,  where  he  was  serving  when  the  secession
troubles  began.  Obtaining  leave  of  absence,  he
returned  home,  resigned  his  commission  on  17
April.  1861.  raised  a  company  of  state  guards,  and
was  soon  afterward  elected  colonel  of  a  regiment.


212


MARMETTE


MAROTO


Disapproving  both  the  military  and  the  political
course  of  Gov.  Claiborne  F.  Jackson,  he  resigned
his  commission,  and  went  to  Richmond  to  tender
his  services  to  the  Confederate  government.  Jef
ferson  Davis  gave  him  a  commission  as  1st  lieu
tenant,  and  he  joined  the  command  of  Gen.  William
J.  Hardee  in  southeastern  Arkansas,  was  promoted
lieutenant-colonel  a  few  weeks  later,  and  in  the
autumn  was  made  colonel  of  the  3d  Confeder
ate  infantry.  His  regiment  at  Shiloh  bore  the
guiding  colors  of  the  battle -line,  and  captured
the  first  prisoners  of  the  day.  He  fought  with
conspicuous  gallantry  in  the  front  until  he  was
wounded  in  the  second  day's  fight.  While  in  hos
pital  he  was  promoted  brigadier-general.  In  Au
gust,  1862,  he  was  transferred  to  the  trans-Missis
sippi  department,  commanded  in  northwestern
Arkansas  and  Missouri  for  six  months,  and  made
frequent  raids,  engaging  the  National  forces  with
varying  fortune  until  finally  he  compelled  Gen.
Blu'nt's  withdrawal  to  Springfield,  Mo.  In  1863
he  entered  Missouri  with  4.000  men  and  extricated
Gen.  Carter  near  Cape  Girardeau,  but  v.'as  pursued
and  brought  his  force  away  with  difficulty.  He
took  part  in  the  unavailing  attack  on  Helena  in
July,  1863,  and  subsequently,  with  his  cavalry  di
vision,  contested  in  daily  combats  the  advance  of
Gen.  Frederick  Steele  on  Little  Rock,  and  after  its
fall  covered  Gen.  Sterling  Price's  retreat.  In  an
attack  on  Pine  Bluff  he  captured  the  National
camp  and  stores.  When  Gen.  Steele  was  marching
in  the  spring  of  1864  to  co-operate  with  Gen.
Banks  against  Kirby  Smith,  Marmaduke  harassed
and  delayed  him  by  repeated  attacks,  and  enabled
Gen.  Smith  to  overtake  and  defeat  Steele's  com
mand  at  Jenkin's  Ferry.  For  these  services  Mar
maduke  was  made  a  major-general.  In  the  follow
ing  summer  he  had  an  indecisive  encounter  with
Gen.  Andrew  J.  Smith  at  Lake  Village,  Ark.,  and
in  the  autumn  took  part  in  Price's  invasion  of
Missouri,  but  after  several  battles  and  skirmishes
was  surrounded  and  compelled  to  surrender  near
Fort  Scott,  24  Oct.  He  was  confined  as  a  prisoner
of  war  at  Fort  Warren  till  August,  1865.  After  a
journey  in  Europe  for  the  restoration  of  his  health,
he  returned  to  Missouri  in  May,  1866,  and  engaged
in  the  commission  business,  and  in  1809-71  in  that
of  life  insurance.  He  then  became  part  proprietor
of  the  "  Journal  of  Commerce,"  established  in  St.
Louis  the  "  Evening  Journal,"  and  also  carried  on
the  "  Illustrated  Journal  of  Agriculture."  In  June,
1873,  he  retired  from  journalism,  and  became  sec
retary  of  the  state  board  of  agriculture.  In  1875
he  was  appointed  railroad  commissioner,  and  in
1876  was  elected  to  that  office  for  four  years.  In
1884  he  was  elected  governor  of  Missouri.

MARMETTE,  Joseph,  Canadian  author,  b.  in
Montmagny,  Quebec,  25  Oct.,  1844. Among  other


"  La  fiancee  du  rebelle  "  (1875) ;  and  "  Les  Macha-
bees  de  la  Nouvelle  France  "  (1878).

MARMIER,  Xavier  (mar-mee-ay),  French  au
thor,  b.  in  Pontarlier,  Doubs,  24  June,  1809.  He
received  his  education  in  Besancon,  and  became
a  journalist  when  eighteen  years  of  age,  afterward
visiting  Switzerland,  Belgium,  and  Holland,  and
going  in  1830  to  Paris,  where  he  published  a  vol
ume  of  poetry.  He  was  editor  of  the  "  Revue  Ger-
manique  "  from  1832  till  1834,  was  sent  in  1835  on
a  mission  to  northern  Europe.and  in  1839  appointed
professor  of  foreign  literature  in  the  University  of
Rennes.  Resigning  a  few  months  later,  he  became
librarian  of  the  home  department,  and  went  in


1842  on  a  voyage  of  three  years  to  North  America,
visiting  Canada  and  the  northern  United  States.
In  1846  he  became  librarian  of  the  Sainte  Gene-
vieve  library  in  Paris,  which  post  he  still  (1888)
holds.  Returning  again  in  1847  to  this  country,  he
visited  the  western  states,  and  in  particular  Cali
fornia,  which  he  explored  thoroughly.  Since  that
time  Marmier  has  made  several  trips  to  this  country,
and  has  published  a  set  of  works  about  the  United
States  which  at  first  were  the  cause  of  much  dis
cussion,  as  the  author,  contradicting  the  received
ideas  about  the  United  States,  explained  for  the
first  time  to  Europeans  the  true  condition  of  things
in  the  New  World,  and  claimed  that  most  of  them
were  improvements  on  the  customs  of  the  Old
Wrorld.  On  19  May,  1870,  he  was  elected  a  mem
ber  of  the  French  academy.  Marmier,  as  a  rule,
is  an  author  of  much  exactness  and  impartiality,
but  is  sometimes  a  little  severe  in  examining  new
customs  that  offend  his  European  tastes.  His
works  number  over  one  hundred,  and  not  only
have  passed  through  many  editions,  but  have  been
translated  several  tinies  into  P^nglish  and  Spanish,
They  include  "  Etudes  sur  Goethe"  (Strasburg,
(1835;  "Langue  et  litterature  islandaises  "  (Paris,
(1838:  "  Histoire  de  1'islande  depuis  sa  decouverte
jusqu'a  nos  jours  "  (1838);  "Lettres  sur  le  nord  "
(2  vols.,  1840);  "Voyage  en  Californic"  (1849);
"Lettres  sur  rAmerique"  (2  vols.,  1852);  "En
Amerique  et  en  Europe  "  (1859);  "  De  Paris  a  San
Francisco"  (1860);  "Gazida"  (I860);  "En  che-
inin  de  fer"  (1864);  and  "  De  Test  a  1'ouest "
(1867).  He  has  also  published  numerous  articles
concerning  this  country,  its  development,  its  fu
ture,  and  the  civil  war,  in  "  Revue  des  Deux-
Mondes,"  the  "  Revue  Britanniquc,"  and  the  "  An-
nales  des  Voyages."

MARMOL,  Jos6  (mar'-mole),  Argentine  poet,  b.
in  Buenos  Ayres,  5  Dec.,  1818;  d.  there,  12  Aug.,
1871.  In  early  life  he  began  to  take  part  in  the
politics  of  his  country,  and  was  elected  several
times  as  deputy  and  afterward  senator  for  the
province  of  Buenos  Ayres,  attaining  notice  by  his
eloquence  in  defence  of  popular  rights.  He  also
travelled  extensively  through  South  America  and
part  of  Europe,  and  on  his  return  was  appointed
director  of  the  National  library  at  Buenos  Ayres,
which  place  he  occupied  till  shortly  before  his
death,  when  he  became  totally  blind.  His  prin
cipal  works  are  "El  Peregrino"  and  "Las  Armo-
nias,"  poems  describing  his  impressions  of  travel
(Buenos  Ayres,  1856) ;  the  dramas  "  El  Cruzado  "
(1860)  and  "  El  Poeta  "  (1862) ;  and  "  La  Amalia,"  a
historical  romance  describing  accidents  of  the  war
of  the  roses  in  England  (1866)  This  is  his  best
work,  and  has  been  translated  into  French  and
German.  A  selection  from  his  works  has  been
published  under  the  title  "  Obras  poeticas  y  drama-
ticas  de  Jose  Marmol '  (Paris,  1875).

MAROTO,  Rafael  (mah-ro'-to),  Spanish  soldier,
b.  in  Lorca,  Spain,  18  Oct.,  1780;  d.  in  Santiago,
Chili,  in  1848.  He  entered  the  military  service  in
his  youth,  and  in  December,  1813,  commanded
a  regiment  that  was  sent  as  a  re-enforcement
to  Peru.  On  his  return  to  Chili  he  commanded
in  the  battle  of  Rancagua,  2  Oct.,  1814.  and  after
his  promotion  to  brigadier  obtained  from  Gen.
Marco  the  command  in  the  battle  of  Chacabuco
against  San  Martin,  12  Feb.,  1817,  where  he  was
defeated.  He  then  retired  to  Peru  and  was  ap
pointed  president  of  Charcas  in  1818.  At  the
beginning  of  1822  he  marched  to  Potosi  and  de
feated  the  insurgents,  who  had  proclaimed  inde
pendence.  Gen.  Olaneta  accused  him  before  the
viceroy,  La  Serna,  of  insubordination  and  treason,


MAEQUAND


MARQUETTE


213


but  the  viceroy  did  not  believe  the  accusation,  and
on  5  Oct.,  1823,  after  the  final  defeat  of  the  Peru
vian  army  of  Santa  Cruz,  promoted  him  major-
general.  In  the  army  of  the  north,  under  the
orders  of  Lieut.-Gen.  Canterac,  Maroto  com
manded  a  division  that  operated  against  the
forces  of  Bolivar.  After  the  defeat  at  Junin,
Maroto,  disgusted  by  the  incapacity  of  Canterac,
abandoned  his  command  and  we'nt  to  Cuzco.
The  viceroy  appointed  him  commander-in-chief  of
Puno.  and  he  stayed  there  till  after  the  battle  of
Ayacucho,  9  Dec",  1824.  In  consequence  of  the
capitulation  of  La  Serna  with  the  independent
forces,  Maroto  delivered  his  command  to  them  and
went  to  Quilca,  whence  he  sailed  with  his  family
to  Spain  in  the  same  vessel  with  the  viceroy.  He
was  promoted  lieutenant-general  by  Ferdinand
VII.,  but  after  the  death  of  the  king'declared  for
the  pretender  Don  Carlos  and  rose  to  be  com
mander-in-chief  of  his  forces.  In  1839  he  secretly
negotiated  with  Espartero  the  peace  of  Vergara,
which  caused  the  fall  of  the  pretender,  and  ended
the  civil  war  in  Spain.  He  was  rewarded  with  the
title  of  Count  of  Casa-Maroto  and  appointed  mem
ber  of  the  supreme  council  of  war ;  but  his  position
being  disagreeable,  as  his  former  companions  con
sidered  him  a  traitor,  he  returned  to  South  America.

MARYLAND,  Frederick,  merchant,  b.  in  Fair-
field.  Conn..  6  April,  1799;  d.  in  Southport,  Conn.,
14  July,  1882.  He  entered  into  business  in  New
York  city,  was  head  of  the  house  of  Marquand  and
Co..  jewellers  and  silversmiths,  and  retired  about
1839,  having  become  an  extensive  proprietor  of
real  estate  in  the  city.  Mr.  Marquand  contributed
to  religious  and  charitable  institutions,  and  be
queathed  a  large  sum  to  similar  enterprises.  He
gave  chapels  to  the  Union  theological  seminary  in
New  York  city,  and  to  the  theological  department
of  Yale  university. — His  brother,  Henry  Gurdon,
banker,  b.  in  New  York  city,  11  April,  1819,  was
educated  in  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  and  engaged  for
twenty  years  in  managing  real  estate,  the  property
of  his  brother  Frederick.  Remarking  the  poor  con
struction  and  faulty  design  of  city  architecture,  he
was  among  the  earliest  to  become  interested  in  its
improvement,  and  was  the  first  honorary  member
of  the  American  institute  of  architects.  For  ten
years  he  was  a  banker  in  New  York  city,  and  in
1808  became  one  of  the  purchasers  of  the  Iron
Mountain  railroad,  of  which  he  was  vice-president,
and  afterward  president,  until  its  incorporation  in
the  Missouri  Pacific  system.  He  is  a  director  in
the  latter  company,  and  in  many  other  corpora
tions.  He  has  devoted  much  time  and  attention
to  the  Metropolitan  museum  of  art  in  New  York
city,  to  which  he  has  made  numerous  gifts  and  fre
quent  loans  from  his  valuable  collection  of  paint
ings.  Mr.  Marquand  presented  a  chapel  and,  with
Robert  Bonner.  a  gymnasium  to  Princeton  college,
and,  with  his  brother,  a  pavilion  to  Bellevue  hos
pital,  New  York  city. — Henry  Gurdon 's  son.  Allan,
educator,  b.  in  New  York  city,  10  Dec.,  1853,  was  J
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1874,  continued  his  J
studies  at  the  University  of  Berlin,  and  after  his
return  in  1876  was  for  a  year  tutor  at  Princeton.
He  then  became  a  fellow  of  Johns  Hopkins  uni
versity,  and  on  taking  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  in  1880
returned  as  tutor  to  Princeton,  and  in  1883  was
made  professor  of  the  history  of  art.  He  is  one  of
the  editors  of  the  "American  Journal  of  Archae
ology,"  has  written  on  archaeology  and  logic  for
various  journals,  and  edited  vol.  iii.  of  the  "  Icono-
graphic  Cyclopaedia  of  Arts."

MARQUES  PERDIGAO.  Joao  da  Puriflca-
<jao  (mar-kes-per-de-gang'),  Brazilian  bishop,  b.  in


Vianna.  Portugal,  about  the  end  of  the  18th  cen
tury;  d.  in  Pernambuco,  30  April.  1864.  He
received  his  early  education  from  private  tutors,
and  was  graduated  as  D.  D.  at  Coimbra  in  1815.
After  being  ordained  priest  he  sailed  for  Brazil,
arriving  at  Rio  Janeiro  in  May,  1816.  Immedi
ately  on  landing  in  Brazil  he  was  appointed  rector
of  a  parish  in  Pernambuco,  where,  besides  conduct
ing  a  school  for  the  training  of  laboring  men,  he
established  drawing  and  other  educational  classes
in  the  evenings  and  on  Sundays,  and  was  active  in
procuring  work  for  the  poor.  His  popularity  as  a
preacher  soon  gained  for  him  a  position  of  great
influence  among  the  people  of  the  province,  who
elected  him  representative  to  congress  in  1826.  but
he  positively  declined.  On  18  Oct.,  1829,  Pedro
I.  appointed  him  bishop  of  Pernambuco,  and  this
choice  was  confirmed  by  the  pope  Leo  XII.  on  28
Feb.,  1831.  His  thorough  knowledge  of  the  wants
of  the  people  enabled  Marques  to  give  valuable
practical  advice  to  the  government,  and  to  do
much  in  behalf  of  the  poorer  class.  In  1839  the
civil  war  known  as  "  Cabanos  "  desolated  the  prov
ince,  but  the  exertions  of  Marques,  who  was
esteemed  by  both  sides,  brought  it  to  a  peaceful
end.  In  1841  he  went  to  Rio  Janeiro  to  crown  the
emperor  Pedro  II.,  and  in  1853  finished  at  his  own
expense  the  magnificent  church-building  of  the
"  Carmo  "  in  Pernambuco.  The  districts  of  Gloria,
Olinda,  Iguarassu,  and  Goyana  are  indebted  to
Marques  for  many  important  charitable  institu
tions  and  several  schools.

MARQUES,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  near  Win
chester,  va.,  in  1753;  d.  near  Belief ontaine,  Ohio,
29  Sept.,  1827.  He  settled  in  Washington  county,
Pa.,  in  1775,  left  home  at  the  age  of  thirty-six  to
prepare  himself  for  the  ministry,  was  ordained
pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church  at  Cross  Creek  in
1794.  and  was  also  active  as  a  missionary  among
the  Indians.  The  cataleptic  manifestations  known
as  "  falling  work  "  first  appeared  during  a  revival
in  his  church  in  1802,  and  spread  thence  like  a
contagion  to  other  districts.

MARQUETTE,  James,  French  missionary,  b.
in  Laon,  France,  in  1637;  d.  near  Marquette  river,
Mich.,  18  May,  1075.  He  entered  the  Society  of
Jesus  at  the  age  of  seventeen,  and  was  ordained
priest  in  1666.  He  sailed  for  Canada  the  same
year,  landed  at  Quebec  on  20  Sept.,  and  on  10  Oct.
went  to  Three  Rivers,  where  he  spent  eighteen
months  studying  the  Algonquin  and  Huron  lan
guages  under  Gabriel  Druilletes  (q.  v.).  In  1668  he
was  ordered  to  return  to  Quebec  and  prepare  for
the  Ottawa  mission,  and  while  awaiting  the  Ottawa
flotilla  at  Montreal  met  a  party  of  Nez-Perces,
with  whom  he  went  to  Lake  Superior  and  founded
the  mission  of  Sault  Sainte  Marie.  After  building
a  church  and  converting  a  large  number  of  savages,
he  was  directed  to  proceed  to  La  Pointe  du  Saint
Esprit,  where  he  arrived  on  13  Sept.,  1669.  He  was
stationed  at  the  head  of  Ashland  bay  till  1671,
when  he  was  obliged  to  fly  with  the  Huron  part  of
his  flock,  on  account  of  the  hostility  of  the  Sioux,
to  Mackinaw,  where  he  founded  the  mission  of  St.
Ignatius  and  built  a  church.  Here  Louis  Joliet
(q.  r.)  came  in  1673  with  orders  from  Frontenac,
governor  of  Canada,  to  take  Marquette  as  com-

Sinion  and  guide  on  his  expedition  of  discovery,
arquette  had  already  heard  of  Mississippi  river
from  the  Illinois  Indians  that  came  to  La  Pointe.
He  now  spent  the  winter  in  making  the  necessary
preparations,  drew  up  a  rude  map  of  the  river  from
information  that  he  received  from  the  Indians,  and
carefully  entered  facts  of  any  value  in  his  note
book.  "  We  took  all  possible  precautions,"  he  says,


214


MARQUEZ


MARQUEZ


"  that,  if  our  enterprise  was  hazardous,  it  should
not  be  rash.''  Marquette  and  Joliet  set  out  on  17
May  in  two  canoes  that  soon  reached  Green  Bay.
The  story  of  the  voyage  and  discovery  is  related
by  Marquette  in  his  "  Voyage  et  decouverte  de
quelques  pays  et  nations  de  1'Amerique  Septen-
trionale,"  a  translation  of  which  is  given  in  Shea's
"  Discovery  and  Exploration  of  the  Mississippi  "
(New  York,  1852).  The  narrative  is  remarkable  for
charm  of  style  as  well  as  close  observation  and  fine
descriptive  'ability.  He  had  a  keen  and  scientific
eye  for  all  the  natural  features  of  the  river,  lie
returned  to  Green  Bay  in  September  and  remained
there  until  October,  1674.  The  hardships  that  he
endured  had  broken  his  constitution,  but  he  sent
to  his  superior  the  journal  of  his  voyage  down  the
Mississippi,  and  awaited  orders.  Being  command
ed  to  establish  a  mission  in  Illinois,  he  set  out  for
Kaskaskia  on  25  Oct.,  and,  overtaking  a  party  of
Pottawattamie  and  Illinois  Indians,  journeyed  with
them  southward  along  the  western  shore  of  Lake
Michigan.  Marquette  reached  Chicago  river  in
December,  and  found  himself  too  exhausted  to
proceed  farther.  The  Illinois  left  him  to  go  to
their  village,  but  two  Frenchmen  remained  with
him  and  built  a  log  hut,  the  first  human  dwelling-

8 lace  on  the  site  of  what  is  now  the  city  of  Chicago,
n  26  Jan.,  1675,  three  Illinois  Indians  brought
him  presents  from  the  chiefs  of  the  tribe,  and  he
promised  to  make  every  effort  to  reach  their  village.
Notwithstanding  his  sufferings,  he  spent  the  long
winter  in  prayer,  meditation,  and  retreat,  and  said
mass  every  day.  Some  time  afterward  he  recovered
sufficiently  to  resume  his  journey.  On  29  March
he  set  out,  and.  after  great  suffering,  reached  Kas
kaskia  on  8  April.  He  went  from  cabin  to  cabin
explaining  the  principles  of  his  religion,  and  then
convened  the  whole  people  on  a  prairie  near  the
village.  He  preached  to  more  than  2.000  men  and
a  still  larger  number  of  women,  most  of  whom  he
converted.  After  addressing  another  great  meet
ing,  he  told  the  Indians  that  he  was  obliged  to  leave
on  account  of  his  ailment,  and  then  set  out  for  Mack
inaw,  escorted  for  thirty  leagues  by  the  Indians.
But  his  strength  gradually  failed  and  he  became  so
weak  that  he  had  to  be  lifted  in  and  out  of  his
canoe.  On  the  eve  of  his  death  he  told  his  com
panions  that  he  would  die  the  next  day,  and,  per
ceiving  the  mouth  of  a  river  with  an  eminence  on
the  bank,  he  directed  that  he  should  be  buried
there.  He  was  carried  ashore  and  a  poor  bark
cabin  raised  to  shelter  him.  "  The  river  where  he
died,"  writes  Parkman,  "  is  a  small  stream  in  the
west  of  Michigan,  some  distance  south  of  the  prom
ontory  called  the  Sleeping  Bear.  It  long  bore  his
name,  which  has  now  been  given  to  a  larger  neigh
boring  stream."  His  remains  were  transferred  to
Point  St.  Ignace,  Mich.,  and  their  resting-place
was  afterward  forgotten,  but  was  discovered  by  a
clergyman  of  Eagle  Harbor,  Mich.,  in  1877.  Fa
ther  Marquette  was  the  first  to  give  an  explana
tion  of  the  lake  tides,  and  his  theory  has  not  been
improved  by  modern  scientists.

MARQUEZ,  Leonardo  (mar'-keth),  Mexican
soldier,  b.  in  Mexico  about  1820.  He  entered  the
army  in  early  life,  and,  when  serving  as  a  major
against  the  revolution  of  Gen.  Paredes,  captured
the  guerilla  chief  Jarauta  (q.  v.)  near  Guanajuato
in  July,  1848.  But  he  was  soon  dissatisfied  with
the  Liberal  government,  and  on  10  Feb..  1849,  pro
nounced  in  Sierra  Gorda  against  President  Her-
rera,  declaring  the  resignation  of  Santa- Anna  void,
and  marched  against  Queretaro.  His  forces  desert
ed  him  and  he  was  obliged  to  fly.  He  was  cap
tured  in  Popotla,  but  escaped,  and  later  was  in


cluded  in  an  amnesty.  In  1858,  under  Gen.  Zu-
loaga's  government,  he  captured  Zacatecas  from
the  Liberal  forces,  but  was  soon  forced  to  evacuate
it.  After  the  accession  to  power  of  Miramon  (q.  v.),
Marquez  was  one  of  the  chief  supports  of  the
reactionary  government.  While  Miramon  was  ab
sent  in  the  attack  on  Vera  Cruz,  the  Constitutional
forces  under  Santos  Degollado  marched  against  the
capital,  but  the  garrison  under  Marquez  encoun
tered  and  totally  defeated  them  at  Tacubaya,  11
April,  1859.  The  victory  was  sullied  by  the  exe
cution  of  a  great  number  of  prisoners,  and  also  of
six  young  medical  students,  who  had  left  the  capi
tal  to  assist  the  wounded  Liberals,  Marquez  alleg
ing  an  express  oi'der  from  Miramon  for  this  cruel
act.  On  the  triumphal  entry  of  the  victorious  army
into  the  capital  the  next  day,  Marquez  was  present
ed  by  a  committee  of  ladies  with  a  silk  sash  bearing
the  inscription :  "  To  virtue  and  valor,  a  token  of
the  gratitude  of  the  daughters  of  Mexico."  Mira
mon  now  organized  three  brigades  for  service  in  the
interior,  and  Marquez.  in  command  of  one,  marched
to  Michoacan,  occupying  Morelia  and  afterward
Guadalajara.  From  the  latter  place  he  made  an  expe
dition  to  Tepic,  where  he  ordered  several  executions,
and  brought  back  twenty  loads  of  bar-silver.  On
his  return  he  marched  against  Guanajuato,  and  was
attacked  by  the  forces  of  Gen.  Jose  Maria  Arteaga,
whose  rear-guard  he  surprised  and  routed.  In
November,  1859.  Gen.  Miramon,  who  for  some  time
had  shown  dislike  for  Marquez,  ordered  his  arrest
and  criminal  prosecution  for  the  seizure  of  a  com
mercial  remittance  of  $600,000  in  silver  in  Guadala
jara,  but  after  the  defeat  of  the  reactionary  forces
in  Silao,  10  Aug.,  1860,  Miramon  was  forced  by
circumstances  to  set  him  at  liberty.  In  September
he  took  the  command  of  one  of  the  three  divisions
that  were  formed  in  Mexico,  and  was  ordered  to
watch  the  Constitutional  forces  in  Guanajuato,
but  when  the  bulk  of  their  army  marched  on  Gua
dalajara,  and  Marquez  was  not  strong  enough  to
intercept  them,  he  was  ordered  against  Queretaro,
which  he  occupied  in  October.  After  recruiting
his  army  he  tried  to  relieve  the  reactionary  forces
that  were  besieged  in  Guadalajara,  but  was  defeated
near  Guanajuato  by  Gen.  Huerta  on  8  Oct.  After
the  armistice  of  Guadalajara  he  was  attacked  on
10  Nov.  by  the  main  army  under  Gonzalez  Ortega
at  Tololotlan,  and  totally  defeated,  taking  refuge
in  the  city  of  Mexico,  where  he  was  soon  sur
rounded  by  the  Constitutional  forces.  As  the  gov
ernment  was  entirely  destitute  of  resources,  Mar
quez  gave  the  superintendent  of  police,  Lagarde,  a
written  order  to  enter  the  house  of  an  English
man  under  pretext  of  searching  for  hidden  arms,
and,  notwithstanding  a  protest,  a  door  closed  with
the  seal  of  the  British  legation  was  forcibly  opened
and  $620,000  belonging  to  British  bond-holders
were  taken  on  17  Nov..  1860.  When  Miramon  at
at  last  resolved  to  inarch  against  the  Constitutional
forces,  Marquez  left  the  capital  on  20  Dec.,  in
command  of  one  of  the  divisions,  and  after  the
final  defeat  of  the  reactionary  party  at  Calpulal-
pam  on  22  Dec.,  when  Miramon  fled  to  Europe,
Marquez  retired  to  the  mountains  of  Michoacan
and  continued  to  harass  the  Liberals.  When  Esco-
bedo  (q.  v.)  early  in  1861  was  captured  by  the  reac
tionary  forces  under  Gen.  Mejia  in  Rio  Verde,
Marquez  used  his  utmost  endeavors  to  have  Esco-
bedo  shot,  but  Mejia  resisted  and  saved  Escobedo's
life.  In  March,  1861.  Marquez  issued  a  decree,
which  he  circulated  widely,  declaring  all  persons
that  served  the  government  of  Juarez  traitors,  and
condemning  them  to  death.  With  the  expectation
of  foreign  intervention  against  the  Liberal  govern-


MARQUEZ


MAEEYAT


215


ment,  the  reactionary  forces  were  encouraged,  and
Marquez  marched  on  Tulancingo  in  April  and  at
tacked  Queretaro,  but  was  defeated.  He  then  joined
the  ex-president,  Zuloaga,  and  they  occupied  Villa
del  Carbon  in  May,  1861.  In  this  'month  the  reac
tionary  forces  captured  Melchor  Ocampo  (q.  r.)  in  his
estate  of  Pomoca  and  delivered  him  to  Marquez
and  Zuloaga,  by  whose  orders  he  was  shot  at  Tepe-
ji  del  Rio  and  his  body  hanged  to  a  tree.  Public
indignation  now  rose  to  the  highest  pitch,  and
congress  offered  a  reward  of  $10,000  for  his  head
or  that  of  Zuloaga ;  but  he  evaded  the  government
forces,  and,  joining  Galvez,  defeated  and  cap
tured,  on  23  June,  Gen.  Leandro  Valles,  who  was
shot  and  hanged  to  a  tree.  After  the  withdrawal
of  the  Spanish  and  British  forces  from  Mexico,
Marquez  offered  his  services  to  Gen.  Laurencez,
and  on  the  latters  retreat  from  Puebla  in  May,
1862.  commanded  the  rear-guard  and  sustained  a
bloody  fight  with  Zaragoza's  forces  at  Barranca
Seca.  After  the  arrival  of  Gen.  Forey  and  during
the  operations  in  1863.  Marquez  led  the  van-guard,
occupied  Cuapiaxtla,  Huamantla,  and  Ixtenco,  and
assisted  in  the  siege  of  Puebla.  After  the  estab
lishment  of  the  empire  he  was  one  of  its  firmest
supporters  and  was  appointed  commander-in-chief
of  the  Pacific  coast,  but  early  in  1865  the  Liberal
forces  invaded  Michoacan  and  forced  Marquez  to
retire  to  Morelia.  He  organized  a  campaign  with
the  French  general  Douay,  but  in  an  encounter
with  the  Liberal  forces  he  was  dangerously  wounded
in  one  eye.  The  emperor,  when  the  army  was  re
modelled,  sent  him  in  the  middle  of  the  year  as
envoy  to  Turkey,  and  thereby  lost  one  of  his  most
faithful  supporters.  When  the  empire  was  near-
ing  its  end  Marquez  was  recalled,  and  arrived  in
November,  1866,  in  Mexico  with  Miramon.  He  was
appointed  commander-in-chief  of  the  capital,  and
after  the  defeat  of  Miramon  at  San  Jacinto  on  1
Feb.,  1867.  accompanied  the  emperor  to  Queretaro
with  about  4.000  men.  When  that  city  was  sur
rounded  by  the  Liberal  forces  under  Escobedo,
Marquez  was  despatched  in  the  middle  of  March
with  some  cavalry  to  Mexico,  with  the  rank  of
lieutenant  of  the  empire  and  orders  to  organize
forces  for  the  relief  of  Queretaro ;  but,  instead  of
returning  there,  he  resolved  to  relieve  Puebla,
which  was  besieged  by  Diaz.  But  the  latter  took
the  city  on  2  April,  and.  encountering  Marquez's
forces  at  San  Lorenzo  on  10  April,  totally  routed
them.  Marquez  returned  to  Mexico  nearly  alone,
and  in  his  turn  was  besieged  by  Diaz.  After  the  fall
of  Queretaro,  which  Marquez  tried  to  conceal,  he
took  the  harshest  measures  to  force  the  inhabitants
and  garrison  to  resistance :  but  gradually  provisions
began  to  fail,  many  poor  persons  died  of  starva
tion,  and  when  Diaz,  re-enforced  by  the  troops
from  Queretaro,  made  a  final  assault  on  20  June,
the  garrison  began  to  show  signs  of  insubordina
tion,  Marquez  hid  himself,  and  Diaz  occupied  the
city  the  next  day.  Marquez  remained  concealed
for  several  days,  and  finally  escaped  to  Havana,
where  he  has  since  resided.

MARQFEZ.  Pedro  ,Tos6  (mar'-keth).  Mexican
author,  b.  in  San  Francisco  del  Rincon.  22  Feb..
1741  :  d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico.  2  Sept..  1820.  Af
ter  a  course  of  study  he  entered  the  Jesuit  order  in
Mexico  in  1763.  He  was  professor  of  Latin  in  the
College  of  Espiritu  Santo  in  Puebla  de  los  Angeles
when  his  order  was  expelled  in  1767,  and  then
went  to  Italy,  where  he  dedicated  himself  to  archi
tecture  and  the  fine  arts.  In  Rome  he  wrote  his
principal  works,  which  are  better  known  in  the
Old  World  than  in  his  own  country.  He  was
made  a  member  of  the  academies  of  Madrid,  Bo-


j  logna,  Florence,  and  Saragossa. In  1814  he  re-
:  turned  to  Mexico  and  gave  himself  to  teaching  in
the  College  of  San  Ildefonso,  where  his  pupils  in
cluded  Jose  Bernardo  Couto. The  latter  intended
j  to  translate  the  works  of  Marquez  from  the  Italian,
j  but  he  died in  1862  without  accomplishing  the
;  task. Marquez's works include "Delle case  .di
!  Citta degli antichi Romani  secondo  la  dottrina
di  Vitruvio"  (Rome,  1795) ;  "  Delle  Ville  di  Plinio
il  Giovane  con  un  Appendice  sugli  Atri  della  S.
Scrittura  e  gli  Scamilli  impari  di  Vitruvio"  (1796);
and  "  Due  antichi  Monumenti  di  Architectura  Mes-
sicana  illustrati "  (1804).

MARROQl'IN,  Francisco  (mar-ro-keen').  Cen
tral  American  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Toranzo.  Spain,
in  1503 ;  d.  in  Santiago.  Guatemala,  19  June,  1563.
He  was  professor  of  philosophy  and  theology  in
Osma,  and  while  preaching  at  the  court  of  Charles
V.  became  an  intimate  friend  of  Pedro  de  Alva-
rado  (q.  i\).  He  accompanied  Alvarado  to  Guate
mala,  where  he  was  appointed  by  Bishop  Zumar-
raga,  of  Mexico,  first  rector  of  Santiago,  and  after
ward  vicar  -  general  of  the  province.  He  was
presented  by  the  emperor  to  the  bishopric  of
Guatemala  in  1533,  confirmed  by  the  pope  in  the
following  year,  and  consecrated  in  Mexico  in  1537.
He  dedicated  himself  with  zeal  to  the  education  of
the  Indians,  bringing  for  the  purpose  from  Spain
some  Dominican  friars,  among  whom  was  Bar-
tolome  de  las  Casas.  and  Franciscans  from  Mexico.
He  soon  acquired  the  Indian  language  and  treated
the  natives  so  kindly  that  they  founded  a  town,
which  they  called  in  his  honor  San  Juan  del  Obis-
po.  He  erected  a  hospital  and  college  and  began
a  cathedral.  He  wrote  "  Catecismo  y  doctrina
cristiana  en  idioma  Utlateco  "  (Mexico/1556),  and
"Arte  para  aprender  los  principales  idiomas  de
Guatemala."  which,  according  to  Remesal,  was
placed  in  the  lihrarv  of  Tlaltelolco  in  manuscript.
MARROQl  IN.  'Jos6  Manuel  (mar-ro-keen ').
Colombian  author,  b.  in  Bogota  in  1827.  He  was
educated  in  the  university  of  his  native  city,  and  for
many  years  afterward  devoted  himself  to  teaching.
He  is  considered  as  an  authority  on  the  Spanish
language  in  South  America,  and  is  a  member  of
the  Colombian  academy  and  honorary  member  of
the  Spanish  academy  of  language.  His  works  are
"  Tratados  de  Ortologia  y  Ortografia  Castellana "
(New  York,  1858)  and  "Diccionario  Ortognifico"
(New  York,  1867),  which  have  passed  through  many
!  editions  and  are  adopted  in  many  Spanish-Ameri-
I  can  schools ;  and  "  Lecciones  de  Retorica  y  Po-
1  etica"  and  "Lecciones  de  Mt'trica,"  which  have
!  been  published  by  the  ministry  of  public  instruc-
|  tion  of  Colombia  in  several  editions.  Marroquin
is  also  the  author  of  many  other  text-books  and  a
collection  of  poems  (Bogota,  1868).

MARRYAT,  Frederick,  British  author,  b.  in
j  London,  England,  10  July,  1792  ;  d.  in  Langham,
Norfolk,  England,  2  Aug.,  1848. His  father  was
;  an  eminent  merchant,  who  published  several  works
j  on  economical  subjects,  and  his  mother  a  native  of
\  Boston,  Mass. He  entered  the  British  navy  as  a
'•  midshipman  in  1812.  and  served  in  the  war  with
France  and  through  the  American  war  of  1812-'15,
distinguishing  himself  by  cutting  four  vessels  out
of  Boston  harbor  and  in  "an  action  with  gun-boats
on  Lake  Pontchartrain  in  1814  just  before  the  battle
of  New  Orleans. In  1829,  when  he  had  attained
the  rank  of  captain,  he  pxiblished  "  Frank  Mild-
may,"  a  novel  dealing  with  life  in  the  British  navy,
in  which  some  of  his  own  early  adventures  were
.  recounted. "  The King's Own "  (London,  1830),
:  "  Midshipman  Easy  "  (1836),  "  Peter  Simple  "  (1837),
,  and  others  followed  at  intervals  of  a  year  or  two,


216


MARSCHALL


MARSH


and,  owing  to  their  faithful  and  spirited  depiction
of  sea-life  and  of  naval  custcmis  and  characters,  ac
quired  wide  and  lasting  popularity.  While  Na
thaniel  P.  Willis  was  in  England,  Capt.  Marryat
printed  in  the  "  Metropolitan  Magazine,"  which  he
was  then  editing,  a  review  of  "  Pencillings  by  the
Way,"  containing  personal  abuse  of  the  American
author.  Willis  challenged  him  to  a  duel,  and  they
met  at  Chatham  and  exchanged  pistol-shots.  In  "  A
Code  of  Signals  for  the  Use  of  Vessels  employed  in
the  Merchant  Service  "  (London,  1837),  Capt.  Mar
ryat  described  a  system  of  marine  signalling  that
was  devised  by  himself,  and  which  was  adopted  by
the  English  and  other  governments.  He  made  a
tour  in  the  United  States  in  1838,  and  on  his  re
turn  home  published  "  A  Diary  in  America,  with
Remarks  on  its  Institutions,"  displaying  strong
prejudices  (1839).  Other  works  treating  of  Ameri
ca  are  "The  Narrative  of  Monsieur  Violet  in  Cali
fornia,  Sonora,  and  Western  Texas.  1839  "  (1843),
and  "  The  Settlers  in  Canada  "  (1844).  His  "  Life
and  Correspondence  "  was  published  by  his  daugh
ter,  Florence. — His  son,  Samuel  Francis,  author,
b.  in  1826;  d.  in  London,  England,  13  July,  1855,
while  serving  as  a  midshipman  in  the  British  navy,
made  notes  and  drawings  for  a  book  on  Borneo,
which  he  published  after  resigning  his  commission
(London,  1848).  In  1850  he  established  himself  in
California,  but  in  1853  returned  to  England  and
published  an  account  of  his  adventures  as  a  gold-
hunter,  with  illustrations  from  his  own  sketches,
under  the  title  of  "  Mountains  and  Molehills,  or
Recollections  of  a  Burnt  Journal  "  (1855). — Fred
erick's  daughter,  Florence,  author,  b.  in  Brighton,
England,  9  July,  1837,  who  married  Mr.  Ross-
Church,  and  for  her  second  husband  Francis  Lean,
became  editor  of  "  London  Society "  in  1872,  is
also  an  actress  and  operatic  singer,  and  has  pub
lished  more  than  forty  novels  and  other  works,  in
cluding  one  on  this  country.

MARSCHALL,  Frederick  William  yon,
clergyman,  b.  in  Stolpen,  near  Dresden,  Saxonv,  5
Feb.,  1721 ;  d.  in  Salem,  N.  C.,  11  Feb.,  1802.  His
father  was  commandant  of  the  fortress  of  Koenig-
stein,  and  he  received  a  strictly  military  education,
but  had  no  taste  for  the  life  of  a  soldier.  While
studying  at  the  University  of  Leipsic  he  became
acquainted  with  Count  Zinzendorf,  and  eventually
entered  the  service  of  the  Moravian  church.  For
sixty-two  years  he  labored  in  its  interest  with  un
wearied  faithfulness,  first  in  Germany  and  Eng
land,  and  then  in  this  country.  He  came  to  North
Carolina  in  1761,  and  settled  on  a  tract  of  land
that  the  Moravian  church  had  bought  of  Lord
Grenville,  and  which  bore  the  name  of  Wachoria.
In  the  centre  of  that  tract  Marschall  founded  the
town  of  Salem,  which  is  now  a  flourishing  borough,
the  seat  of  the  governing  board  of  the  southern
Moravian  church  and  of  the  celebrated  boarding-
school  for  young  ladies.  Other  settlements  were
begun  in  the  vicinity,  and  the  work  of  the  church
prospered  greatly  under  his  supervision.  He  was
a  member  of  its  governing  board,  and  managed  its
finances.  His  military  education  gave  a  tendency
to  his  ministry.  In  his  official  capacity  he  de
manded  implicit  obedience  to  authorities,  a  strict
observance  of  the  discipline  and  rules  of  the  church,
and,  when  occasion  required  it,  rebuked  with  great
sternness.  Personally  he  was  humble,  loving,  kind,
and  rich  in  deeds  of  charity.

MARSDEN,  William,  Canadian  physician,  b.
in  Bolton,  Lancashire,  England,  18  Feb.,  1807;  d
in  Quebec,  Canada,  16  Dec.,  1885.  He  came  to
Canada  with  his  parents  in  1812,  studied  medicine
m  London,  England,  and  was  graduated  in  1830.


He  soon  afterward  returned  to  Canada,  and,
with  the  exception  of  five  years  at  Nicolet,  passed
his  life  in  Quebec.  Dr.  Marsden  was  for  many
years  president  of  the  College  of  physicians  and
surgeons  of  Lower  Canada,  and  of  the  Dominion
medical  association,  and  was  chairman  of  the  com
mittee  of  the  Marine  hospital.  Among  his  writ
ings  was  a  "  History  of  Asiatic  Cholera."

MARSELUS,  Nicholas  John,  clergyman,  b.  in
Schenectady,  X.  Y.,  12  March,  1792 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  5  April,  1876.  He  was  graduated  at
Union  college  in  1810  and  at  New  Brunswick  theo
logical  seminary  in  1815,  and  was  pastor  of  the  Re
formed  churches  of  Greenbush  and  Blooming  Grove
till  1822,  when  he  took  charge  of  the  Greenwich
church  in  New  York  city.  From  this  pulpit  he
exercised  a  wide  religious  influence  until  he  was
compelled  by  age  and  infirmities  to  resign  in  1858.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Rutgers  in
1844.  He  published  a  sketch  of  Greenwich  church
and  its  pastorate  under  the  title  of  "  Gospel  Minis
try  and  its  Results  "  (New  York,  1842).

MARSH,  Charles,  lawyer,  b.  in  Lebanon,  Conn.,
10  July,  1765;  d.  in  Woodstock,  Vt.,  11  Jan.,  1849.
He  settled  with  his  parents  in  Vermont  before  the
Revolutionary  war,  and  was  graduated  at  Dart
mouth  in  1786. After  studying  law  he  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  and  practised  at  Woodstock,  Vt.,
for  about  fifty  years,  becoming  the  senior  member
of  the  profession  in  Vermont. In  1797  he  was  ap
pointed  by  President  Washington  to  the  office  of
district  attorney  of  his  state,  and  later  was  elected
as  a  Federalist  to  congress,  serving  from  4  Dec.,
1815,  to  3  March,  1817. While  in  Washington  he
was  a  founder  of  the  American  colonization  society,
and  he  was  a  liberal  benefactor  of  various  mission
ary  and Bible  societies. He  was prominent in
the  Dartmouth  college  controversy,  a  trustee  in
1809-'49,  and  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
that  college  in  1828. Mr.  Marsh  was  president  of
the  Vermont  Bible  society  and  vice-president  of
the  American Bible  society  and  of  the  American
education  society. — His  son,  George  Perkins,  di
plomatist,  b.  in  Woodstock,  Vt.,  15  March,  1801 ;
d.  in  Vallombrosa,  Italy,  23  July,  1882. He  was
graduated at Dart
mouth  in  1820,  admit
ted  to  the  bar after
studying  law  in  Bur
lington,  and  speedily
obtained  a  large  prac
tice. Meanwhile he
was  active  in  politics,
and  in  1835  was  elect
ed  a  member  of  the
legislature,  becoming
at  the  same  time  one
of  the  supreme  execu
tive  council  of  Ver
mont. In  1842  he  was
elected  as  a  Whig  to
congress,  and served
with  re-elections  un-
til  1849,  when  he  re-
signed  to  accept  the  appointment  of  minister  to
Turkey. This  post  he  held  until  December,  1853,
during  which  time  he  rendered  valuable  service  to
the  cause  of  civil  and  religious  toleration  in  that
empire,  and  in  1852  he  was  charged  with  a  special
mission  to  Greece. (See  KING,  JONAS.) He  accom
plished  this  task  with  a  vigor  that  surprised  the
liplomatists  of  Athens and showed a masterly
knowledge  of  the  Greek  constitution  and  legislation,
as  well  as  of  international  law. In  1857  he  was
appointed  by  the  governor  of  Vermont  to  make  a


MARSH


MARSH


217


report  to  the  legislature  in  regard  to  the  artificial
propagation  of  fish.  He  had  previously  been  ap
pointed  one  of  the  commissioners  to  rebuild  the
state-house  at  Montpelier.  and  in  1857-'9  he  held  the
office  of  state  railroad  commissioner.  In  1861  he
was  appointed  the  first  U.  S.  minister  to  the  new
kingdom  of  Italy,  and  retained  that  post  for  the
remainder  of  his  life.  No  American  living  ever
had  anything  approaching  the  personal  prestige
with  the  Italian  government  that  Mr.  Marsh  en
joyed  ;  and  that  not  for  the  sake  of  the  govern
ment,  but  for  his  own.  The  length  of  his  diplo
matic  service  is  said  to  have  exceeded  that  of  any
other  American,  not  excepting  Benjamin  Franklin.
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Harvard
in  1859.  and  from  Dartmouth  in  I860,  and  was  con
nected  with  the  National  academy  of  sciences  and
other  learned  societies.  Mr.  Marsh  achieved  a  repu
tation  by  his  philological  studies,  especially  in  the
languages  and  literature  of  the  north  of  Europe.
He  was  an  admirer  of  the  Goths,  whose  presence  he
traced  in  whatever  is  great  and  peculiar  in  the
character  of  the  founders  of  New  England.  His
work  in  this  department  began  when  he  was  a
young  lawyer  in  Vermont,  and  his  first  publication
was  "A  Compendious  Grammar  of  the  Old  North
ern  or  Icelandic  Language,"  compiled  and  trans
lated  from  the  grammar  of  Rask  (printed  but  not
published,  Burlington,  1838).  He  owned  the  finest
collection  of  Scandinavian  literature  except  those
in  the  northern  kingdoms,  part  of  which  ultimate
ly  became  the  property  of  the  University  of  Ver
mont,  through  the  liberality  of  Frederick  Billings.
During  the  winter  of  1858-'9  he  began  a  course  of
thirty  lectures  on  the  English  language  at  Colum
bia,  and  a  year  later  he  delivered  a  second  course,
on  the  grammatical  history  of  English  literature,
before  the  Lowell  institute,  in  Boston.  He  also
prepared  an  American  edition  of  Hensleigh  Wedg
wood's  "Dictionary  of  English  Etymology"  (New
York,  1862),  to  which  he  made  large  additions  and
annotations.  In  addition  to  his  published  ad
dresses,  and  articles  on  philological  subjects  in  re
views,  he  was  the  author  of  "The  Camel,  his  Or
ganization,  Habits,  and  Uses,  considered  with
reference  to  his  Introduction  into  the  United
States"  (Boston,  1856);  "  Lectures  on  the  English
Language"  (New  York,  1861);  "Origin  and  His
tory  of  the  English  Language,  and  of  the  Early
Literature  it  embodies "  (1862) ;  and  "  Man  and
Nature,  or  Physical  Geography  as  modified  by
Human  Action  "  (1864).  The  last  work,  with  nu
merous  corrections  by  the  author,  was  translated
into  Italian  (Florence.  1870).  and  afterward  almost
entirely  rewritten  and  republished  under  the  title
"  The  Earth,  as  modified  by  Human  Action  "  (New
York,  1874).  See  "A  Discourse  Commemorative
of  the  Hon.  George  Perkins  Marsh,"  by  Samuel  G.
Brown  (Burlington.  1883). — His  wife",  Caroline
Crane,  b.  in  Berkley.  Mass..  1  Dec..  1816,  married
Mr.  Marsh  in  1838.  "She  has  published  "The  Hal-
lig,  or  the  Sheepfold  in  the  Waters :  A  Tale  of
Humble  Life  on  the  Coast  of  Schleswig,"  trans
lated  from  the  German  of  Biernatzki.  with  a  bio-  j
graphical  sketch  of  the  author  (Boston,  1857),  and
"Wolfe  of  the  Knoll,  and  other  Poems"  (New
York,  1860).  Mrs.  Marsh  has  now  (1888)  in  prep-  |
aration  a  life  of  her  husband,  the  publication  of
which  has  been  delayed  by  her  serious  illness. —
James,  nephew  of  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hart-  :
ford,  Vt..  19  July.  1794 ;  d.  in  Colchester,  Yt,  3
July.  1842.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1817,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  I
1822,  meanwhile  serving  as  tutor  at  Dartmouth
in  1818-'20,  and  spending  several  months  in  ,


1  study  at  Cambridge. In  October,  1824,  he  was  or-
j  dained  as  a  Congregational  clergyman  at  Hanover,
and  then  was  professor  of  languages  and  biblical
literature  at  Hampden  Sidney  college,  Va.,  until
1826.  when  he  was  appointed  president  of  the  Uni-
j  versityof  Vermont. This  office  he  held  until  1833,
and  introduced  a  less  severe  discipline  among  the
students. He  resigned  to  fill  the  chair  of  moral
;  and  intellectual  philosophy,  which  he  retained  un
til  his  death. The  religious  movement  of  1836,
'  known  as  the  "  new  measures,"  met  with  his  disap-
i  proval,  and  was  severely  denounced,  even  at  the
:  expense  of  his  reputation,  but  ultimately  the  ma
jority  of  the  community  accepted  his  view. He  re-
j  ceived  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Columbia  in  1830,
i  and  from  Amherst  in  1833. His  literary  work  was
quite  large,  and  he  was  among  the  first  to  revive  by
his  writings  the  scholastic  dogma  of  "  Crede  ut
intelligas,"  in  opposition  to  that  of  "  Intellige  ut
credas." In  1829  he  contributed  a  series  of  papers
on  "  Popular  Education  "  to  the  "  Vermont  Chroni-
I  cle,"  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Philopolis,"  and  he
i  published  a  "  Preliminary  Essay  "  to  Coleridge's
"Aids  to  Reflection  "  (Burlington,  1829),  and  "  Se
lections  from  the  Old  English  Writers  on  Practical
Theology  "  (1830). Besides  these  he  issued  several
I  translations  from  the  German,  including  Herder's
|  "  Spirit  of  Hebrew  Poetry  "  (1833). His  literary
remains  were  collected  and  published,  with  a  me
moir  of  their  author,  by  Joseph  Torrey  (1843).

MARSH, Dexter, paleontologist,'  b.  in  Mon
tague, Mass., 22 Aug., 1806 ; d. in Greenfield
Mass.,  2  April,  1853. He  was  a  day-laborer  and
;  uneducated  when,  in  1835,  the  fossil  footprints  that
I  were  found  in  flagging-stones  attracted  his  at  ten -
!  tion. These  led  to  his  search  for  other  specimens,
i  and  he  began  collecting,  sometimes  for  others,  but
!  chiefly  for  himself,  traversing  for  this  purpose  the
|  entire  valley  of  the  Connecticut,  and  also  visiting
!  the  states  of  New  York  and New  Jersey. He
;  showed  much  judgment  in  pointing  out  localities
i  where  footprints  were  likely  to  be  found,  and  at
I  the  time  of  his  death,  notwithstanding  his  fre-
:  quent  supplies  to  others,  his  cabinet  probably  con
tained  the  choicest  collection  of  fossil  footprints
and  fishes  then  in  existence. This  was  sold  at  auc
tion  and  scattered  among  various  museums.

MARSH,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wethersfield,
i  Conn.,  2  April,  1788;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  4  Aug.,
1864. He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1804,  and  then
studied  theology  under  his  father,  of the same
i  name,  but  did  not begin preaching  until 1809.
t  In  1818  he  was  settled  as  pastor  of  the  1st  Con
gregational  church  in  Haddam.  Conn. Meanwhile
he  had  become  interested  in  the  temperance  move-
i  ment.  which  at  that  period  was  attracting  great
attention  throughout  the  state. In  1828  a  county
|  society  was  organized,  of  which  he  became  one  of
!  the  officers,  and  in  1829  a  state  organization  was
effected,  of  which  he  was  made  secretary. He  de-
j  livered  temperance  lectures  throughout"  the  state,
among  others  "  Putnam  and  his  Wolf,"  of  which
150.000  copies  were  sold  before  it  passed  into  the
hands  of  the  American  tract  society,  which  subse
quently distributed many thousands more. In
1833  the  American  temperance  union  invited  him
to  become  one  of  its  agents  in  Philadelphia,  and
after  three  veal's  of  labor  he  was  called  to  accept
the  secretaryship  of  that  society  in  New  York  city,
and  became"  the  editor  of  its  organ  and  publica
tions. In  this  capacity  he  was  sent  to  the  World's
temperance  convention  in London in 1846. In
1865  the  society  was  reorganized  and  new  officials
were  appointed. Later  he  became  financial  agent
of  Yale  theological  seminary  and  raised  §10,000  for


218


MARSH


MARSH


that  institution.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Jefferson  college  in  1852,  and,  besides  editing
the  "  Temperance  Journal,''  published  "  Epitome
of  Ecclesiastical  History  "  (New  York,  1838) ;  "  Half-
Century  Tribute  to  the  Cause  of  Temperance "
(1840);' "The  Temperance  Speaker"  (1800);  "Tem
perance  Recollections"  (I860);  and  "Prayers  from
Plymouth  Pulpit "  (1807).

MARSH,  Luther  Rawson,  lawyer,  b.  in  Pom-
pey  Hill,  Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y.,  4  April,  1813.  He
was  educated  in  Pompey,  and  at  Capt.  Alden  Par
tridge's  military  academy  at  Middletown,  Conn.
After  spending  a  year  in  a  store  he  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  Albany  in  October,  183(5,
on  his  way  to  New  York  city  to  become  the  attor
ney  in  the  office  of  Henry'  R.  Storrs.  After  the
death  of  Mr.  Storrs  he  returned  to  Utica  in  1839,
and  practised  there  for  five  years.  During  this
time,  as  counsel  for  the  New  York  and  Erie
railroad,  in  its  inception,  he  personally  examined
and  made  abstracts  of  all  the  titles  to  its  road-bed
from  Binghamton  to  Lake  Erie,  and  tried,  alone,
all  the  cases  of  condemnation.  In  1844  he  again
removed  to  New  York  city,  where  he  has  since  de
voted  himself  to  his  profession.  He  was  originally
a  Democrat,  but  has  been  a  Republican  from  the
early  history  of  the  party,  and  on  the  platform  and
in  the  press  has  maintained  its  cause.  He  was  as
sociated  with  Daniel  Webster  about  1844,  when  the
latter  had  retired  as  secretary  of  state  and  opened
a  law-office  in  New  York,  and  until  he  returned  to
the  senate  in  1845.  In  1850-'!  Mr.  Marsh  carried
on  a  crusade  against  intramural  burials,  and  drew
the  bill  of  1850,  and  the  city  ordinance  of  Febru
ary,  1851,  which  put  an  end  to  the  custom.  In
1885  he  was  chairman  of  the  committee  of  estimate
of  the  lands  for  the  International  park  at  Niagara.
From  1882  till  1887  he  labored  to  secure  3,840  acres
of  new  park  area  for  New  York  city,  being  chair
man  of  the  original  commission,  and  chairman  of
the  commission  to  lay  out  parks  under  the  act  of
1883,  and  chairman  of  the  board  to  appraise  their
value  under  the  act  of  1884.  His  report  witli  John
Mullaly  is  a  valuable  contribution  to  park  litera
ture.  He  has  been  a  frequent  contributor  to  the
press.  In  1840  he  edited  the  "  Sledgehammer,"  a
campaign  paper,  at  Utica  :  and  in  1852-'3  he  wrote
leaders  for  the  New  York  "Times,"  in  1800  he
edited  a  volume  of  Alvan  Stewart's  "  Speeches  on
Slavery."  He  is  a  frequent  orator,  and  a  volume
of  his  addresses  is  in  preparation  for  publication.

MARSH,  Othuiel  Charles,  naturalist,  b.  in
Lockport,  N.  Y.,  29  Oct.,  1831.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Yale  in  1800,
and  passed  the  next
two  years  at  the  Yale
(now  Sheffield)  scien
tific  school.  During  this
time  he  showed  himself
a  devoted  student  in
mineralogy,  and  made
an  important  begin
ning  in  paleontology  in
the  discovery  and  de
scription  of  Eosatmis
Acadian  us.  a  large  rep
tile  from  the  coal-for
mation  of  Nova  Scotia.
From  1862  till  1865
he  studied  zoology,  ge-
ol°£>r'  and  mineralogy
tinder  Ehrenberg  and
other  eminent  teachers

in  the  universities  of  Berlin,  Heidelberg,  and  Bres-
lau,  occupying  his  vacations  in  field-work  in  Ger


many  and  the  Alps.  He  returned  to  the  United
States  to  accept  the  chair  of  paleontology,  which
had  been  established  for  him  at  Yale  in  1866,  and
which  lie  still  (1888)  holds.  He  has  since  devoted
himself  to  the  original  investigation  of  extinct
vertebrate  animals,  more  especially  of  those  remains
that  have  been  collected  in  the  Rocky  mountain
region  by  scientific  expeditions  organized  and  led
by  himself,  and,  in  later  years,  by  trained  parties
sent  into  the  field  under  his  direction.  During
these  researches  Prof.  Marsh  has  crossed  the  Rocky
mountains  twenty-one  times.  His  earlier  expedi
tions  were  carried  into  regions  th.it  had  never  be
fore  been  visited  by  white  men,  and  were  frequent
ly  attended  by  much  hardship  and  danger,  as  the
localities  that  he  visited  were  often  occupied  by
hostile  Indians,  and  explorations  could  be  carried
on  only  under  the  protection  of  a  strong  escort  of
U.  S.  troops.  While  on  one  of  these  expeditions
Prof.  Marsh  became  aware  of  frauds  that  were
practised  on  the  Indians,  and  his  vigorous  efforts
in  their  behalf  at  Washington,  in  1875,  resulted  in
procuring  for  them  better  treatment.  In  Prof.
Marsh's  various  explorations  more  than  1,000  new
species  of  extinct  vertebrates  have  been  brought
to  light,  many  of  which  possess  great  scientific  in
terest,  and  represent  wholly  new  orders,  and  others
that  were  not  before  discovered  in  America.  He
has  already  published  descriptions  of  about  300  of
these,  principally  in  papers  in  the  "  American  Jour
nal  of  Science."  Among  the  more  important  of
them  are  a  new  sub-class  of  birds  with  teeth  (odon-
tornithes),  and  the  first  known  American  ptcrodac-
tyles,  including  a  new  order  (pteranodontia).  from
the  cretaceous  strata  of  Kansas :  two  new  orders
of  large  mammals  from  the  eocene  tertiary  of  the
Rocky  mountains,  the  tillodontia.  which  seem  to
be  related  to  the  carnivores,  ungulates,  and  ro
dents,  and  the  dinoccrata,  which  were  huge  ungu
lates,  elephantine  in  bulk,  bearing  on  their  skulls
two  or  more  pairs  of  horn-cores ;  also,  from  the
same  formation,  eohippus,  orohippus.  and  epihip-
pus,  the  earliest  known  ancestors  of  the  horse,  and
the  first  monkeys,  bats,  and  marsupials  that  were
found  in  this  country ;  from  the  miocene.  the
brontotherida3,  a  new  family  of  great  ungulates,
with  their  skulls  armed  with  a  single  pair  of  horns  ;
and  from  the  Jurassic,  the  first  mammals  of  that
formation  to  be  found  in  America,  representing
two  orders  and  many  species,  and  several  new
families  of  dinosaurs  of  most  interesting  character,
some  of  these  reptiles  being  of  enormous  size,  and
probably  the  largest  land  animals  yet  discovered.
Since  1876  Prof.  Marsh  has  been  engaged  in  pre
paring  a  series  of  monographs  containing  full  illus
trated  descriptions  of  his  western  discoveries,  which
are  in  course  of  publication  under  government  au
spices.  These  include  "  Odontornithes,  or  Birds
with  Teeth ''  (Washington,  1880),  and  a  volume  on
the  "  Dinocerata  "  (1884).  A  third  large  volume,
now  in  press,  describes  the  gigantic  dinosaurs  of
the  order  sauropoda,  and  is  illustrated  by  90  plates
and  over  200  wood-cuts.  A  fourth  will  describe
the  stegosauria.  another  group  of  extinct  reptiles
from  the  Rocky  mountains,  a  fifth  describes  the
brontotherida?.  and  other  memoirs  will  follow.
These  volumes  will  be  issued  by  the  U.  S.  geologi
cal  survey,  of  which  Prof.  Marsh  is  now  paleon
tologist  in  charge  of  the  division  of  vertebrate  pa
leontology,  but  previous  to  1882  all  of  his  explora
tions  were  made  at  his  own  expense.  Charles  Dar
win  wrote  to  him  :  "  Your  work  on  these  old  birds,
and  on  the  many  fossil  animals  of  North  America,
has  afforded  the  best  support  to  the  theory  of
evolution  that  has  appeared  within  the  last  twenty


MARSH


MARSHALL


219


years."  In  1878  Prof.  Marsh  was  president  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci
ence,  and  since  1883  he  has  been  president  of  the
National  academy  of  sciences.  He  is  a  fellow  of
the  Geological  society  of  London,  from  which,  in
1877,  he  received  the  Bigsby  medal  for  important
discoveries  in  paleontology.  He  is  also  a  member
of  many  other  European  and  American  scientific
societies.  In  1886  the  University  of  Heidelberg  con
ferred  upon  him  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.,  and  the  same
year  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Harvard.

MARSH,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Danville,
Vt.,  3  July,  1796;  d.  in  Underbill,  Vt.,  1  April,
1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1821,
and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1824.  He
was  ordained  in  1825,  and,  after  serving  as  a  home
missionary  in  New  England  for  two  years,  was
pastor  of  various  Congregational  churches  m  Ver
mont  for  nearly  forty  years.  He  originated  in
1827  the  system  of  colportage  that  has  since  been
employed  with  excellent  results  by  the  American
tract  society,  the  American  Sunday-school  union,
and  other  religious  societies.  Mr.  Marsh  was  an
able  debater,  and  had  repeated  controversies  with
representatives  of  other  denominations.  He  was  a
profound  biblical  scholar,  and  his  knowledge  of
Greek  and  Hebrew  was  very  thorough.  In  1852
he  was  settled  in  Underbill,  Vt.,  and  continued
there  until  his  death.  His  publications,  including
essays  and  sermons  on  temperance  and  anti-sla
very,  were  very  popular,  and  during  the  latter  part
of  his  life  he  wrote  1,000  biblical  hymns,  some  of
which  wore  published.

MARSH,  Sylvester,  engineer,  b.  in  Oampton,
X.  II..  30  Sept.,  1803;  d.  in  Concord,  X.  II.,  30
Dec.,  1884.  He  had  but  little  opportunity  for  edu
cation.  In  1826  he  established  himself  as  a  pro
vision-dealer  in  Boston,  and  later  was  engaged  in
Ashtabula,  Ohio,  in  supplying  Boston  and  Xew
York  with  beef  and  pork.  He  settled  in  Chicago
during  the  winter  of  1833-'4,  and  there  followed  a
similar  business  till  1837,  when  his  accumulations
were  swept  away  in  the  financial  crisis  of  that
year.  He  began  again  in  the  grain  business,  and
acquired  a  substantial  fortune.  Meanwhile  he  was
active  in  all  that  pertained  to  the  advancement  of
Chicago,  and  ranks  among  its  founders.  The  meat
packing  industry  was  originated  by  him,  and  he
invented  many  appliances  that  were  incidental  to
its  success,  especially  those  having  reference  to  the
use  of  steam.  He  invented  the  dried-meal  pro
cess,  and  "  Marsh's  caloric  dried  meal "  is  still  an
article  of  commerce.  In  1864  he  settled  in  Little
ton.  X.  H.,  and  after  1879  made  Concord,  X.  H.,  his
residence.  While  ascending  Mount  Washington  in
1852  he  lost  his  way.  and  then  conceived  the  idea
of  building  a  railroad  to  its  summit,  believing  that
such  an  enterprise  could  be  made  profitable.  He
obtained  a  charter  for  the  road  on  25  June.  1858,
but  the  civil  war  prevented  any  action  until  May.
1866.  The  construction  of  such  a  road  was  re
garded  as  impossible,  and  he  became  known  as
'•  Crazy  Marsh  " ;  indeed,  the  legislature,  in  grant
ing  him  a  charter,  further  expressed  their  willing
ness  to  grant  a  "charter  to  the  moon"  if  he  wished.
Notwithstanding  all  opposition,  he  persisted  in
building  the  railroad,  relying  chiefly  on  his  own
resources,  and  received  but  little  encouragement
from  capitalists  till  an  engine  was  actually  running
over  part  of  the  route.  The  peculiar  form  of  loco
motive,  cog-rail,  and  brakes  used  were  invented  by
Mr.  Marsh.  The  road  was  formally  opened  on  14
Aug.,  1868,  as  far  as  "Jacob's  ladder"  (see  illustra
tion),  and  entirely  completed  in  July,  1869*.  its
length  is  2-81  miles,  and  the  ascent  3,625  feet,


making  the  average  grade  of  1,290  feet  to  the  mile.
There  are  nine  curves,  of  radius  varying  from  497
to  945  feet.  The  indispensable  peculiarity  of  this
road  is  its  central
cog-rail,  whichcon-
sists  of  two  pieces
of  wrought  -  iron,
parallel  to  each
other  and  connect
ed  by  strong  pins.
The  "teeth  of  the
driving  -  wheel  of
the  engine  play  in
to  the  spaces  of
these  bolts,  and.  as
it  revolves,  the  en
gine  climbs  or  de
scends,  resting  on
the  outer  rails,
which  are  four  feet
and  seven  inches
apart.  For  stop
ping  trains  and
controlling  their
descent,  both  fric
tion  and  atmos
pheric  brakes  are  employed,  and  their  complete
reliability  has  been  proved  by  the  severest  tests.
The  engines  weigh  about  six  and  a  half  tons,  and
are  rated  at  fifty  horse-power,  but  by  their  gearing
this  power  is  greatly  increased,  at  the  expense  of
speed,  which  is  two  miles  an  hour.  The  engine
always  takes  the  down-hill  end  of  the  train,  which
consists  of  locomotive,  tender,  and  one  car,  accom
modating  about  fifty  passengers.  The  cost  of  the
road  was  f  139,000,  and  its  capital  stock  is  $129.000.
Xot  an  accident  has  occurred  on  the  road  to  any
of  its  130,000  passengers  down  to  1888.  During
the  construction  of  this  road  it  was  visited  by  a
Swiss  engineer,  who  took  away  drawings  of  the
machinery  and  track,  from  which  a  similar  railway
has  since  been  built  up  Mount  Rigi  in  Switzerland.
Another  road,  built  on  similar  plans,  is  in  success
ful  operation  to  the  summit  of  Green  mountain,
Mount  Desert.  Me.

MARSHALL,  Andrew,  clergyman,  b.  in  South
Carolina  about  1755  ;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va..  8  Dec..
1856.  He  was  a  negro  slave,  and  was  sold  to  John
Houston,  colonial  governor  of  Georgia,  who  be
queathed  him  freedom.  Marshall  at  one  time  hav
ing  saved  his  master's  life.  The  executors,  failing
to  carry  out  the  will,  sold  him  again,  but  he  ran
away  and  was  sold  at  large  to  Judge  Joseph  Clay.
When  Gen.  Washington  visited  Savannah  he  was
appointed  the  general's  body-servant.  The  em
bargo  having  taken  effect  in  Savannah  at  the  open
ing  of  the  Revolution,  fifteen  merchants  of  that
city  agreed  to  give  him  a  purse  of  f  225  if  he  would
carry  word  to  several  American  vessels  that  lay  in
a  bay  on  the  lower  seaboard,  in  which  achievement
he  was  successful.  He  witnessed  many  stirring
events  during  the  Revolution,  and  his  personal
recollections  of  Gen.  Xathanael  Greene  and  ac
counts  of  his  death  agreed  with  the  historical  rec
ords.  Through  diligence  and  economy  he  pur
chased  his  freedom  and  that  of  his  family.  He
united  with  the  Baptist  church  when  he  was  nearly
fifty  years  of  age.  and  was  ordained  pastor  of  the
second  colored  Baptist  church  in  Savannah,  and
when  this  became  large  enough  for  division  was
made  pastor  of  the  part  which  called  itself  the
First  African  Baptist  church,  and  held  this  charge
until  his  death,  preaching  also  in  Charleston,  Xew
Orleans,  and  elsewhere  in  Georgia.  He  also  con
ducted  a  large  portage  and  draying  business  in


220


MARSHALL


Savannah,  owning  both  teams  and  slave?.  Mar
shall  is  mentioned  in  Prederika  Bremer's  "  Homes
of  the  New  World  "  (London,  1853).

MARSHALL,  Charles  Henry,  merchant,  b.  in
Easton,  Washington  co.,  N.  Y.,  8  April,  1792:  d.
in  New  York  city,  23  Sept.,  1865.  His  ancestors
were  natives  of  Nantucket,  where  they  were  fol
lowers  of  the  sea,  and  his  father  removed  thence  to
the  Saratoga  patent  in  1785.  The  son  was  born  in  a
log  cabin  on  his  father's  farm,  and  received  a  lim
ited  education.  He  followed  the  sea.  and  became  a
proprietor  and  master  in  the  "  Old  line  "  of  pack
ets  between  New  York  and  Liverpool.  In  1834  he
left  the  sea,  having  crossed  the  Atlantic  ninety-
four  times,  and  was  the  principal  manager  of  the
"Old  line"  for  thirty  years,  during  which  time  he
was  closely  identified  with  the  commercial  inter
ests  of  this  country.  He  superintended  the  build
ing  of  new  vessels,  one  of  which,  the  "  United
States,"  of  2,000  tons,  was  after  a  few  voyages  pur
chased  by  the  Prussian  government.  Capt.  Mar
shall  was  a  commissioner  of  emigration  in  1851-'5,
president  of  the  Marine  society,  a  trustee  of  the
Sailors'  snug  harbor,  was  interested  in  other  simi
lar  institutions.  From  1845  till  his  death  he  was
one  of  the  board  of  pilot  commissioners.  He  was
an  active  member  of  the  Union  defence  committee
organized  at  a  meeting  in  Union  square,  New
York,  20  April,  1861,  for  co-operation  with  the
U.  S.  government,  and  was  third  president  of  the
Union  league  club  of  New  York,  holding  this  post
at  the  time  of  his  death.

MARSHALL,  Christopher,  patriot,  b.  in  Dub
lin,  Ireland,  6  Nov.,  1709  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
4  May,  1797.  He  received  a  classical  education  in
England  and  came  to  this  country  without  the  per
mission  of  his  parents,  in  consequence  of  which  lie
was  disowned.  He  settled  in  Philadelphia  and  be
came  a  chemist  and  pharmacist.  His  firm  fur
nished  most  of  the  drugs  and  medicines  to  the
troops  of  the  "  Jerseys,  Pennsylvania*,  and  Dela-
wares."  His  attachment  to  the  American  cause
brought  him  into  many  posts  of  honor  during  the
Revolution,  and  he  was  on  confidential  terms  with
the  chief  members  of  the  Continental  congress  and
the  new  government  of  Pennsylvania.  He  was
disowned  by  the  Society  of  Friends  for  the  active
part  that  he  took  on  the  patriot  side.  On  17
March,  1775,  he  was  elected  one  of  the  twelve
managers  of  a  company  "  set  on  foot  for  making
woollens,  linens,  and  cotton,"  the  election  being
held  at  Carpenter's  hall.  He  was  a  member  of  the
committee  that  met  at  the  state-house,  25  April,
1775,  to  consider  the  measures  to  be  pursued  in
the  "critical  affairs  of  America,"  and  of  the  com
mittee  of  safety  from  its  first  formation  until  the
close  of  the  war.  His  "  Remembrancer  "  is  one  of
the  most  valuable  diaries  that  was  kept  during
the  Revolution.  The  manuscript  was  presented  to
the  Pennsylvania  historical  society  by  his  great-
great-grandson,  Charles  Marshall,  of  Germantown,
edited  by  William  Duane  and  published  (Philadel
phia,  1839). — His  son,  Charles,  pharmacist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  8  May,  1744  ;  d.  there,  22  Aug.,  1825,
received  a  classical  education,  entered  into  partner
ship  with  his  father  and  elder  brother,  Christo
pher,  and  on  their  retirement  from  the  business
became  sole  proprietor.  Early  in  the  19th  cen
tury  he  retired  from  active  business.  When  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  assumed  to  issue  di
plomas  to  practitioners  of  pharmacy  and  to  pre
scribe  the  conditions  of  the  grant,  the  pharmaceut
ists  of  Philadelphia  felt  it  to  be  an  infraction  of
their  rights,  and  established  in  1824  a  college  of
pharmacy,  of  which  Mr.  Marshall,  then  one  of  the


most  noted  men  in  pharmacy  in  America,  was
chosen  first  president.

MARSHALL,  Edward  Chauncey,  author,  b.
in  Little  Falls,  Herkimer  co.,  N.  Y.,  8  July,  1824.
His  ancestor,  Thomas,  from  whom  Marshall  street
in  Boston  was  named,  settled  in  that  city  in  1634.
Edward  was  graduated  at  Geneva  (now  Hobart)
college  in  1843.  and  while  a  student  there  invented
the  arctic  rubber  overshoe.  He  also  invented  the
register  of  fares  with  a  dial-plate  which  is  now  in
use  on  several  street-car  lines.  From  1845  till
1847  he  was  tutor  of  mathematics  in  Geneva  and
of  mathematics  under  Prof.  Charles  Davies  at  West
Point.  From  1848  till  1852  he  was  a  tutor  in  the
New  York  free  academy,  and  in  1852-'5  a  professor
in  the  Episcopal  high-school,  Alexandria,  Va.  In
1871  he  held  an  office  in  the  New  York  custom
house.  From  1875  till  1885  he  was  connected  with
the  New  York  "  Star  "  and  the  "  Evening  Tele
gram,"  and  he  is  now  (1888)  the  financial  agent  of
the  American  protective  tariff  league.  He  is  the
author  of  "Book  of  Oratory"  (New  York,  1852);
"History  of  the  U.  S.  Naval  Academy"  (1862);
"  Ancestry  of  Gen.  Grant "  (1869) ;  and  a  pamphlet,
"  Are  the  West  Point  Graduates  Loyal  1"  the  sta
tistics  of  which  were  quoted  in  congress  and  aided
in  preventing  the  military  academy  from  being
closed  at  this  time  by  its  enemies  (New  York,
1862).— His  brother.  Elisha  Gaylord,  soldier,  b.
in  Seneca  Falls,  N.  Y.,  26  Jan.,  1829 ;  d.  in  Canan-
daigua,  N.  Y.,  3  Aug.,  1883,  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1850,  assigned  to  the
6th  infantry,  and  served  on  frontier  duty  and  in
the  Utah  expedition  of  1858.  He  was  promoted
captain  on  14  May,  1861,  and  on  20  April,  1862,
became  colonel  of  the  13th  New  York  regiment.
He  was  engaged  in  the  various  campaigns  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  being  severely  wounded  at
Fredericksburg,  Va.,  and  receiving  the  brevet  of
lieutenant-colonel,  13  Dec.,  1862.  lie  was  on  sick
leave  of  absence  from  that  date  until  23  May,  1863,
when  he  was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service
and  appointed  mustering  and  disbursing  officer  at
Rochester,  N.  Y.  In  May,  1864,  he  engaged  in  the
Richmond  campaign,  commanding  a  brigade  in
the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  was  wounded  at
Petersburg,  17  June,  1864.  He  was  one  of  the
leaders  in  the  assault  after  the  mine  explosion,  and
was  captured  after  holding  the  crater  during  most
of  the  day.  He  was  a  prisoner  in  Columbus.  Ga.,
from  30  July,  1864,  till  April,  1865,  and  from  May
till  July  of  that  year  commanded  a  brigade.  He
was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  and
brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,  for  gallant  and  meri
torious  services,  13  March,  1865,  mustered  out  of
the  volunteer  service  on  16  Aug.,  and  on  12  June
became  major  of  the  5th  infantry.  He  was  retired
as  colonel  on  11  Sept.,  1867.

MARSHALL,  Humphrey,  botanist,  b.  in  West
Bradford  (now  Marshallton),'Pa.,  10  Oct.,  1722;  d.
there,  5  Nov.,  1801.  He  received  the  rudiments  of
an  English  education,  and  was  apprenticed  to  the
business  of  a  stone-mason,  which  trade  he  subse
quently  followed.  Soon  after  his  marriage  in  1748
he  took  charge  of  his  father's  farm,  and  about  that
time  began  to  devote  his  attention  to  astronomy
and  natural  history,  building  a  small  observatory
in  one  corner  of  his  residence.  Meanwhile,  through
his  correspondence  with  his  cousin,  John  Bartram
(q.  v.),  his  taste  for  horticulture  and  botany  was
fostered  and  developed.  He  procured  books  and
began  the  collection  and  culture  of  the  more  curi
ous  and  interesting  indigenous  plants.  A  large
number  of  ornamental  trees  and  shrubs  in  the  vi
cinity  of  his  house  long  remained  to  show  his  fond-


MARSHALL


MARSHALL


221


ness  for  the  beauties  of  the  vegetable  kingdom.  In
1707  he  came  into  the  possession  of  the  family  es
tate,  and  in  1773  he  planned  and  created  the  bo
tanic  garden  at  Marshallton,  which  soon  became
the  recipient  of  the  most  interesting  trees  and
shrubs  of  the  United  States,  together  with  many
curious  exotics ;  also  of  a  large  collection  of  native
herbaceous  plants.  As  late  as  1849  a  large  part  of
these  still  survived,  although  the  garden  from
neglect  had  become  a  mere  wilderness.  He  held
for  many  years  the  offices  of  treasurer  for  Chester
county  and  trustee  of  the  public  loan  office.  In
1786  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  American
philosophical  society,  and  he  was  a  member  of
other  scientific  societies.  He  published  "  Arbore
tum  Americanum :  the  American  Grove,  an  Al
phabetical  Catalogue  of  Forest  Trees  and  Shrubs,
Natives  of  the  American  United  States"  (Philadel
phia,  1785),  which  "  was  received  with  marked  ap
probation  and  was  promptly  translated  into  the
prevalent  languages  of  continental  Europe."  See
"  Memorials  of  John  Bart  ram  and  Humphrey  Mar
shall  "  (Philadelphia,  1849).

MARSHALL,  James  Wilson,  discoverer  of
gold  in  California,  b.  in  Hope,  Warren  co.,  N.  J.,
in  1812 ;  d.  in  Coloma,  Cal.,  8  Aug.,  1885.  He  re
ceived  a  plain  education,  learned  the  trade  of  coach
and  wagon  builder,  and  about  1833  bought  a  farm
on  the  Platte  river,  near  Fort  Leavenworth,  Kan.
In  1844  he  emigrated  to  California  and  entered  the
service  of  Gen.  John  A.  Sutter.  He  volunteered  in
the  Bear  Flag  war,  serving  through  the  entire  cam
paign  that  resulted  in  a  treaty,  recognizing  the
independence  of  California,  that  was  signed  in
March.  1847.  After  his  discharge  Marshall  returned
to  Sutler's  Fort,  but  abandoned  the  stock  farm
that  he  had  established  and  entered  the  lumber
business  with  Gen.  Sutter  in  Coloma.  On  18  Jan.,
1848,  while  superintending  the  construction  of  a
mill-race,  he  found  a  nugget  of  gold,  and,  collecting
several  ounces  of  the  ore,  took  the  specimens  to
Sutler's  Fort.  His  discovery  brought  a  great
influx  of  adventurers  into  California,  many  of
whom,  knowing  that  gold  had  been  discovered  in
Coloma,  went  there,  seized  Marshall's  property
and  stock,  and  divided  his  land  into  town-lots,
even  disputing  the  title  to  the  land  that  he  had
purchased  prior  to  his  discovery,  and  he  became
reduced  to  extreme  poverty.  Another  version  of
the  story  is  that  two  Mormons  who  were  employed
by  him  had  found  both  gold  and  platinum  and
hidden  their  pile  of  treasure,  and  that  this  was  the
deposit  that  was  accidentally  found  by  Marshall.
It  is  said  that  he  never  denied  this  statement.  A
bronze  statue  of  Marshall  is  to  be  placed  on  the
spot  where  the  discovery  was  made.

MARSHALL,  Josiah,  merchant,  b.  in  Billerica,
Mass.,  in  1771 ;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  in  Novem
ber,  1848.  His  father  was  a  lieutenant  in  the
Revolutionary  army,  and  he  was  ninth  in  descent
from  a  captain  in  Oliver  Cromwell's  army.  In  his
youth  he  removed  to  Boston,  where  he  became  a
wealthy  merchant.  Mr.  Marshall  was  largely  en
gaged  in  the  East  India  trade  and  first  conceived
the  gigantic  commercial  plans  on  the  northwest
ern  coast  of  America,  which  John  Jacob  Astor
afterward  partially  carried  out. — His  daughter,
Emily,  b.  in  Boston,  27  June,  1807;  d.  there,  17
Aug.,  1836,  was  noted  for  her  beauty  and  is  men
tioned  in  many  memoirs  and  reminiscences.  She
married  William  Foster  Otis,  of  Boston.

MARSHALL,  Orsamus  Holmes,  historian,  b.
in  Franklin,  Conn.,  13  Feb.,  1813;  d.  in  Buffalo,
N.  Y.,  9  July,  1884.  His  father,  Dr.  John  E.  Mar
shall,  was  one  of  the  earliest  settlers  of  Buffalo.


When  the  British  burned  that  town  in  the  war  of
1812-'13  Dr.  Marshall  sent  his  wife  to  their  former
home  in  Connecticut,  and  there  the  son  was  born.
When  he  was  two  years  old  his  parents  returned  to
Buffalo,  where  he  passed  his  life.  He  was  graduated
at  Union  college  in  1831,  read  law  in  Buffalo,  and
attended  lectures  at  Yale,  and  was  admitted  to
practice  in  1834.  He  was  a  well-known  member  of
the  Buffalo  bar  till  his  relinquishment  of  practice
in  1867.  Mr.  Marshall  gained  a  wide  reputation  as
the  historian  of  the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  west
ern  New  York.  He  was  personally  acquainted  with
Red  Jacket  and  other  chiefs,  and  received  from
them  much  of  the  data  for  his  works.  Mr.  Mar
shall  held  no  public  office  except  that  of  U.  S.
commissioner  for  the  northern  district  of  New
York.  He  was  for  some  time  chancellor  of  the
University  of  Buffalo.  Among  his  more  important
papers  are  "  Champlain's  Expedition  in  1613-'15
against  the  Onondagas";  "The  Expedition  of  the
Marquis  de  Nonville  in  1689  against  the  Senecas"  ;
"  The  Expedition  of  De  Celeron  to  the  Ohio  in
1749;"  "La  Salle's  First  Visit  to  the  Senecas
in  1699"  (privately  printed,  1874);  "Historical
Sketches  of  the  Niagara  Frontier,"  read  before  the
Buffalo  historical  society;  "  The  Building  and  the
Voyage  of  the  '  Griffon '  in  1679,"  before  the  same
society ;  and  "  The  History  of  the  New  York  Char
ter,  1664-1674."  These  sketches,  since  his  death,
have  been  collected  and  published  in  book-form  by
his  son,  Charles  D.  Marshall,  with  an  introduction
by  William  L.  Stone  (Albany,  1887).

"MARSHALL,  Thomas,  planter,  b.  in  Virginia
about  1655 ;  d.  in  Westmoreland  county,  Va.,  in
1704.  His  father,  John,  a  captain  of  cavalry  in  the
service  of  Charles  I.,  emigrated  to  Virginia  about
1650.  He  owned  a  large  plantation  in  Virginia,  and
was  the  head  of  the  Marshall  family  of  Virginia  and
Kentucky. — His  grandson,  Thomas,  b.  in  \Vash-
ington  parish,  Westmoreland  co.,  Va.,  2  April,
1730:  d.  in  Mason  county,  Ky.,  22  June,  1802,  was
the  son  of  "John  of  the  Forest,"  so  called  from  the
estate  that  he  owned,  was  educated  in  Rev.  Archi
bald  Campbell's  school,  and  subsequently  assisted
Washington  in  his  surveying  excursions  for  Lord
Fairfax  and  others,  for  which  he  received  several
thousand  acres  of  land  in  West  Virginia.  He  was  a
lieutenant  of  Virginians  in  the  French  and  Indian
war,  and  participated  in  the  expedition  of  Gen.
Braddock  against  Fort  Duquesne,  but,  having  been
detailed  as  one  of  the  garrison  at  Fort  Necessity,
was  not  at  the  defeat.  In  1753  he  accepted  the
agency  of  Lord  Fairfax  to  superintend  a  portion  of
his  estate  in  the  "  Northern  neck,"  and  in  1754
married  Mary  Randolph,  daughter  of  Rev.  James
Keith,  an  Episcopal  clergyman  of  Fauquier.  In
1765  he  removed  to  Goose  Creek,  and  in  1773  pur
chased  "  The  Oaks  "  or  "  Oak  Hill "  in  Leeds  parish
in  the  northern  part  of  Fauquier  county.  In  1767
he  was  high  sheriff  of  Fauquier  county,  and  he  was
frequently  a  member  of  the  house  of  burgesses.  He
condemned  and  pledged  resistance  to  the  encroach
ments  of  the  crown,  and  was  a  member  of -the  Vir
ginia  convention  that  declared  her  independence.
In  1775,  on  the  summons  of  Patrick  Henry,  he  re
cruited  a  battalion  and  became  major  of  a  regiment
known  as  the  "Culpepper  minute-men."  He  after
ward  became  colonel  of  the  3d  Virginia  regiment.
At  the  battle  of  Brandywine  his  command  was
placed  in  a  wood  on  the  right,  and,  though  attacked
by  greatly  superior  numbers,  maintained  its  posi-
j  tion  without  losing  an  inch  of  ground  until  its
!  ammunition  was  nearly  expended  and  more  than
!  half  its  officers  and  one  third  of  the  soldiers  were
i  killed  or  wounded.  The  safety  of  the  patriot  army


222


MARSHALL


MARSHALL


on  this  occasion  was  largely  due  to  the  good  con
duct  of  Col.  Marshall  and  his  command.  The
house  of  burgesses  voted  him  a  sword.  At  Ger-
mantown  his  regiment  covered  the  retreat  of  the
patriot  army.  He  was  with  Washington  at  Valley
Forge.  He  was  afterward  ordered  to  the  south,
and  was  surrendered  by  Gen.  Lincoln  at  Charles
ton  in  1780.  When  paroled  he  took  advantage  of
the  circumstance  to  make  his  first  visit  to  Kentucky
on  horseback  over  the  mountains,  and  then  located
the  lands  on  which  he  subsequently  lived  in  Wood-
ford.  Having  been  exchanged,  he  resumed  his
command  and  held  it  until  the  close  of  thejvvar.
In  1781  he  was  for  a  time  in  command  at  York.
He  was  appointed  surveyor-general  of  the  lands  in
Kentucky  in  1783,  in  that  year  established  his
office  in '  Lexington,  and  removed  his  family  to
Kentucky  in  1785.  In  1787  and  1788  he  represent
ed  Fayette  county  in  the  Virginia  assembly.  In
the  latter  year  he"  was  also  a  delegate  to  the  con
vention  in  Danville  to  consider  the  separation  of
Kentucky  from  Virginia.  He  was  appointed  by
Washington  collector  of  revenue  for  Kentucky.
He  and  all  his  family  were  Federalists. — The  sec
ond  Thomas's  eldest  son.  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Ger-
mantown,  Fauquier  co.,  Va.,  24  Sept.,  1755:  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  (i  July,  1835,  received  from  child
hood  a  thorough  course  of  domestic  education
in  English  literature,
and  when  he  was
sufficiently  advanced
his  father  procured
the  services  of  a  pri
vate  teacher,  Rev.
James  Thompson,  an
Episcopal  clergyman
from  Scotland,  who
was  afterward  minis
ter  of  Leeds  parish.
At  fourteen  years  of
age  John  was  sent  to
Westmoreland  coun
ty,  and  placed  at  the
school  where  his  fa
ther  and  Washing
ton  hud  been  pupils.
James  Monroe  was
one  of  his  fellow-
students.  After  remaining  there  for  a  year  he
returned  to  Oak  Hill  and  continued  his  classical
studies  under  the  direction  of  Mr.  Thompson,  but
he  never  had  the  benefit  of  a  college  education.
He  began  the  study  of  law  at  the  age  of  eighteen,
and  used  Blackstone's  "  Commentaries,"  then  re
cently  published,  but  he  had  hardly  begun  his  legal
studies  when  the  controversy  with  "the  mother
country  came  to  a  crisis.  The'  tea  bill,  the  Boston
port  bill,  the  congress  of  1774,  followed  one  another
in  quick  succession,  and  every  question  at  issue
was  thoroughly  discussed  at  Oak  Hill  just  at  the
period  of  young  Marshall's  life  to  make  the  most
indelible  impression  upon  his  intellectual  and
moral  character.  Military  preparations  were  not
neglected.  John  Marshall  joined  an  independent
body  of  volunteers  and  devoted  himself  with  much
zeal  to  the  training  of  a  company  of  militia  in  his
neighborhood.  Among  the  first*  to  take  the  field
was  Thomas  Marshall.  A  regiment  of  minute-
men  was  raised  in  the  summer  of  1775  in  Culpeper,
Orange,  and  Fauquier  counties,  of  which  he  was
appointed  major,  and  his  son  John  a  lieutenant.
On  their  green  hunting-shirts  they  bore  the  motto
•'  Liberty  or  death  !  "  and  on  their  banner  was  the
emblem  of  a  coiled  rattlesnake,  with  the  inscrip
tion  "  Don't  tread  on  me ! "  They  were  armed


Y/1

J^^^^^^-


with  rifles,  knives,  and  tomahawks.  They  had  an
engagement  with  Gov.  Dunmore's  forces  'at  Great
Bridge  on  9  Dec.,  in  which  Lieut.  Marshall  showed
coolness  an  \  skill  in  handling  his  men.  After  this,
in  177(5,  the  father  and  son  were  in  separate  organi
zations.  Thomas  Marshall  was  appointed  colonel
in  the  3d  Virginia  infantry  of  the  Continental  line,
and  John's  company  was  reorganized  and  attached
to  the  llth  regiment  of  Virginia  troops,  which  was
sent  to  join  Washington's  army  in  New  Jersey.
Both  were  in  most  of  the  principal  battles  of  the
war  until  the  end  of  1779.  John  was  promoted  to  a
captaincy  in  May,  1779.  His  company  distinguished
itself  at  the  battle  of  the  Brandy  wine.  He  was  en
gaged  in  the  pursuit  of  the  British  and  the  subse
quent  retreat  at  Germantown,  was  with  the  army  in
winter-quarters  at  Valley  Forge,  and  took  part  in
the  actions  at  Monmouth,  Stony  Point,  and  Paulus
Hook.  His  marked  good  sense  and  discretion  and
his  general  popularity  often  led  to  his  being  selected
to  settle  disputes  between  his  brother  officers,  and
he  was  frequently  employed  to  act  as  deputy  judge-
advocate.  This  brought  him  into  extensive  ac
quaintance  with  the  officers,  and  into  personal
intercourse  with  Gen.  Washington  and  Col.  Alex
ander  Hamilton,  an  acquaintance  that  subsequently
ripened  into  sincere  regard  and  attachment.  The
term  of  enlistment  of  his  regiment  having  expired,
Capt.  Marshall,  with  other  supernumerary  officers,
was  ordered  to  Virginia  to  take  charge  of  any  new
troops  that  might  be  raised  by  the  state,  and  while
he  was  detained  in  Richmond*  during  the  winter  of
1779-'80,  awaiting  the  action  of  the  legislature,  he
availed  himself  of  the  opportunity  to  attend  the
law  lectures  of  George  Wythe,  of  William  and
Mary  college,  and  those  of  Prof,  (afterward  Bishop)
Madison  on  natural  philosophy.  In  the  summer
of  1780  Marshall  received  a  license  to  practise  law,
but.  on  the  invasion  of  Virginia  by  Gen.  Alexander
Leslie  in  October,  he  joined  the  army  again  under
Baron  Steuben,  and  remained  in  the  service  until
Arnold,  after  his  raid  on  James  river,  had  retired
to  Portsmouth.  This  was  in  January,  1781.  He
then  resigned  his  commission,  and  studied  law.

He  had  spent  nearly  six  years  in  arduous  military
service,  exposed  to  the  dangers,  enduring  the  hard
ships,  and  partaking  the  anxieties  of  that  trying
period.  The  discipline  of  those  six  years  could
not  have  failed  to  strengthen  the  manliness  of  his
character  and  greatly  enlarge  his  knowledge  of  the
chief  men,  or  those  who  became  such,  from  every
part  of  the  country,  and  of  their  social  and  politi
cal  principles.  Though  it  was  a  rough  and  severe
school.it  was  instructive,  and  produced  a  maturity
and  self-dependence  that  could  not  have  been
acquired  by  a  much  longer  experience  under  dif
ferent  circumstances.  As  soon  as  the  courts  were
re-opened  young  Marshall  began  practice,  and
quickly  rose  to  high  distinction  at  the  bar.  In  the
spring  of  1782  he  was  elected  to  the  house  of  bur
gesses,  and  in  the  autumn  a  member  of  the  state
executive  council.  On  3  Jan..  1783,  he  married
Mary  Willis  Ambler,  daughter  of  the  state  treasurer,
with  whom  he  lived  for  nearly  fifty  years,  and
about  the  same  time  he  took  up  his  permanent
residence  in  Richmond.  In  the  spring  of  1784  he
resigned  his  seat  at  the  council  board  in  order  to
devote  himself  more  exclusively  to  his  profession,
but  he  was  immediately  returned  to  the  legislature
by  Fauquier  county,  though  he  retained  only  a
nominal  residence  there.  In  1787  he  was  elected
to  represent  Henrico,  which  includes  the  city  of
Richmond.  He  was  a  decided  advocate  of  the
new  U.  S.  constitution,  and  in  1788  was  elected  to
the  state  convention  that  was  called  to  consider


MARSHALL


MARSHALL


223


its  ratification.  His  own  constituents  were  op
posed  to  its  provisions,  but  chose  him  in  spite  of
his  refusal  to  pledge  himself  to  vote  against  its
adoption.  In  this  body  he  spoke  only  on  important
questions,  such  as  the  direct  power  of  taxation,  the
control  of  the  militia,  and  the  judicial  power — the
most  important  features  of  the  proposed  govern
ment,  the  absence  of  which  in  the  Confederation
was  the  principal  cause  of  its  failure.  On  these
occasions  he  generally  answered  Patrick  Henry,
the  most  powerful  opponent  of  the  constitution,
and  he  spoke  with  such  force  of  argument  and
breadth  of  views  as  greatly  to  affect  the  final  re
sult,  which  was  a  majority  in  favor  of  ratification.
The  acceptance  of  the  constitution  by  Virginia  was
entirely  due  to  the  arguments  of  Marshall  and
James  Madison  in  the  convention  which  recorded
eighty-nine  votes  for  its  adoption  against  seventy-
nine  contrary  voices.  When  the  constitution  went
into  effect.  Marshall  acted  with  the  party  that  de
sired  to  give  it  fair  scope  and  to  see  it  fully  carried
out.  His  great  powers  were  frequently  called  into
requisition  in  support  of  the  Federal  cause,  and  in
defence  of  the  measures  of  Washington's  adminis
tration.  His  practice,  in  the  mean  time,  became
extended  and  lucrative.  He  was  employed  in
nearly  every  important  cause  that  came  up  in  the
state  and  United  States  courts  in  Virginia.  In
addition  to  these  labors,  he  served  in  the  legisla
ture  for  the  two  terms  that  followed  the  ratifica
tion  of  the  constitution,  contemporary  with  the
sittings  of  the  first  congress  under  it,  when  those
important  measures  were  adopted  by  which  the
government  was  organized  and  its  system  of  finance
was  established,  all  of  which  were  earnestly  dis
cussed  in  the  house  of  burgesses.  He  also  served
in  the  legislatures  of  1795  and  1796,  when  the  con
troversies  that  arose  upon  Jay's  treaty  and  the
French  revolution  were  exciting  the  country.  At
this  post  he  was  the  constant  and  powerful  ad
vocate  of  Washington's  administration  and  the
measures  of  the  government.  The  treaty  was  as
sailed  as  unconstitutionally  interfering  with  the
power  of  congress  to  regulate  commerce ;  but  Mar
shall,  in  a  speech  of  remarkable  power,  demon
strated  the  utter  fallacy  of  this  argument,  and  it
was  finally  abandoned  by  the  opponents  of  the
treaty,  who  carried  a  resolution  simply  declaring
the  treaty  to  be  inexpedient.

In  August,  1795,  Washington  offered  him  the
place  of  attorney-general,  which  had  been  made
vacant  by  the  death  of  William  Bradford,  but  he
felt  obliged  to  decline  it.  In  February.  1790,  he
attended  the  supreme  court  at  Philadelphia  to
argue  the  great  case  of  the  British  debts,  Ware
rs.  Hylton.  and  while  he  was  there  received  unusual
attention  from  the  leaders  of  the  Federalist  party
in  congress.  He  was  now,  at  forty-one  years  of
age,  undoubtedly  at  the  head  of  the  Virginia  bar;
and  in  the  branches  of  international  and  public
law,  which,  from  the  character  of  his  cases  and  his
own  inclination,  he  had  profoundly  studied,  he
probably  had  no  superior,  if  he  had  an  equal,  in
the  country.  In  the  summer  of  1790  Washington
tendered  him  the  place  of  envoy  to  France  to
succeed  James  Monroe,  but  he  declined  it,  and
Gen.  Charles  C.  Pinckney  was  appointed.  As  the
French  Directory  refused"  to  receive  Mr.  Pinckney,
and  ordered  him  to  leave  the  country,  no  other
representative  was  sent  to  France  until  John
Adams  became  president.  In  June.  1797,  Mr.
Adams  appointed  Messrs.  Pinckney,  Marshall,  and
Elbridge  Gerry  as  joint  envoys.  Marshall's  ap
pointment  was  received  with  great  demonstrations
of  satisfaction  at  Richmond,  and  on  setting  out


1  for  Philadelphia  he  was  escorted  several  miles  out
of  the  city  by  a  body  of  light  horse,  and  his  de
parture  was  signalized  by  the  discharge  of  cannon.
The  new  envoys  were  as  unsuccessful  in  establish
ing  diplomatic  relations  with  the  French  repub
lic  as  Gen.  Pinckney  had  been.  They  arrived  at
Paris  in  October,  1797,  and  communicated  with
Talleyrand,  the  minister  for  foreign  affairs,  but
were  "cajoled  and  trifled  with.  Secret  agents  of
the  minister  approached  them  with  a  demand  for
money — 50,000  pounds  sterling  for  private  account,
and  a  loan  to  the  government.  Repelling  these
shameful  suggestions  with  indignation,  the  envoys
sent  Talleyrand  an  elaborate  paper,  prepared  by
Marshall,  which  set  forth  with  great  precision  and
force  of  argument  the  views  and  requirements  of
the  United  States,  and  their  earnest  desire  for
maintaining  friendly  relations  with  France.  But
it  availed  nothing.  Pinckney  and  Marshall,  who
were  Federalists,  were  ordered  to  leave  the  terri
tories  of  the  republic,  while  Gerry,  as  a  Republican,
was  allowed  to  remain.  The  news  of  these  events
was  received  in  this  country  with  the  deepest  in
dignation.  "History  will  scarcely  furnish  the  ex
ample  of  a  nation,  not  absolutely  degraded,  which
has  experienced  from  a  foreign  power  such  open
contumely  and  undisguised  insult  as  were  on  this
occasion  suffered  by  the  United  States,  in  the  per
sons  of  their  ministers,"  wrote  Marshall  afterward
in  his  "  Life  of  Washington."

Marshall  returned  to  the  United  States  in  June,
1798.  and  was  everywhere  received  with  demon
strations  of  the  highest  respect  and  approval.  At  a
public  dinner  given  to  him  in  Philadelphia,  one  of
the  toasts  was  "  Millions  for  defence ;  not  a  cent  for
tribute,"  which  sentiment  was  echoed  and  re-echoed
throughout  the  country.  Patrick  Henry  wrote  to
a  friend :  "  Tell  Marshall  I  love  him  because  he
felt  and  acted  as  a  republican,  as  an  American."
In  August  Mr.  Adams  offered  him  a  seat  on  the
supreme  bench,  which  had  been  made  vacant  by
the  death  of  Judge  James  Wilson,  but  he  declined
it.  and  his  friend,  Bushrod  Washington,  was  ap
pointed.  In  his  letter  to  the  secretary  of  state,  de
claring  his  intention  to  nominate  Marshall,  Presi
dent  Adams  said :  "  Of  the  three  envoys  the  con
duct  of  Marshall  alone  has  been  entirely  satisfac
tory,  and  ought  to  be  marked  by  the  most  decided
approbation  of  the  public.  He  has  raised  the
American  people  in  their  own  esteem,  and  if  the
influence  of  truth  and  justice,  reason  and  argu
ment,  is  not  lost  in  Europe,  he  has  raised  the  con
sideration  of  the  United  States  in  that  quarter  of
the  world."  As  the  elections  approached,  Mr.  Mar
shall  was  sti'ongly  urged  to  become  a  candidate
for  congress,  consented  much  against  his  inclina
tion,  was  elected  in  April.  1799,  and  served  a
single  session.  One  of  the  most  determined  as
saults  that  was  made  against  the  administration
at  this  session  was  in  relation  to  the  case  of  Jona
than  Robbins.  alias  Thomas  Nash,  who  had  been
arrested  in  Charleston  at  the  instance  of  the
British  consul,  on  the  charge  of  mutiny  and  mur
der  on  the  British  frigate  "Hermione,"  and  who,
upon  habeas  corpus,  was  delivered  up  to  the  British
authorities  by  Judge  Thomas  Bee.  in  pursuance  of
the  requisition  of  the  British  minister  upon  the
president,  and  of  a  letter  from  the  secretary  of
state  to  Judge  Bee  advising  and  requesting  the  de
livery.  Resolutions  censuring  the  president  and
Judge  Bee  were  offered  in  the  house ;  but  Mar
shall,  in  a  most  elaborate  and  powerful  speech,
triumphantly  refuted  all  the  charges  and  assump
tions  of  law  on  which  the  resolutions  were  based,
and  they  were  lost  by  a  decided  vote.  This  speech


224


MARSHALL


MARSHALL


settled  the  principles  that  have  since  guided  the
government  and  the  courts  of  the  United  States  in
extradition  cases,  and  is  still  regarded  as  an  au
thoritative  exposition  of  international  law  on  the
subject  of  which  it  treats.  The  session  lasted  till
14  May,  but  on  the  7th  Marshall  was  nominated  as
secretary  of  war  in  place  of  James  McHenry,  who
had  resigned  ;  and  before  confirmation,  on  the  12th,
he  was  nominated  and  appointed  secretary  of  state
in  place  of  Timothy  Pickering,  who  had  been  re
moved.  He  filled  this  office  with  ability  and  credit
during  the  remainder  of  Adams's  administration.
His  state  papers  are  luminous  and  unanswerable,
especially  his  instructions  to  Rufus  King,  minister
to  Great  Britain,  in  relation  to  the  right  of  search,
and  other  difficulties  with  that  country.

Chief-Justice  Ellsworth  having  resigned  his  seat
on  the  bench  in  November,  1800,  the  president,
after  offering  the  place  to  John  Jay,  who  declined
it,  conferred  the  appointment  on  Mr.  Marshall.
The  tradition  is,  that  after  the  president  had  had
the  matter  under  consideration  for  some  time,  Mr.
Marshall  (or  Gen.  Marshall,  as  he  was  then  called)
happened  one  day  to  suggest  a  new  name  for  the
place,  when  Mr.  Adams  promptly  said:  "General
Marshall,  you  need  not  give  yourself  any  further
trouble  about  that  matter.  I  have  made  up  my
mind  about  it."  "  I  am  happy  to  hear  that  you
are  relieved  on  the  subject,"  said  Marshall.  "  May
I  ask  whom  you  have  fixed  upon?"  "Certainly,"
said  the  president ;  "  I  have  concluded  to  nominate
a  person  whom  it  may  surprise  you  to  hear  men
tioned.  It  is  a  Virginia  lawyer,  a  plain  man  by
the  name  of  John  Marshall."  He  was  nominated
on  20  Jan.,  unanimously  confirmed,  and  presided
in  the  court  at  the  February  term,  though  he  was
still  holding  the  office  of  secretary  of  state.  He
at  once  took,  and  always  maintained,  a  command
ing  position  in  the  court,  not  only  as  its  nominal
but  as  its  real  head.  The  most  important  opin
ions,  especially  those  on  constitutional  law,  were
pronounced  by  him.  The  thirty  volumes  of  re
ports,  from  1st  Cranch  to  9th  Peters,  covering
a  period  of  thirty-five  years,  contain  the  monu
ments  of  his  great  judicial  power  and  learning,
which  are  referred  to  as  the  standard  authority  on
constitutional  questions.  They  have  imparted  life
and  vigor  not  only  to  the  constitution,  but  to  the
national  body  politic.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say
that  for  this  office  no  other  man  could  have  been
selected  who  was  equally  fitted  for  the  task  he  had
before  him.  To  specify  and  characterize  the  great
opinions  that  he  delivered  would  be  to  write  a
treatise  on  American  constitutional  law.  They
must  themselves  stand  as  the  monuments  and
proper  records  of  his  judicial  history.  It  is  re
ported  by  one  of  his  descendants  that  he  often  said
that  if  he  was  worthy  of  remembrance  his  best  bi
ography  would  be  found  in  his  decisions  in  the  su
preme  court.  Their  most  striking  characteristics
are  crystalline  clearness  of  thought,  irrefragable
logic,  and  a  wide  and  statesman-like  view  of  all
questions  of  public  consequence.  In  these  respects
he  has  had  no  superior  in  this  or  any  other  coun
try.  Some  men  seem  to  be  constituted  by  nature
to  be  masters  of  judicial  analysis  and  insight.  Such
were  Papinian,  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  and  Lord  Mans
field,  each  in  his  particular  province.  Such  was
Marshall  in  his.  They  seemed  to  handle  judicial
questions  as  the  great  Euler  did  mathematical
ones,  with  giant  ease.  As  an  instance  of  the  sim
plicity  with  which  he  sometimes  treated  great
questions  may  be  cited  his  reasoning  on  the  power
of  the  court  to  decide  upon  the  constitutionality
of  acts  of  congress.  It  had  been  claimed  before ;


but  it  was  Marshall's  iron  logic  that  settled  it  be
yond  controversy.  "  It  is  a  proposition  too  plain
to  be  contested,"  said  he,  in  Marbury  vs.  Madison,
"that  the  constitution  controls  any  legislative  act
repugnant  to  it ;  or  that  the.  legislature  may  alter
the  constitution  by  an  ordinary  act.  Between  these
alternatives  there  is  no  middle  ground.  The  con
stitution  is  either  a  superior,  paramount  law,  un
changeable  by  ordinary  means,  or  it  is  on  a  level
with  ordinary  legislative  acts,  and,  like  other  acts,
is  alterable  when  the  legislature  shall  please  to
alter  it.  If  the  former  part  of  the  alternative  be
true,  then  a  legislative  act  contrary  to  the  consti
tution  is  not  law ;  if  the  latter  part  be  true,  then
written  constitutions  are  absurd  attempts,  on  the
part  of  the  people,  to  limit  a  power  in  its  own  na
ture  illimitable."

The  incidents  of  Marshall's  life,  aside  from  his
judicial  work,  after  he  went  upon  the  bench,  are
few.  In  1807  he  presided,  with  Judge  Cyrus  Grif
fin,  at  the  great  state  trial  of  Aaron  Burr,  who  was
charged  with  treason  and  misdemeanor.  Few  pub
lic  trials  have  excited  greater  interest  than  this.
President  Jefferson  and  his  adherents  desired  Burr's
conviction,  but  Marshall  preserved  the  most  rigid
impartiality  and  exact  justice  throughout  the  trial,
acquitting  himself,  as  always,  to  the  public  satisfac
tion.  In  1829  he  was  elected  a  delegate  to  the
convention  for  revising  the  state  constitution  of
Virginia,  where  he  again  met  Madison  and  Monroe,
who  were  also  members,  but  much  enfeebled  by
age.  The  chief  justice  did  not  speak  often,  but
when  he  did  speak,  though  he  was  seventy-four
years  of  age,  his  mind  was  as  clear  and  his  reason
ing  as  solid  as  in  younger  days.  His  deepest  in
terest  was  excited  in  reference  to  the  independence
of  the  judiciary.  He  remained  six  years  after  this
on  the  bench  of  the  supreme  court.  In  the  spring
of  1835  he  was  advised  to  go  to  Philadelphia  for
medical  advice,  and  did  so,  but  without  any  bene
ficial  result,  and  died  in  that  city.

In  private  Chief-Justice  Marshall  was  a  man  of
unassuming  piety  and  amiability  of  temper.  He
was  tall,  plain  in  dress,  and  somewhat  awkward  in
appearance,  but  had  a  keen  black  eye,  and  over
flowed  with  geniality  and  kind  feeling.  He  was
the  object  of  the  warmest  love  and  veneration  of
all  his  children  and  grandchildren.  Judge  Mar
shall  published,  at  the  request  of  the  first  presi
dent's  family,  who  placed  their  records  and  private
papers  at  his  disposal,  a  "Life  of  Washington"  (5
vols.,  Philadelphia,  1804-7),  of  which  the  first  vol
ume  was  afterward  issued  separately  as  "  A  History
of  the  American  Colonies"  (1824).  The  whole  was
subsequently  revised  and  condensed  (2  vols.,  1832).
In  this  work  he  defended  the  policy  of  Washing
ton's  administration  against  the  arguments  and
detractions  of  the  Republicans.  A  selection  from
his  decisions  has  been  published,  entitled  "  The
Writings  of  John  Marshall,  late  Chief  Justice  of
the  United  States,  upon  the  Federal  Constitution  "
(Boston,  1839),  under  the  supervision  of  Justice
Joseph  Story.  His  life  has  been  written  by  George
Van  Santvoord,  in  his  "  Sketches  of  the  Chief  Jus
tices"  (New  York,  1854);  and  by  Henry  Flanders,
in  his  "Lives  and  Times  of  the  Chief  Justices"
(2d  series.  Philadelphia,  1858).  See  also  "  Eulogy
on  the  Life  and  Character  of  Marshall,"  by  Horace
Binney  (Philadelphia,  1835);  "  Discourse  upon  the
Life,  Character,  and  Services  of  John  Marshall,"
in  Joseph  Story's  "  Miscellaneous  Writings  "  (Bos
ton,  1852) ;  "  Chief-Justice  Marshall  and^the  Con
stitutional  Law  of  his  Time,"  an  address  by  Ed
ward  J.  Phelps  (1879);  and  "John  Marshall,"  by
Allan  B.  Magruder  (Boston,  1885). — Another  son


MARSHALL


225


of  the  second  Thomas,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in
Fauquier  county,  Va..  27  Oct.,  1761 ;  d.  in  Mason
county,  Ky.,  19  March,  1817,  served  in  the  Revo
lution,  and  attained  the  rank  of  captain.  He
settled  in  Kentucky  in  1790,  and  was  an  active
member  of  the  convention  that  formed  the  second
constitution  of  the  state  in  1799. — Another  son,
James  Markham,  lawyer,  b.  in  Fauquier  county,
Va.,  12  March,  1764;  d'.  there,  26  April,  1848,  was
educated  at  home,  and  when  fifteen  years  of  age
entered  the  Revolutionary  army  as  a  private,  be
coming  a  lieutenant  in  Alexander  Hamilton's
regiment.  He  went  to  Kentucky  with  his  father
in  1785  and  bore  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  discus
sions  concerning  the  "  Spanish  conspiracy."  His
statement  that  Gardoqui,  the  Spanish  minister  at
Washington,  had  been  in  communication  with
John  Brown  looking  to  the  withdrawal  of  Ken
tucky  from  the  United  States,  was  bitterly  de
nounced  by  James  Brown,  afterward  minister  to
France,  which  led  to  a  challenge  from  Marshall,
but  the  duel  was  prevented  after  the  parties  reached
the  ground.  He  returned  to  Virginia  in  1795,  and
soon  afterward  married  Hester,  daughter  of  Robert
Morris,  the  financier  of  the  Revolution.  Mr.  Mar
shall  was  the  commercial  agent  of  Xew  York, Boston,
and  Charleston  in  France  during  the  reign  of  terror,
and  was  employed  by  Washington  as  the  agent
of  the  United  States  to  negotiate  for  the  release
of  Lafayette,  who  was  then  a  prisoner  in  Austria.
While  in  England  he  negotiated  for  the  purchase
of  the  Fairfax  estates  in  the  northern  neck  of  Vir
ginia,  and  he  and  his  brother  John  received  all  the
lands  in  "  Leeds  Manor,"  where  their  posterity  con
tinue  to  reside.  The  last  night  of  the  administra
tion  of  John  Adams,  Mr.  Marshall  was  appointed
one  of  the  "  midnight  judges,"  but  was  soon  legis
lated  out  of  office  by  the  Republicans. — Another
son,  Alexander  Keith,  lawyer,  b.  in  Fauquier
county,  Va.,  in  1770 ;  d.  in  Mason  county,  Ky.,7  Feb.,
1825,  received  a  classical  education  from  private
tutors,  and  became  one  of  the  ablest  pioneer  lawyers
of  his  day.  He  represented  Mason  county  in  the
legislature  from  1797  till  1800,  had  an  active  par
ticipation  in  the  discussions  of  the  Burr  conspiracy
in  1806,  was  for  years  clerk  of  the  court  of  appeals,
and  in  1818  was' appointed  reporter  of  that  court.
He  edited  "  Decisions  of  the  Court  of  Appeals  of
Kentucky,  1817-'21"  (3  vols.,  Washington.  18 19-'26).
— Another  son,  Louis,  educator,  b.  in  Fauquier
county,  Va.,  7  Oct.,  1773;  d.  in  Buckpond,  Morford
co.,  Ky.,  in  1866.  was  educated  at  home,  studied
medicine  in  Edinburgh,  and  spent  several  years  in
Paris,  participating  in  the  attack  upon  the  Bastile.
He  was  arrested  during  the  reign  of  terror  and  con
demned  to  death,  but  was  rescued  by  the  inter
vention  of  his  elder  brothers.  He  attained  note  as
a  physician,  but  his  taste  for  literature  and  lan
guages  caused  him  to  abandon  his  profession,  and
he  then  established  an  academy  at  Woodford.  He  ]
was  president  of  Washington  college,  Va.,  in  1838,
and  afterward  of  Transylvania  university,  Ky.  Dr.  I
Marshall  was  regarded  by  many  as  superior  in  I
native  talent  to  the  chief  justice,  his  brother,  but  J
his  eccentricities  limited  his  influence. — The  third  i
Thomas's  son,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Mason  county,  I
Ky.,  13  April,  1793;  d.  in  Lewis  county,  Ky.,  28  |
March,  1853,  was  well  educated.  He  was  severely  I
wounded  in  a  political  duel  with  Charles  S.  Mitchell  .
in  1812,  served  as  a  lieutenant  in  the  war  of  that
year,  and  was  in  the  legislature  several  times  be-  ;
tween  1817  and  1844.  serving  one  term  a-s  speaker  of  j
that  body.  He  was  commissioned  by  President  Polk
a  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  in  the  Mexican
war,  and  commanded  the  Kentucky  brigade  under  ,
VOL.  iv. — 15


|  Gen.  John  E.  Wool.  In  consequence  of  disagree-
''•  raents  with  that  officer,  Marshall  was  left  with  only
|  a  part  of  his  brigade  to  guard  Rineonada  pass  and
'  to  drill  raw  recruits.  He  received  orders  to  march
!  for  Buena  Vista,  cut  his  way  through  the  forces  of
I  Gen.  Minon,  but  reached  the  field  after  the  victory
'  had  been  won.  Gen.  Marshal],  in  conjunction  with
Gen.  Worth,  preferred  the  charges  against  Gen.
Winfield  Scott  which  led  to  a  court  of  inquiry  on
that  officer's  conduct.  After  his  return  to  Kentucky
he  was  murdered  by  a  tenant  at  his  home  in  Lewis
county.  He  was  originally  a  Federalist,  but  became
an  ardent  Democrat, — Another  son  of  the  third
Thomas,  Charles  Alexander,  soldier,  b.  in  Mason
county.  Ky.,  2  May,  1809,  was  educated  in  Wood-
ford  by  his  uncle,  Dr.  Louis  Marshall,  and  served
in  the  legislature  in  1840,  1855,  and  1857.  He  was
a  determined  friend  of  the  Union,  recruited  the
16th  Kentucky  infantry  in  1861,  at  the  head
of  that  regiment  led  the  advance  of  Gen.  William
Xelson  in  his  campaign  in  eastern  Kentucky  in  the
autumn  of  1861,  and  bore  the  brunt  of  the  fight  at
the  battle  of  Ivy  Creek. — Louis's  son,  Thomas
Francis,  lawyer,  b.  in  Frankfort,  Ky.,  7  June,
1801 ;  d.  near"  Versailles,  Ky.,  22  Sept^  1864,  was
educated  by  private  tutors,  studied  law  under  John
J.  Crittenden,  and  began  practice  in  Versailles.  He
served  in  the  legislature  from  1832  till  1836,  and
was  conspicuous  in  its  debates.  In  1833  he  re
moved  to  Louisville,  was  defeated  as  an  Independ
ent  candidate  for  congress,  returned  to  Versailles
in  1837,  and  again  served  in  the  legislature  in
1838-'9,  resisting  the  repeal  of  the  law  of  1833
which  prohibited  the  importation  of  slaves  into
Kentucky.  His  reports  on  the  judiciary,  reviewing
existing  'defects  in  that  department  of  state  polity
and  urging  its  entire  independence,  and  upon
banks,  are  state  papers  of  great  ability.  He  was
finally  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  serving  from
31  May,  1841,  till  3  March.  1843,  and  during  his
term  moved  a  series  of  resolutions  censuring  John
Quincy  Adams  for  introducing  a  petition  for  the
dissolution  of  the  LTnion.  He  opposed  Clay's  U.  S.
bank  bill,  and  subsequently  favored  the  annexation
of  Texas  and  the  election  of  Polk  to  the  presidency.
In  1846  he  raised  a  company  of  cavalry  and  served
in  Col.  Humphrey  Marshall's  regiment  in  the
Mexican  war.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  in
1852,  was  defeated  as  a  candidate  for  the  Kentucky
constitutional  convention,  and  during  its  sittings
edited  the  "  Old  Guard,"  which  he  continued  several
months.  He  devoted  the  latter  years  of  his  life  to
the  study  of  geology  and  history,  and  lectured  suc
cessfully  through  the  northern  and  eastern  states.
A  collection  of  his  writings  and  speeches  was  edited
by  W.  L.  Barre  (Cincinnati,  1858). — Another  son
of  Louis,  Edward  Colston,  lawyer,  b.  in  Wood-
ford,  Ky.,  in  1820,  was  educated  at  Washington
college,  Va.,  Central  college,  and  Transylvania,  and
practised  law  in  Xicholasville  and  Cincinnati.  In
1847  he  was  made  1st  lieutenant  of  U.S.  infantry,
served  in  the  Mexican  war,  and  became  captain  on
6  May.  1848,  but  was  cashiered  for  duelling  on  22
May, '1848,  and  in  1849  went  to  California,  where  he
sat  in  the  legislature,  and  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  1  Dec.,  1851,  till  3
March,  1853.  In  1856  he  returned  to  Kentucky,
where  he  attained  note  as  a  lawyer  and  orator.  In
1878  he  returned  to  California  and  was  elected  at
torney-general  of  that  state. — The  second  Thomas's
great-grandson.  Charles,  lawyer,  b.  in  Warrenton,
Va.,  3  Oct..  1830.  is  the  son  of  Alexander  John,  a
lawyer  of  Virginia.  He  was  graduated  in  1849  at
the  University  of  Virginia,  was  professor  of  mathe
matics  from  1849  till  1852  in  the  University  of


226


MARSHALL


MARSHALL


Indiana.  Afterward  he  practised  law  in  Balti
more,  and  upon  the  secession  of  Virginia  entered
the  Confederate  army  and  served  on  the  staff  of
his  kinsman.  Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee.  as  assistant  ad
jutant-  and  inspector-general,  until  the  close  of  the
civil  war,  and  was  charged  with  the  duty  of  pre
paring  the  official  reports  of  the  Army  of  Northern
Virginia  from  1862  till  1865,  and  was  directed  by
Gen.  Lee  to  prepare  a  general  order,  embodying
his  farewell  address  to  his  army,  dated  10  April,
1865.  He  now  (1888)  practises  law  in  Baltimore.
He  was  requested  by  Gen.  Lee's  family  to  prepare  a
biography  of  him,  which  work  is  practically  ready
for  publication. — The  second  Thomas's  brother,
William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Washington  parish,
Westmoreland  cb.,  Va.,  in  1735  ;  d.  near  Eminence,
Shelby  co.,  Ky..  in  1809,  removed  to  Fauquier
county,  Va.,  in  1752,  became  a  Baptist  clergyman,
and,  owing  to  his  zealous  preaching  and  influence
over  the  masses,  was  arrested  by  the  enemies  of  his
sect.  In  1780  he  removed  to  Kentucky  and  estab
lished  in  Henry  county  the  Fox  river  church. — His
son,  Martin,  lawyer,  b.  in  Fauquier  county,  Va.,
11  Sept.,  1777:  d.  in  Augusta,  Ky.,  19  Sept.",  1853,
studied  law  under  his  cousin.  Thomas  Marshall,
and  removed  to  Kentucky  in  1804.  He  served  in
the  legislature,  and  had  a  large  law  practice  in
northern  Kentucky  and  Ohio.  He  resembled  his
cousin,  the  chief  justice,  in  appearance  and  in
tellect.  He  married  Matilda,  daughter  of  Capt.
Nicholas  Taliaferro,  a  Revolutionary  officer  of  Vir
ginia. — Their  son,  William  Champe,  lawyer,  b.
in  Augusta,  Ky.,  9  Aug.,  1807;  d.  there,  2  May,
1873,  studied  law  under  his  father,  and  served  in
the  Kentucky  legislature  for  many  years.  He  was
a  member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention  of
1850,  and  was  commonwealth  attorney  for  Bracken
county.  He  was  a  strong  Whig  and  a  brilliant
and  popular  orator. — Another  son,  Nicholas  Tal
iaferro,  physician,  b.  in  Augusta,  Ky..  1  March,
1810 ;  d.  in  Minerva,  Ky.,  7  June.  1858,  was  gradu
ated  at  Augusta  college,  and  received  his  medical
degree  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1853.
He  practised  in  Washington,  Ky.,  and  in  Cincin
nati,  where  he  was  elected  professor  in  the  Ohio
medical  college. — Another  son,  Thomas  Alexan
der,  jurist,  b.  in  Augusta,  Ky.,  29  March,  1812,
was  graduated  at  Augusta  college,  studied  law
under  his  father,  and  settled  in  Vicksburg,  Miss.,
where  he  became  eminent  in  his  profession.  He
was  judge  of  the  Vicksburg  circuit  court,  and  a
publisher  and  editor  of  "Swedes  and  Marshall's
Reports  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Mississippi "
(Vicksburg,  1857).— Another  son,  Thornton  Fran
cis,  lawyer,  b.  in  Augusta.  Ky.,  19  July,  1819,  was
graduated  at  Augusta  college,  studied  law  under
his  father,  and  served  in  the  state  senate.  He  was
at  first  a  Whig,  but  became  a  Democrat,  and  gave
the  decisive  vote  in  1860  for  the  support  of  the
Union.  He  was  presidential  elector  on  the  Mc-
Clellan  ticket  in  1864,  and  has  since  been  a  success
ful  lawyer  in  Kentucky. — The  second  Thomas's
nephew,'  Humphrey,  statesman,  b.  in  Westmore
land  county,  \a.,  in  1756;  d.  near  Frankfort,  Ky.,
1  July,  1841,  was  the  son  of  John.  He  received
no  education,  and  entered  the  Revolutionary  army,
in  which  he  became  captain.  He  removed  to  Ken
tucky  in  1780  and  married  his  cousin,  the  daughter
of  Col.  Thomas  Marshall,  who  had  taught  him  to
read.  In  1787  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Danville  con
vention  to  consider  the  question  of  separation  from
Virginia,  opposing  the  independence  of  Kentucky,
and  taking  an  active  part  in  exposing  the  project
for  an  alliance  with  Spain.  He  was  also  a  delegate
to  the  Virginia  convention  that  ratified  the  consti


tution  of  the  United  States,  and  to  him  was  largely
due  the  conversion  of  a  large  majority  that  opposed
its  adoption.  In  1793  he  was  a  member  of  the
general  assembly,  and  opposed  the  plans  for  the  en
listment  of  troops
in  Kentucky,  un
der  Gen.  George
Rogers  Clarke,  to
attack  the  Spanish
settlements  at  the
mouth  of  the  Mis
sissippi.  He  was
then  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate  as  a
Federalist. serving
from  7  Dec.,  1795,
till  3  March,  1801,
voting  for  the  con
ditional  ratifica
tion  of  the  treaty
that  had  been  ne
gotiated  by  John
Jay  with  Great
Britain,  and  op-
posing  alliances
with  any  foreign

power.  In  1806  he  took  an  active  part  in  denounc
ing  and  thwarting  the  plots  of  Aaron  Burr  and  his
coadjutors.  The  published  communications  that
led  to  the  legislative  inquiry  into  the  conduct  of
Judge  Sebastian,  establishing  the  fact  that  he  had
for  years  been  the  paid  pensioner  of  Spain,  and
compelling  his  resignation  from  the  bench  of  the
court  of  appeals,  were  mainly  the  products  of  his
pen.  He  served  again  in  the  legislature  in  1808-'9,
and  a  dispute  with  Henry  Clay  resulted  in  a  duel,
19  Jan.,  1809,  in  which  Mr.  Clay  was  wounded.  Mr.
Marshall  was  the  author  of  a  "  History  of  Ken
tucky,"  which  is  rather  a  defence  of  himself  than
a  record  of  the  events  of  the  period  (1812;  en
larged  ed.,  2  vols.,  Frankfort,  1824). — Humphrey's
son,  John  Jay,  jurist,  b.  in  Woodford  county,  Ky.,
4  Aug.,  1785;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky..  in  June.  1846,
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1806,  studied  law
under  his  father,  and  served  in  the  legislature  for
many  years.  From  1829  till  1833  he  was  reporter
of  the  court  of  appeals,  and  from  1836  till  his
death  he  was  judge  of  the  circuit  court  of  Louis
ville.  In  the  financial  crisis  of  1837  he  lost  his
property  through  the  generous  support  that  he
gave  to  his  friends.  He  published  "  Reports  of
Cases  at  Law  and  Equity  in  the  Court  of  Appeals  of
Kentucky"  (7  vols.,  Frankfort,  1831-'4).— Another
son  of  Humphrey,  Thomas  Alexander,  jurist,  b.
in  Woodford  county,  Ky.,  15  Jan.,  1794;  d.  in
Louisville,  Ky.,  17  April,  1871,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1815,  studied  law,  and  practised  in  Frank
fort,  Ky.  In  1819  he  removed  to  Paris,  Ky,  He
served  in  the  legislature  in  1827-'8,  and  was  then
elected  a  representative  to  congress  as  a  Whig,
serving  from  5  Dec.,  1831,  till  3  March,  1835.  He
was  judge  of  the  court  of  appeals  from  1835  till
1856,  professor  in  the  law-school  of  Transylvania
from  1836  till  1849,  and  chief  justice  of  the  court
of  appeals  in  1866-'7.  Yale  gave  him  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1866. — John  Jay's  son,  Humphrey,
soldier,  b.  in  Frankfort,  Ky.,  13  Jan.,  1812;  d.  in
Louisville,  Ky.,  28  March,  1872.  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1832,  assigned  to  the
mounted  rangers,  and  served  on  the  Black  Hawk
expedition.  He  resigned  on  30  April,  1833,  studied
law,  and  practised  in  Frankfort  and  Louisville.
He  became  captain  in  the  Kentucky  militia  in
1836,  major  in  1838,  and  lieutenant-colonel  in  1841.
>ln  1836  he  raised  a  company  of  volunteers  and


MARSHALL


MARSHALL


227


marched  to  defend  the  Texas  frontier  against  the
Indians,  but  his  force  disbanded  on  hearing  of
Gen.  Houston's  victory  at  San  Jacinto.  He  became
colonel  "of  the  1st  Kentucky  volunteer  cavalry,  9
June,  1846,  served  in  the  war  with  Mexico,  won
great  distinction  at  the  Battle  of  Buena  Vista,  and
afterward  retired  to  his  farm  in  Henry  county,  Ky.
He  was  subsequently  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,
serving  from  3  Dec.,  1849,  till  4  Aug.,  1852,  and
supported  Clay's  compromise  measures.  From  1852
till  1854  he  was  U.  S.  minister  to  China,  and  on  his
return  he  was  elected  to  congress  from  Kentucky
as  an  American,  serving  from  3  Dec.,  1855.  till  3
March,  1859.  In  1856  he  was  a  member  of  the  Na
tional  American  council  in  New  York  city,  where
he  was  instrumental  in  abolishing  all  secrecy  in
the  political  organization  of  his  party.  In  1860  he
canvassed  Kentucky  for  John  C.  Breckinridge,  and
he  afterward  recruited  in  that  state  a  large  body
of  men  for  the  Confederate  army,  in  which  he  ac
cepted  a  commission  as  brigadier-general.  He  was
placed  in  command  of  the  Army  of  Eastern  Ken
tucky,  with  which  it  was  designed  to  invade  the
state  through  the  mountain-passes.  In  January,
1862.  he  fought  the  battle  of  Middle  Creek,  in  Floyd
county,  with  Gen.  James  A.  Garneld  (q.  v.).  In
May,  1862,  Gen.  Marshall  surprised  Gen.  Jacob  D.
Cox  at  Princeton,  Va.,  the  result  of  the  action
being  the  relief  of  the  Lynchburg  and  Knoxville
railroad,  for  which  service  he  received  the  thanks
of  Gen.  Lee.  He  resigned  his  commission  soon
afterward,  practised  law  in  Richmond,  and  was
elected  to  the  Confederate  congress,  serving  on  the
committee  on  military  affairs.  Subsequently  he
removed  to  Louisville,  Ky.,  and  acquired  a  large
law-pi-actice.  He  was  one  of  the  first  Confederates
whose  disabilities  were  removed  by  congress. — The
second  Humphrey's  daughter,  Nelly  Nichol.  au
thor,  b.  in  Louisville,  Ky..  8  May,  1845,  began  to
write  for  periodicals  in  1863.  She  married,  in
1871,  Col.  John  J.  McAfee,  of  the  Confederate
army.  In  addition  to  numerous  poems,  she  has
published  novels  entitled  "  Eleanor  Morton,  or  Life
in  Dixie"  (New  York,  1865);  "Sodom  Apples"
(1866) ;  "  Fireside  Gleanings  "  (Chicago.  1866) ;  "As
by  Fire  "  (New  York,  1869) ;  "  Wearing  the  Cross  "
(Cincinnati,  1868) ;  "  Passion,  or  Bartered  and
Sold  "  (Louisville,  1876) :  and  "  A  Criminal  through
Love  "(1882).

MARSHALL,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1718;  d.  in  Weston,  Mass.,  18  Nov.,  1800.
His  father.  Capt.  Christopher  Marshall,  was  an
officer  in  the  British  service,  and  assisted  in  the
capture  of  Louisburg  in  1746.  The  son  commanded
the  ancient  and  honorable  artillery  company  of
Boston  in  1763-'7.  In  1765  he  was  major  of  a
Boston  regiment,  and  from  1767  till  1771  lieuten
ant-colonel.  In  a  petition  to  Gov.  Thomas  Hutch-
inson  he  asks  for  a  grant  of  land,  and  speaks  of
the  "great  expense  his  father  was  at  in  raising
troops  for  the  expedition,  which  exceeded  the
whole  of  his  pay,  and  the  greater  part  of  which  the
said  Thomas  Marshall  had  to  advance  for  his  fa
ther  to  the  great  damage  of  his  business."  He  was
a  merchant-tailor  in  King  (now  State)  street  before
the  Revolutionary  war,  in  which  he  commanded
the  10th  Massachusetts  regiment,  and  did  efficient
service  at  Saratoga  in  1777.  In  a  petition  to  the
legislature  Col.  Marshall  says  that  "at  the  evacua
tion  of  Ticonderoga  we  lost  most  of  our  clothing
in  the  retreat,"  but  though  an  order  was  given  by
the  court  for  the  board  of  war  to  make  up  these
losses,  there  were  so  many  other  claims  that  it  was
not  done.  After  the  war  he  purchased  the  confis
cated  estate  of  a  Tory  in  Weston,  Mass.,  which  is


now  the  country-seat  of  Gen.  Charles  J.  Paine.
Thomas's  younger  brother,  Christopher,  was  a  cap
tain  in  his  regiment.

MARSHALL,  William,  surgeon,  b.  in  Milton,
Del.,  23  May,  1827.  After  attending  Milton  acade
my  he  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  medical  college
in  1847,  and  practised  in  Milton,  Philadelphia,
Placerville,  Cal.,  and  Georgetown,  Del.,  until  the
opening  of  the  civil  war.  He  served  in  the  Na
tional  army  as  surgeon  of  the  3d  Delaware  regi
ment,  and  after  the  battle  of  Antietam  was  dis
charged  for  disability,  but  he  subsequently  led  a
company  in  the  6th  Delaware  regiment,  arid  also
acted  as  surgeon  until  the  close  of  the  war.  Since
that  time  he  has  practised  in  Milford.  He  has
been  president  of  the  Delaware  medical  society,
and  was  secretary  of  the  State  board  of  health  from
1879  till  1887.  He  performed  the  first  successful
resection  of  the  humerus  in  the  civil  war,  at  Win
chester  in  1862,  and  discovered  the  pathognomonic
sign  of  malarial  poisoning.  His  specialties  are  sur
gery  and  obstetrics,  and  he  has  contributed  nu
merous  articles  to  medical  publications.

MARSHALL,  William  Ed^ar,  artist,  b.  in
New  York  city,  30  June,  1837.  At  the  age  of
twenty-one  he  began  bank-note  engraving,  at  which
he  worked  for  several  years,  and  then  turned  his
attention  to  the  engraving  of  larger  plates  in  line.
A  few  years  later  he  went  to  Boston  and  painted
many  portraits,  including  that  of  Oliver  Wendell
Holmes.  He  went  abroad  in  1864,  and  remained
in  Europe  about  two  years,  living  mostly  in  Paris,
where  he  painted  portraits  and  exhibited  in  the
salons  of  1865-'6.  On  his  return  he  began  to  en
grave  again,  chiefly  portraits.  Having  executed  a
head  of  Christ,  after  Da  Vinci,  for  Henry  Ward
Beecher's  "Life  of  Jesus"  (1871),  he  conceived  the
plan  of  painting  an  ideal  head  of  Christ  that  would
please  him  better  than  those  hitherto  produced.
He  first  modelled  the  head  in  clay,  and  made  also
a  cartoon  sketch  that  met  with  much  praise,  and
in  1880  he  produced  his  "  Head  of  Christ,"  of  co
lossal  proportions.  Of  this  he  also  executed  a  very
large  line  engraving.  Mr.  Marshall  is  best  known
by  his  portrait  engravings,  of  which  the  admirable
heads  of  Washington  (1862),  Lincoln  (1866),  and
Grant  (1868)  were  especially  successful.  He  made
six  portraits  of  Gen.  Grant,  the  last  one  (considered
by  the  artist  the  best)  just  before  the  general's
death.  Among  others  whose  portraits  he  engraved
were  Henry  W.  Longfellow,  James  G.  Blaine.  Win-
field  S.  Hancock,  James  A.  Garfield,  Henry  Ward
Beecher,  and  James  Fenimore  Cooper.  Most  of  the
engravings  were  after  paintings  by  himself.

MARSHALL,  William  Rairiey,  governor  of
Minnesota,  b.  in  Boone  county,  Mo.,  17  Oct.,  1825.
His  father,  Joseph  M.  Marshall,  removed  to  Mis
souri,  and  thence  to  Quincy,  111.,  where  William
received  a  common-school  education.  At  the  age
of  sixteen  he  worked  in  the  lead-mines  of  Galena,
111.,  and  in  1847  he  went  to  Minnesota  (then  part
of  Wisconsin  territory)  and  engaged  in  the  survey
of  public  lands.  In"  1849  he  established  with  his
brother  the  first  store  of  general  merchandise  in
the  Falls  of  St.  Anthony  (now  Minneapolis).  In
1848  he  served  in  the  legislature  of  \\  isconsin,  and
in  1849  was  elected  a  member  of  the  first  territo
rial  legislature  of  Minnesota.  He  established  the
first  iron  store  in  Minnesota  at  St.  Paul  in  1852,
j  and  in  1855-7  engaged  in  banking  in  that  place.
]  He  presided  at  the  meeting  that  organized  the  Re
publican  party  in  Minnesota,  and  in  1855  was  a
Republican  candidate  for  congress,  but  was  de
feated.  He  engaged  in  dairy- farm  ing  in  1857.  and
imported  fine  stock  into  the  state.  In  1861  he


228


MARSTON


MARTIN


founded  "The  Daily  Press"  (now  the  "Pioneer
Press "),  and  in  the  following  year  enlisted  in  the
7th  Minnesota  regiment,  of  which  he  became  colo
nel,  taking  active  part  in  two  campaigns  against
the  Indians.  In  1803  he  was  assigned  to  the  Kith
army  corps,  and  participated  in  several  battles.
He  commanded  a  brigade  at  the  battle  of  Nash
ville,  15  and  16  Dec.,  1864,  and  on  13  March,  1865,
was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  for
gallant  and  meritorious  conduct.  He  was  wounded
at  the  siege  of  Mobile.  From  1865  till  1869  he
was  governor  of  Minnesota,  and  he  subsequently
served  as  a  railroad  commissioner.

MARSTON.  Oilman,  legislator,  b.  in  Orford,
Graf  ton  co.,  N.  H.,  20  Aug.,  1811.  He  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  in  1837,  and  at  Harvard  law-school
in  1840.  The  year  following  he  was  admitted  to
the  bar  and  began  practice  at  Exeter,  where  he  has
since  resided.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state  house
of  representatives  in  1845-'6-'7  and  1848,  subse
quently  in  1872-'3-'6  and  1877,  and  during  the  bi
ennial  terms  of  1879-'80,  '81-82,  '83-'84.  '85-'86,
and  '87-'88.  In  1850  and  1876  he  was  a  delegate
to  the  State  constitutional  convention.  He  was
elected  as  a  Republican  to  congress,  and  re-elected,
serving  from  5  Dec.,  1859.  till  3  March,  1863.  He
also  took  part  in  the  civil  war  as  colonel  of  the  3d
New  Hampshire  regiment,  being  promoted  briga
dier-general  of  volunteers,  29  Nov.,  1862,  and  re
ceiving  severe  wounds.  On  his  return  home  at  the
end  of  the  war  he  was  again  elected  to  congress,
serving  from  4  Dec.,  1865,  till  3  March,  1867.  He
was  also  the  Republican  candidate  for  election  to
the  45th  congress,  but  was  defeated  by  43  votes.

MARSTON,  John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Boston,
12  June,  1795;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  7  April,  1885.
He  carried  the  first  news  of  Com.  Isaac  Hull's  cap
ture  of  the  "  Guerriere  "  to  John  Adams  at  Quincy,
and  through  the  ex-president's  influence  was  ap
pointed  a  midshipman,  his  commission  being  dated
15  April,  1813.  He  saw  some  service  during  the
war  of  1812-'15,  and  later  was  on  board  the  "  Con
stitution  "  when  Lord  Byron  visited  the  famous
frigate.  In  1825  he  was  promoted  to  the  grade  of
lieutenant,  and  was  on  board  the  "  Brandy  wine  "
when  she  conveyed  Lafayette  to  France.  In
1827-'9  he  served  in  the  "Pacific  squadron,  and
again  in  1833  and  1834.  In  1840  he  was  assigned
to  the  frigate  "  United  States,"  and  in  the  follow
ing  year  was  commissioned  commander.  In  1850
he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  "  York-
town,"  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  he  was  in  charge
of  the  Philadelphia  navy-yard  from  1853  till  1855,
being  in  the  latter  year  made  captain.  Although
placed  on  the  retired  list  in  December,  1861,  he
was  assigned  to  the  "  Cumberland,"  of  the  Brazil
squadron,  in  which  service  he  continued  for  a  year,
when  he  was  commissioned  commodore,  16  July,
1862,  and  was  in  command  of  the  frigate  "  Roan-
oke  "  at  Hampton  Roads  when  the  "  Merrimac "
destroyed  the  "  Congress  "  and  "  Cumberland."  He
was  afterward  made  rear-admiral,  and  for  several
years  after  the  war  was  in  charge  of  the  navy-yards
at  Portsmouth  and  Philadelphia,  and  of  the  naval
station  at  Key  West.  He  also  acted  as  a  light
house-inspector.  In  his  many  voyages  he  had
served  under  Commodores  Roilgers,  Hull,  Perry,
and  Chauncey,  of  the  old  navy,  and  had  seen  alto
gether,  before  his  retirement,  half  a  century  of  ac
tive  service.  His  tastes  were  scholarly,  and  he  was
a  fine  specimen  of  a  gentleman  of  the  old  school.
He  was  a  communicant  of  the  Protestant  Epis
copal  church.  His  eldest  son,  Matthew  R..  entered
the  regular  army,  and  was  brevetted  major  for  gal
lant  conduct  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg.


MARTENS,  Frederic,  German  explorer,  b.  in
Hamburg  in  1635;  d.  there  in  1699.  He  was  the
son  of  a  pilot,  but  followed  the  medical  profession,
and  made  several  voyages  to  North  America  as  a
ship-surgeon.  In  1671  he  joined  a  whaler  that
was  bound  for  Spitsbergen,  and  visited  the  arctic
countries  during  a  voyage  of  six  months.  Seven
years  later  he  went  to  northern  Canada  and  ex
plored  the  territories  around  Hudson  bay,  suffer
ing  great  hardships.  He  was  the  first  to  describe
accurately  to  Europeans  the  northern  part  of  the
American  continent.  He  published  "  Spitzbergische
und  Gronlandische  Reisebeschreibung"  (Hamburg,
1675).  This  work  was  translated  into  English
(London,  1695),  into  French  (Paris,  1715),  into
Dutch  (Amsterdam,  1695),  and  into  Italian  (Bo
logna,  1680).  He  also  published  "  Zweijtihriger
Aufenthalt  in  den  Territorien  der  Hudson's  und
Baffin's  Bay "  (Hamburg,  1687),  which  was  also
translated  into  several  languages.

MARTIEN,  William  Stockton,  publisher,  b.
20  June,  1798;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  16  April,  1861.
He  was  of  Huguenot  descent,  and  received  a  care
ful  religious  training.  From  1828  till  1834  he  was
engaged  in  business  in  Philadelphia  with  James
Russell.  In  1830,  in  connection  with  others,  he
began  the  publication  of  the  "  Presbyterian,"  and
remained  its  publisher  and  principal  owner  until
his  death.  In  1833  he  undertook  the  publication
of  religious  books,  and  as  a  member  of  the  board
of  publication  of  the  Presbyterian  church  he  issued
many  standard  works.  lie  also  served  on  the  ex
ecutive  committee  of  the  board  of  domestic  mis
sions.  In  1846  he  was  elected  and  ordained  a  rul
ing  elder,  which  office  he  filled  during  the  remain
der  of  his  life.  Mr.  Martien  favored  the  largest
liberality  in  church  work,  and  was  accustomed  to
declare  that  when  an  application  was  made  to  a
Christian  from  any  worthy  source.  "  a  favor  was
conferred  upon  him  who  was  asked  to  give,  and
not  upon  him  who  was  to  receive."

MARTIN,  Adam,  clergyman,  b.  in  Biedershau-
sen,  Bavaria,  9  Aug.,  1835.  He  came  to  this  coun
try  early  in  life,  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  col
lege  in  1858  and  at  Hartwick  theological  seminary
in  1861.  In  September  of  that  year  he  was  or
dained  to  the  Lutheran  ministry,  and  became  pas
tor  of  St.  Mark's  church,  Middleburg,  N.  Y.  In
1865  he  was  called  to  the  presidency  of  North
western  university,  Wis.  In  1869  he  accepted  the
professorship  of  the  German  language  and  liter
ature  in  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettysburg,  Pa.,
which  post  he  now  (1888)  holds.  In  "1887  he  re
ceived  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Muhlenberg  col
lege,  Pa.  He  is  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  peri
odicals  of  his  church,  and  has  translated  the  large
catechism  of  Luther  for  the  "  Book  of  Concord,"
edited  by  Prof.  H.  E.  Jacobs,  D.  D.

MARTIN,  Alexander,  senator,  b.  in  New  Jer
sey  about  1740 ;  d.  in  Danbury,  N.  C.,  in  November,
1807.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1756,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and,  after
a  brief  sojourn  in  Virginia,  settled  in  Guilford
county,  N.  C.,  in  1772.  Soon  afterward  he  was
chosen  a  member  of  the  colonial  assembly,  took
part  in  the  conventions  of  1774-'5  that  were  called
to  vindicate  the  rights  of  the  people,  and  in  1776
was  appointed  colonel  of  the  2d  North  Carolina
regiment,  with  which  he  served  at  Germantown
and  the  Brandywine.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state
senate  from  1779  till  1782,  from  1785  till  1787,
and  again  in  1788,  and  for  some  time  served  as  its
president.  He  was  acting  governor  of  the  state  in
1781,  and  the  following  year  was  chosen  governor,
being  re-elected  in  1789.  In  the  interval  he  served


MARTIN


MARTIN


229


as  a  member  of  the  convention  that  framed  the
constitution  of  the  United  States.  At  the  close  of
his  second  term  as  governor  he  was  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate,  and  served  fypm  2  Dec.,  1793,  till  3
March.  1799.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  Princeton  in  1793,  and  at  the  time  of  his
death  was  a  trustee  of  the  University  of  North
Carolina.  He  published  in  the  "North  Carolina
University  Magazine "  poetical  tributes  to  Gen.
Francis  Nash  and  Gov.  Richard  Caswell.  —  His
brother,  James,  removed  to  North  Carolina  from
New  Jersey  in  1774,  and  being  appointed  colonel-
commandant  of  the  Guilford  regiment  of  militia
the  same  year,  served  at  different  times  for  about
sixteen  months  during  the  Revolutionary  war.  He
was  subsequently  elected  to  the  legislature.

MARTIN,  Auguste  Marie,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Brittany,  France,  about  1820 ;  d.  in  Natchitoches,
La.,  29  Sept.,  1875.  He  came  to  the  United  States
in  1841,  some  time  after  his  ordination,  and  was  a
member  of  the  household  of  Bishop  Blanc,  of  New
Orleans,  in  the  following  year,  at  the  same  time
acting  as  chaplain  to  the  Ursuline  convent.  He
was  pastor  of  St.  Martin's  church,  Attakapas  (now
Martinsville)  from  1843  till  1845,  when  he  was
transferred  to  St.  James's  parish.  In  1847  he  was
made  pastor  of  St.  Joseph's  church,  East  Baton
Rouge,  together  with  the  outlying  missions  of
Plains  and  Manchac.  He  was  consecrated  on  30
Nov.,  1853,  bishop  of  the  newly  created  diocese  of
Natchitoches,  which  comprised  the  part  of  Louisi
ana  that  lies  north  of  the  thirty-first  parallel  of
latitude.  This  district  contained  at  the  time  a
Roman  Catholic  population  of  over  25,000.  but
only  four  priests  and  seven  churches.  Bishop  Mar
tin  founded  convents  and  academies,  which  he
placed  under  the  care  of  the  Sisters  of  Mercy  and
the  Daughters  of  the  Cross,  and  during  his  admin
istration  the  number  of  churches  and  chapels  in
creased  to  more  than  sixty.

MARTIN,  Benjamin  Nicholas,  educator,  b.
in  Mount  Holly,  N.  J.,  20  Oct.,  181C ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  26  Dec.,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1837,  and  at  the  divinity-school  in  1840.
After  filling  pulpits  in  New  York  city,  Hadley,
Mass.,  and  Albany,  N.  Y..  and  spending  three  years
in  study,  he  was  called  in  1852  to  the  chair  of  psy
chology  and  cognate  subjects  in  the  University  of
the  city  of  New  York,  where  he  also  lectured  on
rhetoric,  belles-lettres,  modern  history,  political
economy,  apologetics,  and  natural  theology.  In
this  employment  he  passed  the  remaining  thirty-
one  years  of  his  career.  He  received  the  degree
of  S.  T.  D.  from  Columbia  in  18G2,  and  that  of
L.  H.  D.  from  the  regents  of  the  University  of  the
state  of  New  York  in  1869.  Dr.  Martin  contrib
uted  largely  to  theological  reviews  and  other  peri
odicals  on  anti-slavery  and  national  topics  during
the  civil  war.  He  was  a  member  of  societies  for
religious  and  social  improvement,  and  one  of  his
last  lectures  was  delivered  before  the  Institute  of
Christian  philosophy  in  November,  1883.

MARTIN.  Charles  Cyril,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Springfield,  Pa..  30  Aug.,  1831.  He  was  graduated
at  Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute  in  1856,  and  j
then  for  a  year  was  assistant  in  geodesy.  His  first
professional  appointment  was  as  rodman  on  the
Brooklyn  water-works,  from  which  place  he  ad
vanced  steadily  until  within  two  years  he  became
assistant  engineer.  On  the  completion  of  this
work,  Mr.  Martin  entered  the  employ  of  the  Tren
ton  locomotive  machine  manufacturing  company,
in  order  to  become  familiar  with  iron-work  and
particularly  with  the  construction  of  bridges.  At
the  beginning  ot  the  civil  war  he  was  engaged  in


building  an  iron  bridge  across  Savannah  river  on
the  Savannah  and  Charleston  railroad.  Subse
quently  he  became  superintendent  of  a  factory  of
arms,  and  then  was  engaged  as  an  expert  in  con
ducting  a  series  of  experiments  for  the  purpose  of
determining  the  respective  merits  of  horizontal
and  vertical  tubular  boilers  in  the  U.S.  navy.  Mr.
Martin  superintended  the  laying  of  the  forty-eight-
inch  water-main  along  Atlantic  avenue  to  the
Ridgewood  reservoir,  through  which  the  water-
supply  of  Brooklyn  has  since  been  obtained.  He
then  became  chief  engineer  of  Prospect  park,  and
there  introduced  a  system  of  road-building  and
sub-drainage  sewers  that  has  proved  eminently
successful,  also  bringing  to  a  completion  the  great
park  well,  then  the  largest  in  the  world.  On  the
accomplishment  of  this  work  he  became  first  as
sistant  engineer  of  the  New  York  and  Brooklyn
bridge,  and  after  the  structure  was  thrown  open
to  the  public,  in  May,  1883,  was  made  chief  engi
neer  and  superintendent,  which  office  he  still  (1888)
holds.  Mr.  Martin  is  a  member  of  the  American
society  of  civil  engineers,  and  has  published  re
ports  in  connection  with  his  work.

MARTIN,  Felix,  Canadian  author,  b.  in  Aiiray,
France,  4  Oct..  1804.  He  became  a  Jesuit,  and  in
1842  went  to  Canada  as  a  missionary.  He  found
ed  St.  Mary's  college,  Montreal,  presided  over  it
for  many  years,  and  displayed  his  architectural
skill  in  connection  with  it  and  two  adjacent
churches.  He  was  next  stationed  at  Quebec,  but,
his  eyesight  becoming  impaired,  he  returned  to
France  and  connected  himself  with  a  Jesuit  es
tablishment  near  Paris.  While  in  Canada  he  ex
plored  the  Huron  country,  wrote  a  report  upon  it,
and  assisted  in  preparing  a  series  of  volumes  on
the  Jesuit  missions.  He  also  collected  material  for
a  history  of  Canada,  and  contributed  largely  to
publications  on  that  subject.  His  chief  works  are
"  Manuel  du  pelerin  de  Notre  Dame  de  Bon  Se-
cours  "  (Montreal,  1848) ;  "  Relation  cles  Jesuits,"
an  enlarged  translation  of  O'Callaghan's  bibliogra
phy  of  that  series:  (1850);  a  French  translation,
with  notes,  of  Bressani's  "Breve  relazione  "  (1852);
"Mission  du  Canada,  relations  inedites"  (Paris,
1861);  "De  Montcalm  en  Canada"  (1867);  and
"  Le  R.  P.  Isaac  Jogues  "  (1873).

MARTIN,  Francois  Xavier,  jurist,  b.  in  Mar
seilles,  France,  17  March,  1764;  d.  in  New  Orleans,
La.,  11  Dec.,  1846.  He  received  a  good  educa
tion,  and  at  the  age  of  eighteen  emigrated  to
Martinique.  Not  succeeding  there,  he  came  to  the
United  States,  and  in  1786  took  up  his  residence
in  New  Berne.  N.  C.  He  could  speak  but  little
English,  and  determined  to  learn  the  printer's
trade  in  order  to  become  familiar  with  the  lan
guage.  Although  entirely  inexperienced,  he  se
cured  employment  in  a  printing-office  in  the  town,
in  a  short  time  was  made  foreman  of  the  compos
ing-room,  and  eventually  became  proprietor  of  the
newspaper.  He  printed  school-books,  almanacs,
translations  from  the  French,  and,  after  studying
law  and  being  admitted  to  the  bar  about  1789,
treatises  on  the  duties  of  sheriffs,  justices  of  the
peace,  and  executors  and  administrators  of  estates.
He  compiled,  at  the  instance  of  the  legislature,
the  British  statutes  in  operation  in  North  Carolina
at  the  time  of  the  Revolution,  and  a  digest  of  the
state  laws.  He  also  published  "  Notes^  of  a  Few
Decisions  of  the  Superior  Courts  of  North  Caro
lina  and  of  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  United
States,  1778-'97"  (New  Berne,  1797),  a  translation
of  Robert  J.  Pothier's  treatise  "  On  Obligations,"
made  by  himself  (1802).  and  "Acts  of  the  North
Carolina  Assemblvfrom  1715  to  1803  "  (1804).  His


230


MARTIN


MARTIN


researches  into  the  statute  law  suggested  to  him
the  idea  of  collecting  material  for  a  "  History  of
North  Carolina,"  which  was  published  chiefly  in
the  form  of  annals  (New  Orleans,  1829).  In  1806-'7
he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature.  After  twenty
years  of  successful  practice  as  a  lawyer  in  North
Carolina  he  was  appointed  by  President  Madison
in  1809  U.  S.  judge  for  the  territory  of  Mississippi,
and  a  year  later  was  transferred  to  the  bench  ot
the  territory  of  Orleans.  The  defects  of  the  civil
code  of  1808,  and  the  confusion  resulting  from
engrafting  on  the  French  system  of  jurisprudence
certain  principles  of  the  common  law,  made  the
post  of  judge  a  difficult  one,  and  Judge  Martin,
by  reconciling  the  conflicting  elements,  acquired
the  title  of  the  father  of  the  jurisprudence  of
Louisiana.  On  the  organization  of  the  state  gov
ernment  of  Louisiana  he  became  attorney-general
in  February,  1813,  and  in  January,  1815,  he  was
appointed  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court.  He  be
came  chief  justice  in  1837,  and  in  1845  retired  from
the  bench.  During  the  last  years  of  his  life  he  was
nearly  blind.  Judge  Martin  devoted  himself  en
tirely  to  study,  held  aloof  from  society,  and  pre
served  the  habits  of  extreme  parsimony  that  he
had  acquired  in  his  days  of  poverty.  Though  he-
made  no  friends,  he  was  universally  respected  for
his  uprightness  and  for  his  devotion  to  the  duties
of  his  office.  His  holographic  will,  devising  his  .
large  estate  to  his  brother,  was  contested  by  the
state,  which  sought  to  show  that  the  devisee  was
under  a  pledge  to  distribute  the  property  among
French  heirs,  and  thus  recover  the  administration
duties  on  property  willed  to  foreigners,  or  to  prove
that,  being  blind,  he  could  not  have  written  the
will,  but  the  suit  failed.  He  received  the  degree
of  LL.  I),  from  the  University  of  Nashville,  and  in
1841  from  Harvard.  He  published,  in  addition  to
the  works  previously  mentioned,  "  Reports  of  the
Superior  Court  of  Orleans  from  1809  to  1812  "  (New
Orleans,  1811-'13);  "General  Digest  of  the  Terri
torial  and  State  Laws  of  Louisiana,"  published  in
both  French  and  English  (1816) ;  and  "  Reports  of
the  Supreme  Court  of  Louisiana  from  1813  to
1830,"  in  two  series  (1816-'23  and  1824-'30).  He
was  also  the  author  of  a  "  History  of  Louisiana
from  its  Settlement  to  the  Treaty  of  Ghent  in
1814  "(3  vols.,  1827).

MARTIN,  George,  jurist,  b.  in  Middlebury,
Vt,  30  June,  1815 ;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  15  Dec.,
1807.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  college
in  1833,  studied  law,  and  established  himself  in
practice  at  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.,  in  1836.  He  ac
quired  a  high  reputation  as  a  lawyer,  and  in  1851  j
was  appointed  a  justice  of  the  state  supreme  court,
and  in  the  following  year  elected  for  the  term  of
six  years.  His  services  were  especially  acceptable
as  a  circuit  judge,  circuit  duty  being  at  that  time
a  part  of  the  functions  of  the  justices  of  the  su
preme  court.  In  1857  he  was  elected  chief  justice
for  two  years.  In  1859  he  was  elected  a  justice  of
the  court  for  a  term  of  eight  years,  and  the  law
having  been  changed  so  that  the*  judge  holding  the
shortest  term  became  chief,  for  the  last  two  years
of  his  term  he  was  again  chief  justice.

MARTIN,  Henry  Austin,  physician,  b.  in
London.  England,  23  July,  1824;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  7  Dec.,  1884.  He  came  to  this  country  at
an  early  age,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  med'ical
school  in  1845.  and  practised  in  Boston.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  appointed  staff-
surgeon,  and  rose  to  be  surgeon-in-chief  of  the  2d
corps,  Army  of  the  Potomac,  which  post  he  held
till  near  the  close  of  the  war.  On  his  resignation
he  received  the  brevet  of  lieutenant-colonel  for  |


"gallant  and  meritorious  services."  Afterward  he
paid  particular  attention  to  surgery,  and  gained
great  repute  in  the  treatment  of  diseases  of  the
rectum.  He  early  made  a  thorough  study  of  small
pox  and  vaccination,  and  in  1870  first  introduced
into  this  country  the  practice  of  true  animal  vacci
nation,  and  it  was  largely  owing  to  his  writings
and  labors  that  the  method  was  so  soon  and  so  uni
versally  adopted.  He  was  an  authority  on  the
subject  in  this  country.  In  1877,  as  chairman  of
the  committee  on  animal  vaccination  of  the  Ameri
can  medical  association,  he  made  a  full  report  on
that  subject,  which  appeared  in  the  published  vol
umes  of  the  "  Transactions,"  and  was  widely  quoted
from  and  reviewed  here  and  abroad.  In  1877  he  in
troduced  to  the  profession  tiie  treatment  of  ulcers  of
the  leg,  and  many  other  kindred  troubles,  by  the  iise
of  the  pure  rubber  bandage  that  he  had  invented.
The  Martin  bandage  has  been  generally  adopted,  and
has  given  its  inventor  a  wide  reputation  in  this  coun
try  and  abroad.  In  1878  Dr.  Martin  announced  to
the  profession  his  operation  of  tracheotomy  without
tubes,  which  he  many  times  successfully  performed.
In  1881  he  attended  the  International  medical  con
gress  at  London,  and  delivered  a  paper  on  treat
ment  of  synovitis  of  the  knee-joint  by  aspiration
and  subsequent  use  of  the  Martin  bandage,  a
method  original  with  himself.  Dr.  Martin  has
contributed  largely  to  medical  journals,  notably  to
the  London  "Lancet,"  the  "British  Medical  Jour
nal,"  and  other  magazines  in  England,  as  well  as
to  the  "  North  American  Review  "  and  many  other
journals  in  this  country.

MARTIN,  Henry  Newell,  biologist,  b.  in
Newry,  Ireland.  1  Julyi  1848.  He  studied  at  Uni
versity  college,  London,  and  received  the  degrees
of  B.  S.  in  1870.  M.  B.  in  1871,  and  Dr.  Sc.  in  1872,
at  the  University  of  London,  and  was  appointed
university  scholar  in  zoology  and  physiology.
From  London  he  went  to  Christ  college,  Cam
bridge,  where  he  took  the  B.  A.  degree  in  1874.
He  became  a  fellow  of  his  college,  and  also  lecturer
on  natural  history.  When  the  Johns  Hopkins  uni
versity  was  established,  in  1870,  he  was  invited  to
become  its  professor  of  biology,  and  he  has  since
held  that  chair,  and  also  the  post  of  director  of
the  biological  laboratory.  His  original  researches
included  experiments  on  "  The  Normal  Respiratory
Movements  of  the  Frog  and  the  Influence  upon  its
Respiratory  Centre  of  Stimulation  of  the  Optic
Lobes"  (1878),  in  which  he  explains,  after  careful
examination,  the  respiratory  mechanism  of  the  frog
and  demonstrates  that  a  nerve-centre  able  to  check
expiration  exist  in  its  mid-brain;  "  On  the  Influ
ence  of  Stimulation  of  the  Mid-Brain  upon  the  Re
spiratory  Rhythm  of  the  Mammal  "  (1878) ;  and
"  On  the  Respiratory  Function  of  the  Internal  In
tercostal  Muscles"  (1879),  in  which  he  proved  ex
perimentally  that  in  the  dog  and  cat  the  internal
intercostal  muscles  are  expiratory,  and  therefore
presumably  so  in  man,  thus  settling  a  long-dis
puted  point.  In  a  series  of  papers  (1881-'3)  he
was  the  first  to  demonstrate  that  the  heart  of  a
warm-blooded  animal  can  be  kept  alive  and  beat
ing  normally  for  hours  after  general  death  of  the
animal,  and  by  researches  made  on  it  in  that  con
dition,  when  beyond  all  control  from  the  central
nervous  system  or  products  of  glandular  activity
or  tissue  change,  that  alterations  in  arterial  or
venous  pressure  do  not  directly  cause  any  change
in  the  pulse-rate  ;  and  that  slight  changes  of  tem
perature  in  the  blood  supplied  to  it  very  greatly
influence  the  rate  of  beat  of  the  heart  by  acting
directly  on  it,  hence  showing  that  the  quick  pulse
in  fever  is  not  a  nervous  phenomenon.  His  "Ob-


MARTIN


MARTIN


231


serrations  in  regard  to  the  Supposed  Suction-Pump
Action  of  the  Mammalian  Heart"  (1887)  show
that  this  generally  accepted  action  does  not  exist.
Much  of  his  work  has  been  in  collaboration  with
his  pupils.  Prof.  Martin  was  appointed  Croonian
lecturer  of  the  Royal  society  of  London  for  the
year  1883,  and  in  1881  the  honorary  degree  of
M.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  the  University  of
Georgia.  He  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies
in  the  United  States,  and  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  so
ciety  of  London,  and  has  contributed  largely  to
scientific  journals.  He  is  editor  of  the  "Studies
from  the  Biological  Laboratory  "  of  Johns  Hopkins,
and  associate  editor  of  "  The  Journal  of  Physi
ology."  He  was  associated  with  Thomas  H.  Hux
ley  in  the  preparation  of  his  "Practical  Biology"
(London  and  New  York.  1876),  and  is  the  author
of  "The  Human  Body"  (New  York,  1881);  and,
with  William  A.  Moale.  of  a  "  Handbook  of  Verte
brate  Dissection  "  (3  parts.  1881-'4).

MARTIN,  Homer  Dodge,  artist,  b.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  28  Oct.,  1836.  He  received  no  regular  art
instruction,  but  began  exhibiting  at  the  National
academy  about  1857.  He  removed  to  New  York
early  in  1802.  and  was  elected  an  associate  of  the
National  academy  in  1868,  and  academician  in
1875.  In  1876. 1880,  and  1881  he  travelled  in  Eng
land,  and  in  1882-'6  resided  in  France,  sketching
and  painting  from  nature  during  his  stay  in  those
countries.  His  landscapes  are  notable  for  color
and  atmosphere.  His  works  include  "  White
Mountains  from  Randolph  Hill"  (1862);  "Adi-
rondacks"  (1876);  "Thames  at  Richmond"  (1877):
"  Evening  on  the  Saranac  "  (1878) ;  "  Sand  Dunes
on  Lake  Ontario"  (1879  and  1886);  "On  the  Neck,
Newport,  R.  I."  (1880) ;  and  "  Old  Manor  at  Crique-
bceuf.  Normandy  "  (1885).

MARTIN,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  12  May,  1796;  d.  in  C'anonsburg,  Pa..  15
June,  1846.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  college
in  1819,  studied  theology  in  the  seminary  of  the
Associate  church,  which  was  then  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  and  was  ordained  as  pastor  of  the  church  in
Albany.  N.  Y..  19  May,  1824.  While  still  filling
the  pastoral  office  he  assumed  the  editorship  of  the
"Evangelical  Repository  "  in  1833.  In  1842  he  be
came  professor  of  didactic  theology  and  Hebrew  in
the  theological  seminary  at  Cannonsburg.  He  re
ceived  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Jefferson  college
in  1843.  He  published  "  A  Preface  designed  to
show  that  the  Biblical  Psalms  only  are  to  be  sung
in  the  Worship  of  God"  (Albany,"  1830);  an  "Es
say  on  the  Imputation  of  Adam's  First  Sin  to  his
Posterity"  (1834):  and  "The  Duty  of  Submission
to  Church  Rulers  Explained  and  Defended  "  (1841).

MARTIN,  James  Green,  soldier,  b.  in  Eliza
beth  City,  N.  G\,  14  Feb.,  1819:  d.  in  Asheville,
N.  C.,  4~  Oct.,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1840,  and  assigned  to
the  artillery.  As  1st  lieutenant  of  a  light  battery
he  fought  in  the  Mexican  war.  and  lost  his  right
arm  at  Churubusco.  He  had  meanwhile  been  com
missioned  as  captain  of  staff,  and  was  now  brevet-
ted  major.  When  the  civil  war  began  he  was
quartermaster  at  Fort  Riley.  Resigning  his  com
mission  on  14  June,  1861,  he  offered  his  services  to
his  state,  was  appointed  adjutant-general  of  North
Carolina,  and  applied  himself  to  the  task  of  or
ganizing,  equipping,  and  clothing  the  troops.  At
his  suggestion  blockade-running  ships  were  first
employed  to  bring  supplies  from  Europe.  On  28
Sept.,  "1861,  he  was  appointed  general-in-chief  of
the  state  forces,  with  the  rank  of  major-general.
Anticipating  the  need  of  more  troops,  he  raised
12,000  men  beyond  North  Carolina's  quota,  which


were  hastily  called  into  the  field  when  Gen.  Mc-
Clellan  advanced  on  Richmond,  and  performed
effective  service  in  the  defence  of  the  Confederate
capital.  When  he  had  accomplished  the  duty  of
fitting  the  North  Carolina  troops  for  the  field',  he
was  commissioned  as  brigadier-general  in  the  Con
federate  army  in  1862,  and  on  reaching  the  field  in
1863  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  a  brigade
and  ordered  to  Petersburg.  Not  long  after  his
arrival  at  the  scene  of  operations  Gen.  Lee  re
quested  him  to  go  back  and  resume  the  duties  of
adjutant-general  of  North  Carolina,  where  the  con
scription  law  had  provoked  a  dangerous  state  of
disaffection.  After  spending  nine  months  at  Ra
leigh  in  the  discharge  of  this  trust,  he  again  asked
for  service  in  the  field,  was  assigned  to  the  com
mand  of  a  brigade,  and  was  made  commander  of
the  district  of  North  Carolina.  His  brigade  was
often  spoken  of  as  the  best-disciplined  in  Lee's
army,  and  he  won  additional  praise  by  his  ability
in  handling  his  command  in  action.  He  surprised
the  National  camp  at  Newport,  was  ordered  to
Petersburg  in  May,  1864,  and  at  Bermuda  Hun
dred  carried  by  assault  the  earthworks  on  the  ex
treme  left  of  the  National  line.  He  afterward  was
engaged  in  severe  fighting  at  Cold  Harbor  and  in
the  battles  before  Petersburg.  At  the  close  of  the
war  he  was  stationed  at  Asheville  in  command  of
the  district  of  western  North  Carolina  and  south
western  Virginia.  The  considerable  property  that
he  once  possessed  had  been  swept  away,  and.  though
his  health  was  impaired  by  hard  service,  he  studied
law,  was  speedily  called  to  the  bar,  and  practised
in  Asheville  during  the  remainder  of  his  life.

MARTIN,  James  Stewart,  soldier,  b.  in
Scott  county,  Va.,  19  Aug.,  1826.  He  received  a
public-school  education,  removed  to  Salem,  111.,  in
1846,  and  during  the  Mexican  war  served  as  a
non-commissioned  officer.  He  was  clerk  of  the
Marion  county  court  from  1849  till  1861,  in  the
mean  time  studying  law  and  being  admitted  to  the
bar.  For  several  years  he  was  a  member  of  the
Republican  state  committee.  He  entered  the  Na
tional  army  as  colonel  of  an  Illinois  regiment  in
1862,  and  served  till  the  end  of  the  war,  taking
part  in  all  the  important  battles  of  the  Atlanta
campaign  and  in  the  march  to  the  sea,  and  receiv
ing  the  brevet  of  brigadier-general  on  28  Feb.,
1865.  After  his  return  to  Illinois  he  was  elected
judge  of  the  Marion  county  court,  and  in  1868  was
appointed  a  pension-agent,  resigning  the  judge-
ship.  He  resigned  that  office  on  being  elected  as
a  Republican  to  congress  in  1872.  After  his  ser
vice  in  congress  he  was  for  some  veal's  commis
sioner  of  the  Southern  Illinois  penitentiary,  and
subsequently  a  banker  in  Salem  and  president  of  a
coal-mining  company.

MARTIN,  John,  governor  of  Georgia,  b.  about
1730.  He  was  appointed  naval  officer  at  Stinbury,
Ga.,  in  1761.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution
he  was  sent  to  the  Provincial  congress  in  1775.  and
was  a  member  of  the  council  of  safety.  He  joined
the  Continental  army,  was  commissioned  as  cap
tain,  and  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  in  1781.  He
was  elected  to  the  legislature  from  Chatham  coun
ty  in  the  same  year,  was  governor  of  the  state  in
1782-'3,  and  was  elected  in  1783  state  treasurer.
In  January  of  that  year  he  was  commissioned  to
make  a  treaty  with  the  Creek  Indians.

MARTINA  John  Alexander,  governor  of  Kan
sas,  b.  in  Brownsville,  Pa..  10  March,  1839.  He
learned  the  printer's  trade  in  the  office  of  the
Brownsville  "  Clipper."  and  became  foreman  of
the  composing-room,  and  subsequently  local  editor.
Removing  in  1857  to  Atchison,  Kan.,  he  purchased


232


MARTIN


MARTIN


the  "Squatter  Sovereign"  in  February,  1858.  and
changing  its  name  to  the  "  Champion,"  exercised
through  its  columns  a  powerful  influence  on  the  po
litical  development  of  the  state.  In  July,  1859,  he
was  secretary  of  the  Wyandotte  convention,  at
which  the  state  constitution  was  framed,  in  Octo
ber  of  that  year  was  a  delegate  to  the  Republican
convention,  and  in  December  was  elected  a  state
senator.  He  was  a  member  of  the  National  Re
publican  convention  in  1860,  and  after  the  admis
sion  of  Kansas  to  the  Union  in  1861  was  post
master  at  Atchison.  He  served  during  one  session
in  the  state  senate,  on  27  Oct.  joined  the  National
army  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  8th  Kansas  in
fantry,  and  was  for  some  time  provost-marshal  of
Leavenworth.  On  1  Nov.,  1862,  he  was  promoted
colonel  of  the  regiment,  and  a  month  later  appoint
ed  provost-marshal  at  Nashville,  Term.,  in  which
capacity  he  served  six  months.  He  took  part  in
the  principal  engagements  of  the  Army  of  the  Cum
berland,  commanding  a  brigade  at  Chickamauga,
and  also  for  several  months  before  he  was  mus
tered  out,  17  Nov..  1864.  He  was  bre vetted  briga
dier-general  of  volunteers  for  services  during  the
war.  Returning  to  Atchison,  he  resumed  the
management  of  his  newspaper,  which  he  converted
into  a  daily,  and  in  1865  was  elected  mayor.  He
was  a  delegate  to  the  Republican  National  con
ventions  of  1868,  1872,  and  1880.  a  member  of  the
National  committee  of  the  party  from  1868  till
1884,  also  of  the  U.  S.  centennial  commission  in
1876,  and  since  1878  has  been  a  manager  of  the
National  soldiers'  home.  He  was  elected  governor
of  Kansas  in  1884,  and  in  1886  was  re-elected.

MARTIN,  John  Hill,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  13  Jan.,  1823.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1838,  but  resigned  in  1841  to  enter  on
the  study  of  the  law,  and  in  1844  was  admitted  to
the  Philadelphia  bar.  In  1851  he  l>ecame  the  legal
editor  of  the  "  Philadelphia  Intelligencer,"  an  in
surance  journal,  which  post  he  still  retains  (1888),
engaging  also  in  the  work  of  his  profession.  lie
is  the  author  of  "  Bethlehem  and  the  Moravians"
(Philadelphia,  1872) ;  "  The  Bench  and  Bar"  (1883) ;
and  "  Chester  and  its  Vicinity,  Delaware  County,
Pennsylvania,  with  Genealogical  Sketches  of  some
Old  Families "(1877).

MARTIN,  John  Nicholas,  clergyman,  b.  in  the
duchy  of  Deux-Ponts,  Rhenish  Bavaria,  about  1725 ;
d.  27  July,  1795.  He  came  to  this  country  about
the  middle  of  the  18th  century,  in  company  with  a
Lutheran  colony,  as  their  pastor,  and  finally  set
tled  in  a  district  between  the  Broad  and  Saluda
rivers,  South  Carolina,  where  he  remained  many
years.  In  1776  he  took  charge  of  the  Lutheran
church  in  Charleston,  which  was  his  last  field  of
labor.  When  it  was  ascertained  that  he  would  not
pray  for  the  king,  he  was  interdicted  from  preach
ing  and  placed  under  arrest,  and  his  property  hav
ing  been  confiscated  he  was  driven  from  the  city.
He  remained  in  the  interior  of  the  state  till  1783,
when  he  returned  to  his  congregation,  and  preached
till  his  retirement  in  1787.

MARTIN,  Joseph  Hamilton,  clergyman,  b.  in
Jefferson  county,  Teun.,  11  Aug.,  1825 ;  d.  in
Georgetown,  Ky.,  7  Feb..  1887.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  East  Tennessee  university  (now  the  Uni
versity  of  Tennessee,  from  which  he  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1878)  in  1843,  and  at  Union  theo
logical  seminary,  New  York  city,  in  1846.  After
laboring  for  two  years  as  a  missionary  among  sail
ors  at  New  Orleans,  he  was  installed"  as  pastor  of
the  Presbyterian  church  at  Huntsville,  Ala.,  in
August,  1848.  From  1851  till  1864  he  preached  in
Knoxville,  Tenn.,  and  then  in  Bethesda,  S.  C.,  till


1867,  and  for  the  next  two  years  in  Wytheville,
Va.  He  preached  subsequently  to  various'churches
in  Tennessee,  and  was  a  pastor  in  Atlanta,  Ga.,
from  1873  till  1882.  and  preached  to  vacant  churches
near  Georgetown,  Ky.,  till  his  death.  He  was  the
author  of  two  historical  poems  entitled  "  Smith
and  Pocahontas "  (Richmond,  1862).  and  "  The
Declaration  of  Independence  "  (New  York,  1876) ;
also  of  many  Sunday-school  songs.

MARTIN,  Joshua  Lanier,  governor  of  Ala
bama,  b.  in  Blount  county,  Tenn.,  5  Dec.,  1799;  d.
in  Tuscaloosa,  Ala.,  2  Nov.,  1856.  He  was  edu
cated  under  the  instructions  of  Rev.  Isaac  Ander
son  at  Maryville,  Tenn..  removed  to  Alabama,  stud
ied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  within  a
short  time  took  high  rank  in  his  profession.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Alabama  legislature  in  1822,
and  for  some  time  solictor,  and  subsequently  a  cir
cuit  judge  and  chancellor  of  the  middle  division
of  the  state.  He  was  elected  to  congress  in  1835,
and  re-elected  for  the  following  term.  In  1845  he
took  issue  with  the  other  Democratic  leaders  in
Alabama  on  the  question  of  the  state  credit,  an
nounced  himself  as  an  independent  candidate  for
governor,  and  was  elected  ;  and  the  financial  stand
ing  of  the  state  was  preserved  unimpaired. — His
son,  John  Mason,  member  of  congress,  b.  in  Ath
ens,  Limestone  co.,  Ala.,  20  Jan.,  1837,  was  gradu
ated  at  Centre  college,  Danville.  Ky.,  in  1856,  stud
ied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1858.  and  es
tablished  himself  in  practice  at  Tuscaloosa,  Ala.
He  served  four  years  in  the  Confederate  army,  was
elected  a  state  senator  in  1871  to  fill  a  vacancy,  re-
elected  for  a  full  term  the  following  year,  and
chosen  president  pro  temporc.  In  1875  he  became
professor  of  equity  jurisprudence  in  the  Univer
sity  of  Alabama.  He  was  elected  to  the  National
house  of  representatives  as  a  Democrat,  and  served
from  7  Dec.,  1885,  till  3  March,  1887.

MARTIN  Josiah,  colonial  governor,  b.  proba
bly  in  Antigua,  W.  I.,  23  April,  1737;  d.  in  Lon
don,  England,  in  July,  1786.  He  became  an  ensign
in  the  British  army  in  1756,  and  had  risen  to  the
rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  in  1771,  when  he  was
appointed  royal  governor  of  North  Carolina,  suc
ceeding  William  Tryon,  who  had  been  transferred
to  New  York  after  the  battle  of  Alamance.  Gov.
Martin,  with  conciliatory  tact,  attained  a  good
understanding  with  the  Regulators,  many  of  whom
remained  faithful  to  the  crown  throughout  the
Revolution.  He  assumed  a  firm  attitude  toward
the  Whigs,  and,  when  the  difficulties  with  the  home
government  approached  a  crisis  in  the  colonies,
was  secretly  active  in  organizing  the  Highlanders
and  other  loyal  elements.  In  his  speech  to  the
assembly  in  April,  1775,  he  reviewed  the  situation,
and  defined  his  position  in  energetic  language.
The  assembly  replied  in  equally  resolute  terms,
whereupon  he  dissolved  it,  and  began  to  enlist  a
Loyalist  force.  On  24  April,  while  he  was  in  con
ference  with  those  members  of  the  council  that
adhered  to  royalist  views,  a  body  of  Whigs  at
tacked  his  house  and  carried  off  six  guns  that  he
had  planted.  The  next  day  he  sent  his  family  to
New  York,  and  took  refuge  on  board  the  sloop-of-
war  "Cruiser,"  transferring  his  headquarters  to
Fort  Johnston  on  Cape  Fear  river.  When  the
Mecklenburg  resolutions  were  published  he  trans
mitted  to  England  a  copy  of  the  document,  which
he  described  as  "  setting  up  a  system  of  rule  and
regulation  subversive  of  his  majesty's  government,"
while  still  affirming  his  belief  that  he  had  the  means
in  his  own  hands  "  to  maintain  the  sovereignty  of
this  country  to  my  royal  master  in  any  event."
He  already  had  requested  from  Gen.  Thomas  Gage


MARTIN


MARTIN


233


in  Boston  ei  supply  of  arms  and  ammunition.  One
of  the  letters  was  intercepted,  and  in  July  a  plot
for  arming  the  slaves  was  discovered,  of  which  he
was  supposed  to  have  been  the  instigator.  John
A  she  thereupon  marched  on  Fort  Johnston  at  the
head  of  a  band  of  incensed  colonists,  compelled  the
governor  to  flee  on  board  the  "  Cruiser  "  on  20  July,
and  demolished  the  fort.  From  the  vessel  Martin
issued  on  8  Aug.  a  proclamation  of  extraordinary
length,  which  was  denounced  as  a  malicious  libel
by  the  Whigs,  and  publicly  burned  by  the  common
hangman.  He  remained  on  the  coast  to  direct  a
rising  of  the  Loyalists,  whom  he  furnished  with  arms
brought  from  England.  In  January.  1776,  Sir  Henry
Clinton  came  with  a  body  of  troops  in  transports  to
aid  Martin  in  re-etablishing  the  royal  power,  but
the  presence  of  Gen.  Charles  Lee's  forces  deterred
him  from  landing.  The  expedition  of  Lord  Corn-
wallis  and  Sir  Peter  Parker  was  expected  from
Cork  to  co-operate  with  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  but  was
retarded  by  a  storm  at  sea.  It  had  been  sent  out
by  the  advice  of  Martin,  who  had  presented  a  com
plete  plan  for  the  subjugation  of  the  Carolinas.
The  Highlanders  now  took  the  field  under  the  two
MacDonalds,  but  were  completely  routed  at  Moore's
creek  bridge.  Discomfited  by  this  disaster,  Martin
embarked  on  Sir  Peter  Parker's  fleet,  and  arrived
at  Charleston  in  June,  1776.  He  importuned  the
British  authorities  to  send  arms  and  money  for  a
loyal  corps  in  North  Carolina,  and  offered  to  raise
and  lead  a  battalion  of  Scottish  Highlanders  and
rally  the  people  of  the  western  counties  around  the
royal  standard  if  he  were  restored  to  his  old  rank
in  the  army.  The  means  were  furnished  for  the
formation  of  military  bodies  among  the  High
landers  and  Regulators,  though  the  commission
that  he  asked  for  was  refused.  He  remained  with
Cornwallis,  who  gave  special  heed  to  his  energetic
counsels  after  taking  command  in  the  south.
When  Cornwallis  entered  North  Carolina  after  his
victory  at  Camden  he  was  accompanied  by  Martin,
who  expected  to  rouse  the  loyal  part  of  the  popu
lation,  and  soon  be  able  to  resume  the  administra
tion.  The  two  attempted  invasions  of  North  Caro
lina  were  checked  at  King's  Mountain  and  Cow-
Eens.  Gov.  Martin's  health  was  destroyed  by  the
itigues  of  the  campaign.  He  left  North  Carolina
in  March.  1781,  for  Long  Island,  and  shortly  after
ward  embarked  for  England.

MARTIN,  Luther,  lawyer,  b.  in  New  Bruns
wick,  N.  J.,  9  Feb.,  1748;'  d.  in  New  York  city,

10  July.  1826.  He
was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1766,
and  at  once  went
to  Queenstown.  Md..
where  he  studied
law  and  supported
himself  by  teach
ing.  In  1771  he
was  admitted  to  the
bar.  and  afterward
settled  in  Somerset,
Md.,  where  he  at
tained  a  lucrative
practice.  At  one  of
the  early  terms  of
the  Williamsburg.
Va..  court  he  de-
fended  thirty-eight
persons,  of  whom
twenty-nine  were  acquitted.  He  was  appoint
ed  in  1774  one  of  the  commissioners  of  his  county
to  oppose  the  claims  of  Great  Britain,  and  also
n  member  of  the  convention  that  was  called  at


Annapolis  for  a  similar  purpose.  In  August,
1777,  he  published  a  reply  to  the  address  that  was
sent  out  by  the  brothers  Howe  from  their  ships
in  Chesapeake  bay ;  also  an  address  "  to  the  in
habitants  of  the  peninsula  between  the  Delaware
and  the  Chesapeake  to  the  southward  of  the
British  lines,"  which  was  circulated  on  printed
handbills.  In  1778  he  was  appointed  attorney-
general  of  Maryland,  and  in  1787  he  was  sent  by
the  Maryland  legislature  as  one  of  the  delegates
to  the  convention  that  framed  the  U.  S.  consti
tution,  but  he  opposed  the  constitution  and  left
the  convention  rather  than  sign  the  instrument.
His  opposition  to  this  measure  led  to  his  being
called  "the  Federal  bull-dog"  by  his  antagonist,
Thomas  Jefferson.  In  1804  he  appeared  as  counsel
for  the  defence  in  the  impeachment  of  Samuel  Chase
(q.  v.)  before  the  U.  S.  senate.  He  is  described  on
this  occasion  as  the  rollicking,  witty,  audacious
attorney-general  of  Maryland  ;  drunken,  generous,
slovenly,  grand,  shouting  with  a  school-boy's  fun  at
the  idea  of  tearing  John  Randolph's  indictment  to
pieces,  and  teaching  the  Virginia  Democrats  some
law.  A  year  later  he  resigned  from  the  attorney-
generalship  of  Maryland,  but  continued  his  law
practice,  then  the  largest  in  that  state.  He  again
brought  himself  into  notice  as  counsel  for  Aaron
Burr  in  the  latter's  trial  at  Richmond  in  1807.  and
at  its  close  entertained  both  Burr  and  Harman
Blenncrhassett  at  his  residence  in  Baltimore.  In
1814-'16  he  held  the  office  of  chief  judge  of  the
court  of  over  and  terminer  in  Baltimore,  and  in
1818  he  was  again  appointed  attorney-general  of
Maryland,  but  two  years  later  a  stroke  of  paralysis
made  him  entirely  dependent  upon  his  friends,  as
he  had  never  saved  money.  The  Maryland  legis
lature  passed  an  act  in  1822.  that  is  unparalleled
in  American  history,  requiring  every  lawyer  in  the
state  to  pay  annually  a  license  fee  of  $5.  the  entire
proceeds  to  be  paid  over  to  trustees  "  for  the  use
of  Luther  Martin."  His  last  days  were  spent  in
New  York  city,  where  Burr,  who  was  his  debtor
in  every  sense,  gave  him  a  home  in  his  own  house.
He  was  the  author  of  a  "  Defence  of  C'apt.  Cresap,"
whose  daughter  he  married  in  1783,  "  from  the
charge  of  murder  made  in  Jefferson's  notes " ;
"  Genuine  Information  delivered  to  the  Legislature
of  the  State  of  Maryland  relative  to  the  Proceed
ings  of  the  General  Convention  lately  held  at
\  Philadelphia"  (Philadelphia,  1788) ;  and  a  series  of
pamphlets  called  "  Modern  Gratitude "  (1801-'2).
See  "Luther  Martin,  the  Federal  Bull-Dog,"  by
Henry  P.  Goddard  (Baltimore,  1887).

MARTIN,  Margaret  Maxwell,  author,  b.  in
Dumfries,  Scotland,  12  July,  1807.  She  was
brought  to  the  United  States  in  1815.  Her  parents
ultimately  settled  in  Columbia,  S.  C.,  where  she  re
ceived  her  education,  and  married  in  1836  the  Rev.
William  Martin.  For  more  than  seventeen  years
she  taught  a  female  seminary  in  Columbia.  She  is
the  author  of  "  Day-Spring.'or  Light  to  them  that
Sit  in  Darkness ""  (Nashville,  1854) ;  "  Sabbath-
School  Offering,"  a  collection  of  poems  and  tales
(1854);  "Christianity  in  Earnest";  '-Heroines  of
Early  Methodism,"  'conjointly  with  her  husband
(1858);  "Religious  Poems"  (1858);  "Flowers  and
Fruits,  or  Poems  for  Young  People  " :  and  "  Scenes
and  Scenery  of  South  Carolina  "  (1869).

MARTIN,  Robert  Nicols,  jurist,  b.  in  Cam
bridge,  Dorchester  co..  Md..  14  Jan.,  1798;  d.  in
Saratoga,  N.  Y.,  20  July.  1870.  He  received  a  classi
cal  education,  and  studied  law  with  his  father,
William  Bond  Martin,  a  judge  of  the  Maryland
court  of  appeals,  and  with  Judge  Roger  B.  Taney.
Soon  after  his  admission  to  the  bar  he  was  elected


234


MARTIN


MARTINDALE


to  congress,  and  served  from  5  Dec.,  1825.  till  3
March,  1827.  At  the  end  of  his  term  he  established
himself  in  practice  in  Baltimore.  In  1845  he  was
appointed  chief  judge  of  the  western  judicial  dis
trict,  and  served  till  1851,  exercising  also  the  office,
which  the  law  then  devolved  upon  the  chief  district
judges,  of  a  judge  of  appeals.  From  1859  till  1807
he  was  judge  of  the  superior  court  of  Baltimore,
and  then  till  his  death  a  professor  in  the  law-school
of  the  University  of  Maryland  at  Baltimore.

MARTIN,  Thomas  Mower,  Canadian  artist,  b.
in  London,  England,  5  Oct.,  1838.  He  was  edu
cated  at  the  military  college  of  Enfield  and  in  the
South  Kensington  art  galleries,  and  in  1862  came
to  Toronto,  Canada,  where  he  was  the  first  artist
that  was  able  to  live  by  his  profession.  He  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Ontario  art  union,  the
Ontario  society  of  artists,  and  the  Royal  Canadian
academy,  was  president  of  the  first  society  of  artists
in  Canada,  and  in  1877  became  director  of  the
Ontario  school  of  art,  which  he  had  established.
He  removed  to  New  York  in  1884,  and  has  con
tributed  to  the  exhibitions  of  the  American  water-
color  society  and  the  National  academy  of  design.
Mr.  Martin  has  invented  a  stretching-frame  for
canvas  or  paper.  Among  his  works  are  "  The  Un
touched  Wilderness,"  painted  for  the  queen  of
England  in  1882,  and  now  in  Windsor  castle;  "A
Summer  Idyl  "  and  '•  Whiskey  Ring,"  exhibited  at
the  Centennial  in  Philadelphia  in  1876 ;  and  "  Sun
rise.  Muskoka,"  and  "  Canadian  Game."  both  of
which  were  shown  at  the  colonial  and  Indian  ex
hibition  in  London  in  1886.

MARTIN,  William  Alexander  Parsons,  mis
sionary,  b.  in  Livonia,  Ind.,  10  April,  1827.  He
was  graduated  at  Indiana  state  university  in  1846,
studied  theology  at  the  Presbyterian  seminary.
New  Albany,  Ind.,  since  removed  to  Chicago,  and
in  1850  went  to  Ning-po,  China,  where  he  was  en
gaged  for  ten  years  in  missionary  labor.  He  acted
as  interpreter  for  William  B.  Reed,  the  U.  S.  min
ister,  in  negotiating  the  treaty  of  1858  with  China,
and  in  1859  accompanied  his  successor,  John  E.
Ward,  to  Peking  and  to  Yeddo,  Japan.  From
1863  till  1868  he  was  a  missionary  at  Peking,  and
in  1869  became  president  of  the  Tong  VVeng  college
in  that  city  and  professor  of  international  law.  He
was  the  first  foreigner  to  make  the  journey  from
Peking  to  Shanghai  on  the  grand  canal,  and  de
scribed  the  trip  in  the  "  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  So
ciety  "  (1866).  He  acted  as  an  adviser  of  Chinese
officials  on  questions  of  international  law  when  dis
putes  have  arisen  with  European  powers,  notably
during  the  conflict  with  France  in  1884-'5.  In
1885  he  was  made  a  mandarin  of  the  third  class.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Lafayette
college  in  1860,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  the 'Uni
versity  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1870.  Dr.
Martin  edited  the 'Peking  "Scientific  Magazine,"
printed  in  Chinese,  from  1875  till  1878,  and  has
published  in  the  Chinese  language  "  Evidences  of
Christianity"  (1855;  10th  ed.,  1885),  which  was
translated  into  Japanese  and  obtained  a  large  cir
culation  in  Japan;  "The  Three  Principles "(1856);
"Religious  Allegories"  (1857);  a  translation  of
Henry  Wheaton's  "  Elements  of  International  Law  "
(1863) ;  an  educational  treatise  on  "  Natural  Phi
losophy  "  (1866);  translations  of  Theodore  D.
Woolsey's  "  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Interna
tional  Law  "  (1875) ;  the  "  Guide  Diplomatique  "  of
Georg  F.  von  Martens,  and  "  Das  moderne  Volker-
recht,"  by  Johann  K.  Bluntschli  (1879);  and  a
work  on  "  Mathematical  Physics  "  (1885).  He  has
contributed  to  American  and  English  reviews  and
to  the  transactions  of  learned  societies,  and  pub


lished  in  English  "  The  Chinese  :  their  Education,
Philosophy,  and  Letters  "  (Shanghai  and  London,
1880  ;  new  ed..  New  York,  1881).

MARTIN,  William  Dobbin,  jurist,  b.  in  Mar-
tintown,  Edgefield  district,  S.  C.,  20  Oct.,  1789;  d.
in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  16  Nov.,  1833.  He  received  a
classical  education,  studied  law  with  Edmund  Ba
con  in  Edgefield  and  at  the  Litchfield  law-school,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1811,  and  practised  in
Edgefield  till  1813,  when  he  removed  to  Coosa-
wliatchie.  He  and  his  friend  James  L.  Pettigru
divided  all  the  leading  cases  in  lower  Carolina,  ex
cept  in  Charleston,  and  were  accustomed  to  ex
amine  their  cases  together  out  of  court,  and  reduce
the  argument  to  the  actual  point  in  dispute.  lie
was  elected  to  the  state  house  of  representatives
in  1816,  and  was  chosen  chairman  of  the  judiciary
committee  in  1818.  The  same  year  he  was  elected
clerk  of  the  senate,  and  held  that  office  till  1826,
when  he  was  chosen  a  representative  in  congress  as
a  state  rights  Democrat,  and  took  his  seat  on  3  Dec.,
1827.  He  was  re-elected  without  opposition,  and
on  its  expiration  was  chosen  a  circuit  judge,  and
removed  to  Columbia.

MARTINAYS,  Edonard  Simon  (mar-tee-nay'),
Flemish  author,  b.  in  Bruges  in  1739  ;  d.  in  Mech
lin  in  1796.  He  began  life  as  a  clerk  in  a  mercan
tile  house,  and  in  1761  was  sent  to  Buenos  Ayres  to
establish  an  agency.  Having  acquired  a  large  for
tune,  he  began  to  travel  in  1779  through  South
America,  and,  returning  to  Europe  in  1784,  fixed
his  residence  in  Mechlin.  He  devoted  the  remain
der  of  his  life  to  literature  and  published  guides
for  the  use  of  European  merchants  trading  with
South  America.  Among  his  works  are '•  Histoire
des  etats  limitrophes  du  Rio  de  la  Plata,  etudies
au  point  de  vue  commercial  et  des  ressources  qu'ils
offrent  aux  marchands  Europeans  "  (2  vols.,  Brus
sels,  1789),  and  "  L'Amerique  du  Sud,  etudiee  au
point  de  vue  de  debouche  du  commerce  des  pays
soumis  a  la  domination  de  la  maison  d'Autriche"
(Mechlin,  1791).

MARTINDALE,  Henry  Clinton,  member  of
congress,  b.  in  Berkshire  county,  Mass.,  6  May,
1780;  d.  in  Sandy  Hill,  Washington  co.,  N.  Y.,  22
April,  1860.  He  was  graduated  at  W'illiams  in
1800,  studied  law,  and  established  himself  in  prac
tice  at  Sandy  Hill.  After  filling  various  local  of
fices,  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  and  re-
elected  for  the  three  succeeding  terms,  serving  from
1  Dec.,  1823.  till  3  March,  1831.  After  an  interval
of  one  term  he  was  returned  for  the  fifth  time,  and
served  from  2  Dec.,  1833,  till  3  March,  1835.— His
son,  John  Henry,  soldier,  b.  at  Sandy  Hill,  N.  Y.,
20  March,  1815  ;*d.  in  Nice.  France,  13  Dec.,  1881,
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1835,  and  attached  to  the  1st  dragoons,  but"  re
signed  on  10  March,  1836,  and,  after  a  brief  em
ployment  as  engineer  in  the  construction  of  a  rail
road,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1838,
and  began  practice  in  Batavia,  N.  Y.  He  held  the
office  of  district  attorney  of  Genesee  county  by  ap
pointment  of  the  court  in  1842-'o,  and  in  1847-'51
by  election  under  the  new  constitution  of  1846.
In  the  spring  of  1851  he  removed  to  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  and  there  followed  his  profession  until  the
civil  war.  On  9  Aug.,  1861,  he  was  commissioned
brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  He  won  credit
by  the  skilful  handling  of  his  brigade  during  the
peninsular  campaign.  At  Hanover  Court-IIouse,
with  about  1,000  men,  he  bore  the  attack  of  4,000
until  Gen.  Fitz-John  Porter  came  up,  and  thus
enabled  the  National  forces  to  achieve  a  complete
victory.  His  brigade  was  prominently  engaged  at
Gaines's  Mills  and  at  Malvern  Hill.  lii  the  retreat


MARTIN  DE  MOYVILLE


MARTINES


235


he  exclaimed  that  he  would  rather  stay  and  sur
render  than  desert  the  wounded.  For  this  expres
sion  Gen.  Porter  brought  charges  against  him.  and
after  recovering  from  a  severe  illness  he  demanded
a  court  of  inquiry,  which  fully  exonerated  him.
He  was  appointed  military  governor  of  Washing
ton  in  November.  1802.  where  he  remained  until  he
was  relieved  at  his  own  request  in  May.  1864,
joined  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler's  army, "and  in
the  operations  south  of  Richmond  and  the  siege  of
Petersburg  led  a  division.  He  subsequently  com
manded  the  18th  corps,  and  held  the  advanced  line
on  the  Appomattox  until  he  was  compelled  by  sick
ness  to  leave  the  field.  He  resigned  his  commis
sion  on  account  of  disability  on  13  Sept.,  1864.
For  gallant  conduct  at  Malvern  Hill  he  was  given
the  brevet  of  major-general  of  volunteers.  He
resumed  the  practice  of  law  in  Rochester,  and  in
1866-'8  was  attorney-general  of  New  York  state.
He  was  for  many  years  vice-president  of  the  Board
of  managers  for  soldier's  homes.

MARTIN  DE  MOYVILLE,  Edouard  Nicolas
Henry,  French  explorer,  b.  in  Calais  in  1715;  d.
in  Paris  in  1779.  His  father  was  a  "  fermier  gene
ral"  of  taxes,  and  the  son  followed  the  same  career
for  several  years.  Being  left  at  the  death  of  his
father  with  an  independent  fortune,  he  abandoned
this  pursuit,  and  opened  his  parlors  to  philosophers
and  authors.  But  his  former  profession  had  left
a  stain  upon  him,  and  he  resolved  to  emigrate  to
Canada,  which  the  peace  of  1748  had  restored  to
the  French.  Settling  in  Quebec  in  1749,  he  was
made  a  consulting  member  of  the  "  Conseil  sou-
verain  "  of  the  city,  and.  by  the  suggestion  of  the
governor-general,  purchased  a  vast  tract  of  land
west  of  the  peninsula  of  Upper  Canada.  After
several  unsuccessful  attempts  to  colonize  his  new
estate,  Martin  began  to  study  the  flora  of  Canada,
then  scarcely  known  to  Europeans.  During  five
years  he  explored  Lower  and  Upper  Canada,  Acadia,
Nova  Scotia,  and  Cape  Breton,  descending  as  far
smith  as  the  New  England  states,  west  to  Lake
Michigan,  and  north  to  Hudson  bay.  He  formed
an  herbarium  of  1,450  plants,  180  of  which  were
new.  The  war  of  1756  put  an  end  to  his  explo
rations,  and  he  returned  to  Paris.  On  his  arrival
he  immediately  sent  a  paper  to  the  Academy  of
sciences,  in  which  he  narrated  his  journeys,  and,"
being  invited  by  that  body  to  undertake  the  pub
lication  of  a  flora  of  Canada,  associated  himself
with  the  naturalist  Gaudin,  who  classified  the
plants  and  gave  them  scientific  names.  They
published  "  Flore  du  Canada  "  (6  vols.,  Paris,  1769) ;
'•  De  1'cicclimatation  des  plantes  Europeennes  au
Canada"  (2  vols.,  1771,  with  fig.) ;  and  "  Histoire,
description  et  proprietes  des  plantes  medicinales
de  la  vallee  de  Saint  Laurent  au  Canada  "  (2  vols.,
1773,  with  fig.).  Martin  published  "Journal  de
voyage  a  travers  la  Nouvelle  France  du  Nord  ou
Canada"  (1761);  "Expose  de  1'etat  du  Canada  de
1750  a  1756"  (1766)  ;  and  "Les  Six  Nations,"  an
essay  on  the  history  of  the  Canadian  Indians  (1772).

MARTIN  DE  MO  USSY,  Jean  Antoine  Vic
tor  (mar-tang),  French physician,  b.  in Moussy
le  Vieux,  26 June.  1810: d".  in  Bourg la  Reine.
near  Paris.  26  March,  1869. He  went  in  1841  to
Rio  de  Janeiro,  and  in  1842  to  Montevideo,  where  ;
he  practised  his  profession  with  success. Having  j
become  rich,  he  abandoned  medicine,  and  found-  '•
ing  an  astronomical  observatory,  which  he  after
ward  presented  to  the  city,  he  made,  during  ten  i
years,  valuable  observations  on atmospheric  cur-  ;
rents. In 1846.  during  the  siege  of  Montevideo
by  Rosas  and  Oribe,  by  his  suggestion,  the  foreign  ;
residents  formed  a  National  guard  divided  in  two  j


legions,  the  French  under  Col.  Thiebaut.  and  the
Italians  and  other  foreigners  under  Garibaldi.
Martin  was  elected  physician  of  both  legions,  which
rendered  valuable  services  to  the  city  in  preserving
order  and  checking  riots  till  the  peace  of  1852,
when  they  dissolved.  Martin  then  began  an  ex
ploration  of  the  river  Plate,  which  the  govern
ment  had  intrusted  to  him,  and  from  1855  till  the
end  of  1858  travelled  through  South  America,
making  a  survey  of  Plate,  Uruguay,  and  Paraguay
rivers.  In  1859  he  returned  to  France  on  account
of  failing  health.  An  account  of  his  travels  was
published  at  the  expense  of  the  Argentine  govern
ment.  His  works  include  "  Description  geo-
graphique  et  statistique  de  la  confederation  Ar
gentine"  (10  vols.,  Paris,  1860-'5) :  "Essai  sur  la
topographic  physique  et  medicale  du  departement
et  de  la  ville  de  Montevideo  "  (2  vols.,  1861) ;  and
•'  Une  annee  dans  les  Cordillieres  des  Andes  de
Chaco  et  de  Copiapo  "  (1865).

MARTINEAU,  Harriet,  English  author,  b.  in
Norwich,  England,  12  June,  1802;  d.  in  Amble-
side.  27  June,  1876.  She  was  descended  from  a
family  of  French  Huguenots  that  settled  in  Nor
wich  on  the  revocation  of  the  edict  of  Nantes.
Her  father  was  a  manufacturer  and  died  early,
leaving  eight  children  unprovided  for.  Harriet
received  a  good  education  under  the  supervision  of
her  uncle,  an  eminent  surgeon,  but  was  compelled
to  earn  her  own  livelihood.  Being  afflicted,  when
still  young,  with  a  constantly  increasing  deafness
and  a  total  lack  of  the  sense  of  smell,  she  found
her  chief  amusement  in  literary  composition,  and
ultimately  decided  to  depend  upon  her  pen  for  sup
port.  In  1834-'6  she  travelled  extensively  in  the
United  States,  and  on  her  return  recorded  her  im
pressions  of  American  life  and  institutions  in  a
work  entitled  "Society  in  America"  (3  vols.,  Lon
don.  1837).  She  also  published  "  Retrospect  of
Western  Travel "  (3  vols.,  1838),  which  gave  more
of  her  personal  experiences.  Her  health  became  so
seriously  affected  in  1839  that  she  was  long  obliged
to  desist  from  all  literary  occupation.  On  recov
ering,  through  the  agency,  as  she  believed,  of  ani
mal  magnetism,  she  published  in  1844  an  account
of  the  treatment  in  a  letter  which  excited  much
attention.  In  1852  Miss  Martineau  formed  a  con
nection  with  the  London  "  Daily  News,"  to  which
she  contributed  leading  articles  and  biographical
and  other  papers.  At  her  death  she  left  in  the
office  of  the  above-mentioned  journal  an  "  Auto
biography."  written  in  1855,  which  was  published
posthumously  (London,  1876;  Boston,  1877).  Miss
Martineau's  writings  are  very  numerous  and  in
clude  travels,  works  on  history,  political  economy,
and  philosophy,  and  stories  for  children.  Besides
those  already  mentioned,  she  published  two  books
referring  to  the  United  States,  "  The  Martyr  Age  "
(London,  1838)  and  "History  of  the  American
Compromises  "  (1856).

MARTINES,  Domingo  Jose"  (mar-tee'-nes),
Brazilian  insurgent,  b.  in  Lisbon,  Portugal,  in
1780;  d.  in  Bahia,  Brazil,  18  May,  1817.  He  was
a  merchant,  and,  becoming  involved  in  difficulties,
he  fled  to  South  America  in  1807  to  escape  punish
ment.  He  studied  law  in  Pernarnbuco,  and,  being
admitted  to  the  bar,  made  a  fortune  in  a  few  years.
But  the  particulars  of  his  former  life  becoming
known,  his  practice  began  to  diminish,  and  he
abandoned  his  profession  to  become  a  politician.
His  eloquence  won  him  many  partisans,  as  he  ad
vocated  the  independence  of  Brazil  and  republican
principles.  Entering  into  negotiations  with  Gen.
Victoriano  and  Gen.  Cavalcante,  he  received  prom
ise  of  support,  and  raising  a  corps  of  guerillas,  he


236


MARTINEZ


MARTINEZ  DE  ALDUNATE


began  in  1816  operations  against  the  royal  forces.
In  April,  1817,  his  followers  numbered  more  than
5,000,  and  the  Brazilian  government  organized
against  him  a  powerful  expedition  under  Col.
Mello.  During  the  following  month  several  bat
tles  were  fought  with  varying  success;  but  the
forces  of  Martines  diminishing  day  by  day,  and  re
solving  on  a  bold  enterprise,  he  marched  against
Bahia,  and  encountered  Col.  Mello  on  16  May.  in
the  valley  of  Ipajuco.  The  insurgents  were  finally
routed  and  Martines  taken  prisoner.  Pie  was  taken
on  the  following  day  to  Bahia,  tried  and  condemned
to  the  gallows  by  a  court-martial.

MARTINEZ,"  Enrique  (mar-tee'-neth),  some
times  improperly  called  ENRICO  MARTIN,  Mexican
engineer,  b.,  according  to  Torqucmada,  in  Ger
many,  but  probably  according  to  late  researches,
in  Ayamonte,  Andalusia,  about  1570 ;  d.  in  Mexico
in  1632.  He  studied  mathematics,  geography,  and
hydraulics,  was  appointed  cosmographer  to  the
king,  and,  coining  to  Mexico  as  interpreter  of  the
inquisition,  established  a  printing-office  in  that
city.  The  valley  of  Mexico  being  threatened  re
peatedly  with  inundation  by  the  overflow  of  the
lakes  of  Zumpango  and  San  Cristobal  into  that  of
Texcoco.  the  viceroy,  Marquis  de  Salinas,  appointed
a  scientific  commission  which  recommended  a  plan
that  was  proposed  by  Martinez  and  the  Jesuit  Juan
Sanchez  to  cut  an  open  canal  from  Lake  Zum-
pango  to  Cuautitlan  river  at  Huehuetoca,  and
thence  construct  a  tunnel  through  the  hills  of
Nochistongo,  the  lowest  spot  in  the  mountains
bounding  the  valley  on  the  north,  to  El  Salto  on
Tula  river.  Martinez  was  put  in  charge  of  the
work,  which  was  begun  on  28  Nov.,  1607,  with
great  solemnities.  More  than  15.000  Indians  were
employed  in  the  work.  After  scarcely  ten  months
of  labor  the  tunnel  was  finished,  and  on  23  Sept.,
1G08,  the  water  passed  through  it  for  the  first
time.  It  was  more  than  five  miles  long,  eleven
feet  wide,  and  fourteen  feet  high,  but  it  soon  proved
insufficient,  and  the  loose  earth  through  which  it
was  cut  began  to  crumble.  Martinez  asked  for  an
appropriation  to  enlarge  the  tunnel,  but  without
avail.  In  1614  the  Flemish  engineer  Boot  recom
mended  a  system  of  dikes,  which  failed  to  give  re-
lief.and  Martinez's  tunnel  was  maintained,  but  with
out  giving  him  the  means  for  the  required  enlarge
ment.  In  1623  the  new  viceroy,  Marquis  de  Guelves,
desiring  to  show  that  the  funnel  was  superflu
ous,  ordered  the  water  of  Cuautitlan  river  to  be  re
turned  to  its  former  bed,  and  the  entrance  of  the
tunnel  to  be  obstructed,  but  in  the  same  year  heavy
rains  fell  and  Lake  Texcoco  began  to  threaten  an
inundation  of  the  city.  The  communication  with
the  tunnel  of  Nochistongo  was  restored,  and  Mar
tinez  was  ordered  to  repair  it,  but  with  insufficient
means,  and  on  20  June,  1629,  heavy  rains  swelling  the
rivers,  the  dikes  broke  and  the  city  was  inundated
to  the  depth  of  nearly  six  feet.  Martinez,  accused
of  tampering  with  the  sluices  in  order  to  demon
strate  the  necessity  of  improving  the  tunnel,  was
imprisoned  by  order  of  the  viceroy.  The  city  re
mained  flooded  till  1632,  when  Martinez  was  set
at  liberty  and  ordered  to  finish  the  work  of  drain
age  by  enlarging  the  tunnel,  but  his  sufferings  and
a  cold  that  he  had  contracted  in  supervising  the
laborers  resulted  in  his  death  soon  afterward,  and
the  work  was  alternately  abandoned  and  resumed
at  the  approach  of  danger.  In  1637  it  was  resolved
to  change  the  plan  of  the  work  by  substituting  an
open  cut  through  the  mountain  for  the  tunnel.  A
Franciscan  monk,  Luis  Flores,  was  put  in  charge
of  the  work,  which  was  continued  with  many  in
terruptions,  and  was  not  finished  till  1767.  It  has


never  entirely  fulfilled  its  purpose,  and  it  is  prob
ably  reserved  for  American  enterprise  to  complete
the  project  of  draining  the  valley  of  Mexico.  The
cut  is  now  (1888)  about  ten  miles  long,  the  greatest
breadth  361  feet,
and  the  greatest
depth  197  feet,  and
the  Mexican  cen
tral  railway  runs
through  it  at  a
height  of  from  100
to  200  feet  above
the  water -course,
sometimes  almost
directly  over  the
canal.  In  1883  a
statue  was  erected
to  the  memory  of
Martinez  on  the
square  of  the  Sagra-
rio,  east  of  the  ca
thedral  of  Mexico.
(See  illustration.)
Martinez  wrote
"  Discurso  sobre  la
magna  conjuncion
de  los  planetas  Ju
piter  y  Saturno,
acaecida  en  24  I)i-

ciembre  1603  en  Sagitario"  (Mexico,  1604);  a  trea
tise  on  cosmography,  under  the  title  "  Repertorio
de  tiempos,  e  historia  natural  de  la  Nueva  Rspafta"
(1606,  printed  by  the  author);  and  other  works;
and  designed  thirty-two  maps  of  the  Pacific  coast
of  Mexico  and  plans  of  its  ports  and  bays  that  are
preserved  in  the  archives  of  the  council  of  Indies.

MARTINEZ,  Pedro,  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in
Celda,  Aragon.  15  Oct.,  1523;  d.  about  nine  miles
from  the  mouth  of  St.  John's  river,  Fla.,  6  Oct.,
1565.  He  took  a  vow  of  perpetual  chastity  when
he  was  a  boy,  ultimately  became  a  member  of  the
Society  of  Jesus,  and  in  1558  accompanied  the
army  of  Count  Alcahudete  in  the  African  cam
paign.  Before  setting  out  for  the  conquest  of
Florida  in  1565,  Menendez  applied  for  some  Jesuits
to  accompany  him.  Martinez  was  appointed  their
superior,  but  he  did  not  sail  with  Meriendez,  going
several  months  later  with  another  expedition.
When  the  vessel  came  within  sight  of  Florida,  it
took  a  northerly  direction,  different  from  that  of
the  other  ships.  The  captain,  on  reaching  the
shore,  directed  some  of  his  sailors  to  land  in  a  boat
and  explore  the  country.  They  refused  to  expose
themselves  to  unknown  dangers,  but  at  last  about
twelve  Belgians  and  Spaniards  consented  to  obey
if  Martinez  would  accompany  them.  The  Jesuit
at  once  leaped  into  a  boat  and  landed  with  the  ex
ploring  party,  being  thus  the  first  of  his  order  to
step  on  North  American  soil.  No  sooner  had  he
done  so  than  a  storm  arose  and  the  ship  was  driven
from  the  coast.  The  position  of  the  explorers  was
now  one  of  great  danger,  and  would  have  been
hopeless  but  for  the  energy  and  courage  with  which
Martinez  inspired  his  companions.  They  stayed
on  the  coast  for  ten  days,  and  met  with  many  ad
ventures  in  their  efforts  to  reach  a  settlement.  At
one  of  the  rivers  Martinez  waited  for  two  Belgians
who  had  been  exhausted  by  their  journey,  and  he
was  overtaken  and  killed  by  savages.

MARTINEZ  DE  ALDUNATE,  Jos6  Antonio,
Chilian  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Santiago  in  1730;  d.
there,  8  April,  1811.  He  studied  in  the  Jesuit
college  of  San  Francisco  Javier,  and  in  1755  was
graduated  as  doctor  in  theology  and  law  in  the
University  of  San  Felipe,  and  appointed  professor


MARTINEZ-CAMPOS


MARTY


237


of  sacred  law  there.  He  was  made  canon  and
counsellor  of  the  cathedral  of  Santiago  in  1757,
later  became  vicar-general,  and  was  twice  governor
of  the  bishopric.  In  1764  he  was  unanimously
elected  rector  of  the  university,  and  in  17G7  he  be
came  archdeacon.  He  was  made  assistant  bishop
in  1771,  consecrated  bishop  of  Concepcion  in  1778,
and  in  1803  promoted  bishop  of  Guamanga.  In
1809  he  was  nominated  for  the  archbishopric  of
Chili,  and,  being  confirmed  by  the  pope,  took  pos
session  of  his  see  early  in  1810.  He  joined  the
movement  for  independence,  and  was  elected  by
popular  vote  vice-president  of  the  first  revolution
ary  governing  junta.

MARTINEZ-CAMPOS,  Arsenic,  Spanish  sol
dier,  b.  in  Segovia,  Spain,  in  1831.  He  entered  the
army,  took  part  in  the  war  against  Morocco,  and
became  colonel  in  1859.  He  went  to  Mexico  under
Gen.  Prim  in  1802.  but  returned  to  Spain.  When
the  insurrection  began  in  Cuba,  he  was  sent  to  the
island  and  did  good  service.  In  1871  he  was  ap
pointed  governor  of  Santiago  de  Cuba,  and  in
1872  he  returned  to  Spain.  He  then  became  lieu
tenant-general  and  succeeded  in  bringing  to  an
end  the  Carlist  war.  In  1876  he  was  appointed
captain-general  of  Cuba,  and  after  many  efforts
and  by  means  of  a  conciliatory  policy  pacified  the
island,  and  terminated  the  civil  war  that  had  de
vastated  the  country  for  ten  years.  He  remained
governor  of  Cuba  until  1879,  and  did  much  to
secure  reforms  for  the  island.  He  has  since  been
prominent  in  Spanish  politics.

MARTINEZ  Y  COBBES,  Cristobal,  Cuban
musician,  b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  in  June,  1823;  d.  in
Genoa,  Italy,  in  1842.  When  he  was  ten  years
old  his  parents  took  him  to  Paris,  where  he  studied
music.  There  he  wrote  a  mass,  several  romances
and  songs,  and  a  comic  opera  with  the  title  "  Le
diable  contrebandier,"  which  was  performed  with
success  in  the  Theatre  de  la  opera  comique.  He
then  went  to  Genoa,  composed  another  mass,  a  sep-
tuor,  and  the  comic  opera  "  Don  Papavero,"  which
was  performed  at  Turin.  lie  was  engaged  in  the
composition  of  a  grand  opera  for  La  Scala,  Milan,
when  he  died  from  the  results  of  overwork.

MARTINEZ  DE  ROZAS,  Jnan,  South  Ameri
can  statesman,  b.  in  Mendoza,  Argentine  Republic,
in  1759;  d.  there  in  February,  1813.  He  studied
philosophy  and  theology  in  the  College  of  Mon-
serrate,  in  Cordova,  and  in  1780  went  to  Santiago
to  study  civil  and  canonical  law  in  the  University
of  San' Felipe,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1781.
He  was  appointed  in  the  same  year  to  the  chair  of
philosophy  in  the  Royal  college  of  San  Carlos,  and
was  the  first  in  Chili  to  teach  physics.  In  1782
he  also  taught  jurisprudence  in  the  same  college
and  at  the  University  of  San  Felipe,  and  in  1784
he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  the  audiencia,  being
graduated  in  1786  as  doctor  of  civil  and  canon
law.  He  was  appointed  assistant  intendant  of  the
province  of  Concepcion  in  1787,  fortified  the  fron
tier  line  of  Arauco.  founded  the  city  of  Linares,
and  in  the  rising  of  the  Araucanians  did  important
services  that  were  rewarded  by  the  rank  of  lieu
tenant-colonel.  In  1796  he  was  appointed  second
in  command  of  the  presidency  of  Chili.  He  began
in  1808  to  support  the  cause  of  independence,  and,
gaining  the  confidence  and  good-will  of  the  frontier
forces,  he  kept  up  an  active  correspondence  with
Gen.  Belgrano  and  other  Argentine  chiefs.  When
independence  was  declared,  he  was  appointed  a
member  of  the  first  governing  junta,  10  Sept.,
1810.  On  27  Feb.,  1811,  he  was  promoted  to  the
presidency  of  the  junta,  and  immediately  sent  an
auxiliary  force  of  400  men  to  Buenos  Ayres  to


assist  in  the  war  in  upper  Peru.  On  1  April  he
personally  quelled  a  mutiny  of  the  soldiers,  dis
solving  the  audiencia,  which  had  instigated  the
movement,  and  establishing  instead  the  court  of
appeals.  He  convoked  the  first  congress,  and
opened  it  with  an  eloquent  address,  which  is  pre
served  as  a  noteworthy  political  document.  After
Carrera  assumed  the  supreme  power  he  banished
Martinez  to  Mendoza,  where  he  died  soon  afterward.

MARTIUS,  Charles  Frederic  Philip  de
(mar-teens'),  German  botanist,  b.  in  Erlancren,  17
April,  1794  ;  d.  in  Munich,  13  Dec.,  1869.  He  was
graduated  at  Munich  in  1816  as  a  surgeon,  ap
pointed  in  the  following  year  physician  of  the  ex
pedition  that  was  sent  by  the  Bavarian  and  Aus
trian  governments  to  Brazil,  and  specially  charged
with  the  ethnographical  and  botanical  work.  The
expedition  achieved  few  satisfactory  results,  and
but  for  Martius  would  scarcely  be  remembered.
The  latter  studied  the  natural  history  of  the  coun
try  thoroughly,  and  collecting  notes  and  docu
ments  that  enabled  him  on  his  return  to  Europe  to
publish  "  Reise  nach  Brasilien  "  (3  vols.,  Munich,
1824-'32)  and  •'  Nova  genera  et  species  plantarum
Brasiliarum,"  the  most  complete  work  of  its  kind
according  to  Alexander  von  Humboldt  (3  vols.,
1824-'32).  Martius  was  a  member  of  many  learned
societies,  and  at  his  death  was  professor  of  botany
in  the  University  of  Munich.  He  also  wrote
"Genera  et  species  plantarum  Palmarum  "  (3  vols.,
1828-'4o);  ;' Die  Pflanzen  und  Thiere  des  tropi-
schen  Amerika "  (1831);  "Systems  materiae  medi-
cse  vegetabilis  Brasiliensis  'f  (Leipsic,  1843) ;  and
"  Flora  Brasiliensis,"  on  which  the  author  labored
twenty  years,  and  which  was  printed  at  the  ex
pense  of  the  Bavarian  government  (10  vols.,  Stutt
gart,  1840-'57).  Martius  wrote  also  several  less
important  works  on  Brazil.

MARTY,  Martin,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Schwyz,
Switzerland,  12  Jan.,  1834.  He  studied  in  colleges
in  Switzerland  and
Austria,  with  the  in
tention  to  fit  himself
for  the  medical  pro
fession,  but  he  after
ward  went  through
a  course  of  theolo
gy,  and  on  14  Sept.,
1856,  was  ordained.
He  came  to  the
United  States  to  as
sist  in  founding  a
new  Benedictine  ab
bey  and  college,  and
learning  on  his  ar
rival  that  Bishop  De
Saint  Palais,  of  Vin-
cennes.  was  in  need
of  German  priests,
he  went  thither  with
two  companions  in  1860.  After  consultation
with  the  bishop,  he  purchased  a  tract  of  7,000
acres  in  Spencer  county,  Ind..  part  of  which  ho
sold  to  colonists  whom  he  invited  from  Germany
and  Switzerland.  Through  his  efforts  Spencer
and  Dubois  counties  were  settled  almost  entirely
by  German  Roman  Catholics.  He  built  many
churches,  and  in  1865  erected  St.  Meinrad's  priory,
and  was  made  its  first  superior.  He  also  established
and  presided  over  a  theological  college.  In  1870
Pope  Pius  IX.  raised  St.  Meinrad's  to  the  rank  of
an  abbey,  formed  the  priests  connected  with  it
into  the  "  Helveto-American  congregation,"  and
appointed  Father  Marty  a  mitred  abbot.  He  re
signed  his  office  a  few  years  later  to  devote  himself


238


MARTYN


MARVIN


to  the  conversion  of  the  Indians,  and  went  to
Dakota,  where  he  spent  some  time  in  studying  the
Indian  languages,  that  of  the  Sioux  in  particular.
He  then  returned  to  St.  Meinrad's  and  wrote  a  Sioux
grain  mar  and  dictionary,  by  means  of  which  he
taught  twelve  priests  and  twelve  Sisters  of  Charity
to  speak  the  language,  afterward  taking  them
with  him  to  Dakota,  Father  Marty  soon  attained
great  influence  over  the  savages;  he  was  trusted  by
them  so  thoroughly  that  he  went  twice  into  the
camp  of  Sitting  Bull  at  a  time  when  the  Indian
had  sworn  death  to  every  white  man,  and  he  did
much  toward  protecting  settlers.  He  acted  thus
under  the  authority  of  the  U.  S.  government,
which  has  always  recognized  his  services  in  Indian
troubles.  In  1879  the  territory  of  Dakota  was
formed  into  an  apostolic  vicariate,  and  Dr.  Marty-
was  consecrated  bishop  of  Tiberias  in  parti  bus
on  1  Feb.,  1880.  When  he  went  to  Dakota  the  Ro
man  Catholic  church  had  hardly  any  existence
in  the  territory,  and  all  the  institutions  and  con
gregations  that  have  been  there  established  are  his
creation.  The  vicariate  now  contains  97  churches,
118  stations,  and  eight  missions  containing  nearly
30,000  Indians,  with  several  schools,  among  them
an  agricultural  school  at  Standing  Rock  agency,
in  which 'eighty  boys  are  taught.

MARTYN,  'Sarah  Towne,  author,  b.  in  Hop-
kinton,  N.  H.,  15  Aug.,  1805:  d.  in  New  York  city,
22  Nov.,  1879.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Rev.
Ethan  Smith,  by  whom  her  education  was  directed.
She  married  in  1841  Rev.  Job  II.  Martyn,  a  cler
gyman  of  Xew  York  city,  where  she  resided  for
twenty-five  years.  She  established  the  "Ladies'
Wreath,"  which  she  edited  from  184(5  till  1851,  but
which  she  resigned  on  the  removal  of  her  husband
to  Waukesha,  Wis.  On  her  return  to  New  York
she  began  writing  for  the  American  tract  society,
which  within  a  few  years  published  more  than
twenty  of  her  books.  She  wrote  fictions  of  a  semi-
historical  character,  illustrating  important  person
ages  and  events  in  church  history,  notably  those
connected  with  the  Reformation,  of  which  period
she  had  made  a  special  study.  She  also  contributed
many  essays  and  short  stories  to  periodicals.  Mrs.
Martyn  was  an  active  advocate  of  the  anti-slavery
and  temperance  reforms,  and  her  residence  in  New
York  city  was  a  centre  for  those  that  labored
in  their  behalf.  Among  her  books  are  "  Evelyn
Percival,"  "Allen  Cameron,"  "Happy  Fireside,"
"Huguenots  of  France,"  and  "Jesus  in  Bethany"
(New  York,  1865) ;  "  Effie  Morrison  "  and  "  Sybil
Grey "  (1866) ;  "  Hopes  of  Hope  Castle,"  "  Lady
Alice  Lisle,"  "  Margaret  of  Navarre,"  and  "  Will
iam  Tyndale"  (1867);  "Daughters  of  the  Cross,"
"  Nettie  and  her  Sister,"  "  Wilt'ord  Parsonage,"  and
"  Women  of  the  Bible  "  (1868) ;  "  The  Crescent  and
the  Cross  "  (1869) ;  "  Dora's  Mistake  "  (1870) ;  and
"Hillside  Cottage"  (Boston,  1872).  — Her  son,
William  Carlos,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  York  city,
15  Dec..  1841,  was  graduated  at  the  law-school  of
the  University  of  New  York  in  1863.  Before  com
pleting  his  course  he  acted  as  assistant  editor  to
several  New  York  journals,  and,  after  leaving  the
school,  began  the  preparation  of  a  series  of  bio
graphical  and  historical  works,  which  were  pub
lished  by  the  American  tract  society.  He  then
entered  Union  theological  seminary,  was  graduated
in  1809,  and  has  held  pastorates  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  and  New  York,  in  which  latter
city  he  still  (1888)  remains.  Besides  contributing
frequently  to  the  periodical  press,  Mr.  Martyn  has
published  "  Life  of  John  Milton."  "  Life  of  Martin
Luther."  and  "History  of  the  Huguenots"  (New
York,  1866);  "History  of  the  English  Puritans"


and  "  History  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  of  New  Eng
land  "  (18(57) :  and  "  The  Dutch  Reformation  "  (1868).

MARURE,  Alejandro  (mah-roo'-ray),  Guate
malan  geographer,  b.  near  Quezaltenango  in  1803;
d.  in  Guatemala  in  1866.  He  participated  in  the
struggle  of  his  country  for  independence,  and,  al
though  rich  and  with  the  prospects  of  a  political
career,  devoted  himself  to  scientific  researches,
and  studied  for  several  years  the  geological  forma
tion  of  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  which  was  com
paratively  unknown  before  him.  Among  his  pub
lications  are  "Efemerides  de  los  hechos  notables
acaecidos  en  la  Republica  de  Centre  America  desde
el  afio  1821,  hasta  el  de  1842"  (Guatemala,  1844);
"Atlas  de  Guatemala  en  ocho  cartas,"  which  was
engraved  and  printed  at  the  expense  of  the  gov
ernment  (1848) :  and  "  Memoria  sobrc  el  Canal  de
Nicaragua"  (1851).

MARVIN,  Dudley,  lawyer,  b.  in  Lyme,  Conn.,
6  May,  1786  ;  d.  in  Ripley,  Chautauqua  co.,  N.  Y.,  25
June,  1856.  He  received  an  academical  education,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1811,
after  removing  to  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  where  he
soon  won  reputation  in  his  profession.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  and  served  from
1  Dec.,  1823,  till  3  March,  1829.  When  he  en
tered  congress  one  of  the  more  important  pend
ing  questions  was  the  modification  and  revision  of
the  tariff.  As  second  on  the  committee  to  which
was  referred  the  investigation  into  the  amount  of
duties  paid  on  imported  woollen  goods,  he  drew  up,
in  the  absence  of  the  chairman,  an  elaborate  re
port,  which  was  subsequently  made  the  basis  of
the  measure  known  as  the  Woollen  bill.  In  1835
he  removed  to  New  York  city,  and  at  once  engaged
in  successful  practice;  but  in  1845  the  care  of
landed  interests  in  Chautauqua  county,  N.  Y.,  com
pelled  him  to  reside  there.  He  was  again  elected
to  congress  in  184(5,  and  served  till  3  March,  1849.
In  his  speech  in  1847  on  that  part  of  the  president's
message  that  referred  to  the  Mexican  war,  his  re
marks  on  the  question  of  slavery  in  the  territories
were  almost  prophetic  in  their  character.  As  a
lawyer  Mr.  Marvin's  distinguishing  characteristics
were  unusual  gifts  as  an  orator  arid  an  extreme
subtlety  of  observation  that  rendered  his  power  of
cross-examination  exceptional.

MARVIN,  Enoch  Mather,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Warren  county,  Mo.,  12  June,  1823 :  d.  in  St.
Louis,  Mo.,  3  Dec.,  1877.  He  entered  the  itinerant
ministry  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in
1841,  a'nd  filled  several  important  stations  in  the
St.  Louis  an  1  Missouri  conferences.  During  the
civil  war  he  was  in  Texas.  He  was  elected  bishop
of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  south,  in  1866,
and  in  1876  was  chosen  by  the  college  of  bishops
to  go  to  China  and  Japan  to  examine  native  mis
sionaries  and  to  ordain  native  preachers.  He  re
ceived  the  degrees  of  D.  D.  and  of  LL.  D.,  and  wrote
several  treatises,  one  of  the  most  important  of
which  is  the  "  Work  of  Christ."

MARVIN,  Joseph  Dana,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Bazetta,  Ohio,  2  Oct.,  1839 ;  d.  in  Yokohama,  Japan,
10  April,  1877.  He  entered  the  navy  as  acting  mid
shipman,  25  Sept.,  1856,  and  became  midshipman,
15  June,  1860,  and  was  promoted  master,  19  Sept.,
1861,  lieutenant,  16  July,  1862,  lieutenant-com
mander,  12  April.  1866,  and  commander,  12  Dec.,
1873.  He  served  as  executive  officer  of  the  "Mo
hican  "  at  both  attacks  on  Fort  Fisher,  and  su
perintended  the  fire  of  that  vessel  with  much  cool
ness  and  skill.  He  was  associated  with  Com.  Simp
son  in  1870  in  his  mission  to  Europe  "  to  inspect
its  principal  foundries,  ordnance  establishments,
dock-yards,  and  powder-magazines."  In  1871  ho


MASON


239


was  placed  in  command  of  a  battery  at  Annapolis.
Md.,  and  subsequently  ordered  to  special  ordnance
duty  as  assistant  to  the  chief  of  bureau.  In  Sep
tember,  1875,  he  took  command  of  the  "  Alert,"
on  board  of  which,  in  May.  1876,  he  sailed  for
China,  by  way  of  the  Suez  canal.

MASCARENE,  Jean  Paul,  governor  of  Nova
Scotia,  b.  in  Castras,  Languedoc,  France,  in  1684 ;
d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  22  Jan.,  1760.  He  was  of  a
Huguenot  family,  and  at  sixteen  years  of  age  was
expatriated,  and  went  to  Geneva,  Switzerland,
where  he  was  educated.  He  subsequently  removed
to  England,  was  naturalized  in  1706.  and  entered
the  British  army  as  a  lieutenant.  He  came  with
his  regiment  to  Xova  Scotia  in  1711,  rose  by  de
grees  to  colonel,  lieutenant-governor,  and  com-
mander-in-chief.  was  appointed  councillor  in  1720.
and  for  many  years  was  senior  member  of  the
board.  About  this  date  he  transmitted  to  the
plantation -office  a  complete  description  of  the
province,  with  suggestions  for  its  settlement  and
defence.  With  the  governors  of  Massachusetts
and  New  Hampshire  he  negotiated  the  treaty  of
1725  with  the  Indians.  He  was  acting  governor
of  Nova  Scotia  in  1740-'9.  and  in  1754  beat  off  the
French  under  Du  Vivier.  He  was  commissioned
major-general  in  1758.

MASCARENHAS  DE  CASTELLO  BRANCO,
Jose"  Joaqilim  (mas-cah-rain  -yas),  Brazilian  R.  C.
bishop,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  23  Aug.,  1731 ;  d.  there,
28  Jan..  1805.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Coimbra  in  1754,  ordained  priest  the  same  year,
and  became  judge  of  the  inquisition  successively
in  Evora.  Lisbon,  and  Rio  Janeiro.  In  1773  he
was  appointed  assistant  bishop  of  Rio  Janeiro,  and
consecrated  in  Lisbon.  Before  he  arrived  in  South
America  his  bishop  died,  and  he  therefore  took
charge  of  the  see  at  once,  on  15  April,  1774.  He
forced  the  clergy  of  his  diocese  to  pass  examina
tion  on  moral  theology,  in  spite  of  the  refusal  of
many,  particularly  the  Carmelite  monks.  He  also
established  lectures  for  his  clergy,  and,  unless  they
showed  a  certificate  of  attendance,  they  were  not
admitted  to  the  exercise  of  their  priestly  functions.
He  established  at  his  own  expense  in  the  seminary
of  the  diocese  classes  of  rhetoric,  philosophy,  geog
raphy,  cosmology,  and  natural  history,  and  found
ed  a  school  of  music.  In  1784  he  was  appointed
by  the  pope  general  visitor  of  the  Carmelite  con
vents,  and  established  strict  discipline.  Bishop
Mascarenhas  rendered  eminent  service  to  his  coun
try  in  promoting  the  public  wealth  by  introducing
coffee-seed  from  Asia  and  distributing  it  in  differ
ent  parts  of  Brazil.  He  also  gave  great  impulse  to
the  cultivation  of  indigo.

MASERES.  Francis,  British  author,  b.  in  Lon
don,  15  Dec.,  1731 :  d.  in  Reigate,  Surrey,  19  May.
1824.  His  father,  a  London  physician,  was  the  son
of  a  French  Huguenot,  who  settled  in  London.
Francis  was  educated  at  Kiugston-upon-Thames
and  at  Clare  hall.  Cambridge,  where  he  was  gradu
ated  in  1752.  He  subsequently  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  appointed  attorney-gen
eral  of  Canada,  which  office  he  held  till  1773,  re
siding  in  Quebec.  On  his  return  to  England  he
was  appointed  in  August,  1773,  to  the  sinecure
place  of  cursitor  baron  of  the  exchequer,  which  he
filled  with  great  reputation  till  his  death,  and  he
was  recorder  of  London  for  about  forty  years.  He
was  commonly  called  Baron  Maseres.  After  his
return  to  London  he  recommended  conciliatory
measures  in  dealing  with  the  American  colonies.
He  was  the  author  of  "  A  Dissertation  on  the  Nega
tive  Sign  in  Algebra"  (1758);  "The  Elements  of
Plane  Trigonometry  "  (1760) ;  "  An  Account  of  the


Labors  of  the  British  and  other  Protestant  Inhabi
tants  of  Quebec  in  order  to  obtain  a  House  of  As
sembly  "  (1775);  "The  Canadian  Freeholder"  (3
vols.,  1779) ;  "  Montesquieu's  View  of  the  English
Constitution  translated,  with  Notes  "  (1781) ;  "  The


"Scriptores  Optici"  (1823).

MASIAS,  Beato  Juan.  Peruvian  monk,  b.  in
Ribera,  Spain,  in  1585:  d.  in  Lima,  17  Sept..  1645.
He  was  born  of  poor  parents,  who  died  when  he
was  five  years  old,  and  he  spent  the  greater  part
of  his  youth  as  a  shepherd.  In  1619  he  sailed  for
Peru,  and  in  1622  entered  the  Dominican  convent
of  Lima  as  a  novice.  He  led  a  life  of  the  most
ascetic  character,  and  was  regarded  by  the  people
of  Peru  as  a  saint.  He  was  appointed  porter  of
his  convent  after  his  profession,  and  had  charge
of  the  distribution  of  alms  to  the  poor  and  to
strangers.  His  reputation  spread  over  all  Spanish
America,  and  large  sums  were  sent  him  from  Quito,
Potosi.  and  Mexico,  for  distribution  among  the
poor.  Miracles  were  believed  to  have  been  wrought
by  him,  and  when  he  fell  sick  of  his  last  illness
there  was  general  consternation  not  only  in  Lima,
but  in  Mexico.  He  was  beatified  by  Gregory  XVI.

MASON,  Caroline  Atherton,  poet,  b.  in  Mar-
blehead.  Mass.,  27  July,  1823.  Her  father  was
Calvin  Briggs,  a  physician.  She  was  educated  at
the  Bradford,  Mass.,  academy,  and  began  writing
when  quite  young.  One  of  her  early  poems,  "  Do
they  miss  me  at  Home?"  which  first  appeared  in
a  Salem,  Mass.,  newspaper,  obtained  immediate
and  widespread  popularity,  being  set  to  music  and
sold  in  this  country  and  in  England.  Several  of
her  other  poems  have  been  similarly  honored,  nota
bly  ''  The  King's  Quest."  She  has  contributed
largely  to  the  hymnology  of  the  Unitarian  church,
and  her  poetry  generally  is  strong  in  the  didactic-
element.  She  has  published  "  Utterance,  a  Col
lection  of  Home  Poems"  (Boston,  1852),  and  a
Sunday-school  story,  "  Rose  Hamilton  "  (1859).
She  resides  at  present  (1888)  in  Fitchburg,  Mass.,
and  continues  her  contributions  to  the  press.

MASON,  Charles,  astronomer,  b.  in  England  in
1730;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  February,  1787.
He  served  for  several  years  as  assistant  to  the  as
tronomers  royal  at  the  Greenwich  observatory,  and
was  associated  with  Jeremiah  Dixon  in  the  obser
vation  of  the  transit  of  Venus  on  6  June.  1761,  at
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  In  1763  both  gentlemen
were  commissioned  to  survey  the  boundary-line  be
tween  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland  by  the  respect
ive  proprietors  of  these  colonies.  They  arrived  in
Philadelphia  in  November,  1763,  and  began  their
work,  which  was  continued  along  the  parallel  of
latitude  39°  43'  26-3"  N.,  244  miles  west  from  the
Delaware  river,  beginning  at  the  northeast  corner
of  Maryland,  until  they  reached  a  point  within
thirty-six  miles  of  the  entire  distance  to  be  deter
mined,  when  they  were  compelled  to  suspend  op
erations  in  consequence  of  opposition  by  the  Indi
ans.  At  the  end  of  every  fifth  mile  a  stone  was
planted,  graven  with  the  arms  of  the  Penn  family
on  one  side  and  those  of  Lord  Baltimore  on  the
other.  The  intermediate  miles  were  marked  with
smaller  stones  having  a  P  on  one  side  and  an  M
on  the  other.  All  of  these  stones  were  sent  out
from  England.  Mason  and  Dixon  returned  to
I  Philadelphia  and  were  discharged  in  December,
1767.  This  line,  known  as  "  Mason  and  Dixon's
line,"  became  famous  in  the  history  of  the  United
States  as  marking  the  northern  limit,  with  the  ex
ception  of  portions  of  Delaware  and  Virginia,  of  the


MASON


MASON


slave-states.  Mason  and  Dixon  devoted  a  month
during  17(56,  at  the  request  of  the  Royal  astro
nomical  society,  to  determining  "  the  precise  meas
ure  of  a  degree  of  latitude  in  America  in  the  neigh
borhood  of  Pennsylvania,"  the  particulars  of  which
are  printed  in  vol.  Iviii.  of  the  "Transactions"  of
that  body.  In  the  same  volume  are  to  be  found
"  Astronomical  Observations  made  at  the  Forks  of
the  Brandywine  "  for  the  purpose  of  "  determining
the  going  of  a  clock  sent  thither  by  the  Royal  so
ciety  in  order  to  find  the  difference  of  gravity  be
tween  the  observatory  at  Greenwich  and  the  spot
where  the  clock  was  set  up  in  Pennsylvania."  Ma
son  was  a  trained  observer,  and  has  recorded  in  his
private  journal,  mingled  with  the  original  field-
notes  of  the  survey,  not  only  the  incidents  of  each
day  as  they  occurred,  with  the  name  of  every  per
son  whose'  hospitality  he  shared,  but  accounts  of
the  flora  and  fauna,  the  geological  structure  and
the  agricultural  capabilities  of  the  country,  inter
spersed  with  notices  of  the  Mohawk,  Seneca,  Dela
ware,  and  other  Indians  who  served  as  his  escort
or  whom  he  encountered  on  his  route.  He  dwells
with  enthusiasm  on  the  beauties  of  the  scenery  as
viewed  from  the  Alleghanies,  and  gives  a  tolerably
correct  account  of  the  Mississippi  valley  that  he
obtained  from  an  Indian  chief.  These  journals
were  accidentally  discovered  at  Halifax,  N.  S.,  in
1860,  in  a  pile  of  waste  paper  in  the  cellar  of  the
government-house  where  they  had  been  thrown.
Messrs.  Mason  and  Dixon  sailed  for  England,  9
Sept.,  1768,  and  the  following  year  Mason  observed
the  transit  of  Venus  on  3  June  at  Cavan,  Ireland.
He  was  subsequently  employed  by  the  Bureau  of
longitudes  to  verify  the  lunar  tables  of  Tobias
Mayer,  and  they  were  published  after  his  death  by
Nevil  Maskelyne  under  the  title  of  "  Mayer's  Lunar
Tables  improved  by  Charles  Mason "  (London,
1781).  Mason  returned  to  this  country,  but  at
what  date  is  unknown.

MASON,  David  Hastings,  journalist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  8  Jan.,  1828.  Between  1852  and
1867  he  was  editorially  connected  with  newspapers
in  Georgia  and  Tennessee.  In  the  last-named  year
he  settled  in  Chicago,  111.,  where  he  was  one  of
the  writers  on  the  "  Tribune "  and  the  "  Re
publican,"  and  subsequently  editor-in-chief  of  the
latter  paper.  In  1870  he  began  to  devote  himself
wholly  to  economic  questions,  and  especially  to
that  of  the  tariff.  In  1871  he  became  editor  of
"  The  Bureau,"  a  monthly  protectionist  magazine,
and  from  1873  till  1880  he  was  tariff  editor  of  the
Chicago  "  Inter-Ocean,"  subsequently  filling  the
same  place  on  the  Chicago  "  Herald."  He  is  the
author  of  a  large  pamphlet,  "  How  Western  Farm
ers  are  benefited  by  Protection " ;  of  arguments
before  the  ways  and  means  committee  of  congress
and  the  tariff  commission;  of  the  article  "Pro
tection,"  in  Lalor's  "  Cyclopaedia  of  Political  Sci
ence  " ;  and  of  "  A  Short  Tariff  History  of  the
United  States,"  of  which  only  the  first  part
(1783-'9)  has  been  published  (Chicago,  1884).  He
has  been  engaged  on  this  book  for  several  years,
and  proposes  to  bring  it  down  to  recent  times.  In
the  part  that  is  already  published  he  aims  to  show
that  the  recognition  of  the  necessity  for  a  protect
ive  tariff  was  the  chief  impelling  cause  of  the  con
stitutional  convention  and  of  the  adoption  of  the
constitution  of  the  United  States.

MASON,  Ebenezer  Porter,  astronomer,  b.  in
Washington,  Conn.,  7  Dec.,  1819  ;  d.  in  Richmond,
Va.,  20  Dec.,  1840.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1839,  and,  being  compelled  by  delicate  health  to
abandon  studies  that  he  had  undertaken  as  a  resi
dent  graduate,  he  joined  the  Maine  boundary  ex


pedition  in  1840.  This  failed  to  restore  his  health,
and  he  went  to  the  south,  but  without  avail.  He
published  occasional  poems  and  a  paper  on  "  Ob
servations  on  Nebuhe,"  which  appeared  in  the
"  Transactions  of  the  American  Philosophical  So
ciety"  for  1840,  and  elicited  favorable  comment
from  Sir  John  Herschel  ;  also  "  An  Introduction
to  Practical  Astronomy,"  appended  as  a  supple
ment  to  Olmsted's  "  Practical  Astronomy  (New
York,  1842).  See  his  "  Life  and  Writings,"  by
Denison  Olmsted  (New  York,  1842).

MASON,  Edward  Gay,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bridge
port,  Conn..  23  Aug.,  1839.  His  father,  Roswell,
was  a  civil  engineer,  and  became  mayor  of  Chica
go.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1860,
studied  law  at  Chicago,  was  for  several  years  a
member  of  the  firm  of  Mattocks  and  Mason,  and
afterward,  with  his  brothers,  Henry  and  Alfred,
formed  the  firm  of  Mason  Brothers,  which  enjoys  a
large  practice.  He  has  been  president  of  the  Chi
cago  bar  association  and  the  Chicago  literary  club,
is  president  of  the  University  club'of  Chicago,  and
in  November.  1887,  was  elected  president  of  the
Chicago  historical  society  to  succeed  Elihu  B.
Washburne.  Mr.  Mason  is  a  member  of  the  vari
ous  historical  associations,  has  published  pam
phlets  on  the  early  history  of  Illinois,  and  has
contributed  to  magazines,  etc.

MASON,  Francis,  missionary,  b.  in  Wai  in  gate,
York,  England,  2  April,  1799:  d.  in  Rangoon,
Burmah,  3  March,  1874.  His  father  was  a  shoe
maker  and  a  Baptist  local  preacher  in  the  city  of
York.  The  son  early  learned  his  father's  trade,
but  while  yet  a  lad  he  was  seized  with  a  passion
for  study,  and  acquired  a  fair  education  in  mathe
matics,  geography,  and  English  literature,  under
the  instruction  of  a  retired  naval  officer.  In  1818
he  came  to  the  United  States.  After  working  at
his  trade  in  various  places  he  married  in  1825.  and,
under  his  wife's  influence,  united  with  the  Baptist
church.  In  October,  1827,  he  was  licensed  to
preach,  and  soon  afterward  entered  Newton  theo
logical  seminary.  In  1830  he  sailed  for  Burmah  as
a  missionary.  He  landed  in  Maulmain  in  Novem
ber,  1830,  and  a  few  months  later  removed  to  Ta-
voy  to  become  the  helper  and  successor  of  George
I).  Boardman,  who  was  dying  of  consumption.  He
remained  at  Tavoy  about  twenty-two  years,  his
missionary  work  being  chiefly  among  the  different
tribes  of  Karens,  though  he  became  very  familiar
with  the  Burmese  language  as  well  as  the  Pali  and
Sanscrit,  and  could,  upon  occasion,  converse  or
preach  in  most  of  the  dialects  of  farther  India.
His  lingual  acquisitions  also  included  Talaing,  Sia
mese,  Chinese,  Syriac,  Hebrew,  Chaldee,  Arabic,
and  German.  Among  the  Karens  he  reduced  two
of  their  dialects,  the  Sagan-Karen  and  the  Pwo-Ka-
ren.  to  writing,  and  translated  the  Scriptures  into
both,  besides  making  some  progress  with  a  third,
the  Byhai-Karen.  He  also  conducted  a  seminary
for  the  education  of  native  preachers  and  teachers,
and  superintended  the  general  work  of  the  mission
for  a  considerable  period.  With  a  view  to  making
his  translations  of  the  Karen  Scriptures  more  in
telligible  and  accurate,  he  began  making  collections
of  notes  and  facts  concerning  the  fauna,  flora,
minerals,  and  ethnology  of  Burmah.  On  the  pub
lication  of  his  first  work,  "Tenasserim,  or  the
Fauna,  Flora,  Minerals,  and  Nations  of  British
Burmah  and  Pegu"  (1852;  enlarged  ed.,  1860),  he
was  elected  a  member  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  society.
In  1853  he  removed  to  Toungoo  and  published  the
whole  Bible  in  Karen,  his  version  of  the  New  Testa
ment  having  already  been  three  times  revised.  The
next  year  he  visited  England  and  America,  was


MASON


MASON


241


made  a  corresponding  member  of  several  American
and  European  learned  societies,  and  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Brown  University.  He  re
turned  to  his  work  in  1850  and  prepared  a  Pali
grammar,  with  chrestomathy  and  vocabulary,  and
an  edition  in  the  Pali  language  of  Kachchayano's
grammar,  besides  translations  from  Burmese^  Pali,
and  Sanscrit.  These  grammars  are  standard  works,
and  have  the  sanction  and  approval  of  both  the
Royal  Asiatic  and  the  Oriental  societies.  The  In
dia  government  purchased  the  greater  part  of  the
second  edition  of  his  '•  Tenasserirn,"  and  in  1872-'3
paid  his  expenses  to  northern  Burmah.  which  re
quired  further  exploration.  It  was  characteristic
of  Dr.  Mason  that,  finding  a  difficulty  in  getting
the  edition  of  1800  printed  according  to  his  ideas
at  Rangoon,  he  learned  the  printer's  art  when  past
sixty  years  of  age,  and  set  up  the  greater  part  of
the  work  himself,  producing  the  most  creditable
piece  of  book-printing  that  had  ever  been  done  in
Burmah.  Besides  the  works  already  mentioned,
he  prepared  the  first  book  published  "in  the  Karen
language,  "  The  Sayings  of  the  Polders,"  and  sub
sequently  a  small  work  on  pathology  and  materia
medica  for  his  students,  in  one  of  the  Karen  dia
lects,  having  studied  medicine  for  the  purpose.
He  published  in  English  "  Report  of  the  Tavoy
Mission  Society  ";  "  Life  of  Ko-Tha-Byu,  the  Ka-
reri  Apostle  " ;  "  Memoir  of  Mrs.  Helen  M.  Mason  "
(New  York,  1847) ;  "  Memoir  of  Sau  Quala  "  (Bos
ton,  1850) ;  and  "  Story  of  a  Workingman's  Life  "
(New  York,  1870).  He  also  contributed  largely  to
the  "  Missionary  Magazine,"  to  the  "  Transactions
of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,"  and  for  several  years
edited  the  ''Morning  Star,"  a  Karen  monthly,' pub
lished  in  both  the  Sgau  and  Pwo  dialects.

MASON,  George,  colonist,  b.  in  England  ;  d.  in
Stafford  county,  Va..  in  1080.  lie  was  the  first  of
the  Virginian  family  of  that  name  that  came  to
this  country.  He  lived  in  Staffordshire,  and  be
longed  to  the  family  of  Masons  settled  at  Strat-
ford-on-Avon.  He  commanded  a  troop  of  horse
under  Charles  II.,  and,  when  the  royalist  forces
were  defeated  at  Worcester  by  Cromwell  in  1051,
Mason  made  his  escape  disguised  as  a  peasant,  and,
embarking  for  this  country,  he  landed  at  Norfolk,
Va.  He  received  a  grant  of  land  in  Northumber
land  (afterward  Stafford)  county,  Va.,  in  1055,  for
transporting  eighteen  persons  into  the  colony.  He
was  sheriff  of  Stafford  county  in  1070,  and  county
lieutenant  in  1075.  Col.  Mason  represented  his
county  in  "  Bacon's  assembly "  in  1070.  He  was
conspicuous  in  Indian  warfare,  and  in  Bacon's  re
bellion  he  espoused  the  popular  side  in  the  house
of  burgesses.  In  the  acts  of  the  assembly  for  1075,
1079,  and  1084.  Col.  Mason  is  seen  to  be  actively
engaged  in  defending  his  frontier  county  against
the  Indians. — His  son,  George,  frontiersman,  b,  in
Stafford  county,  Va.,  about  1070;  d.  there  in  1710,
was  justice  of  the  peace  in  1089-'99,  and  captain  of
rangers.  In  1099-1700  he  was  county  lieutenant
of  Stafford,  under  Gen.  Nicholson,  and  was  engaged,
as  his  father  had  been  before  him,  in  the  defence
of  the  Potomac  region  against  the  Indians.  A
copy  of  his  will  is  preserved  in  the  archives  of  the
Virginia  historical  society. — The  second  George's
son,  George,  legislator,  b!  in  Stafford  county,  Va.,
about  1090 ;  d.  in  Charles  county,  Md.,  in  1735,  like
his  predecessors,  was  county  lieutenant,  receiving
his  commission  from  Gov.  Spotswood  in  1719.  For
courtesies  extended  to  the  Scotch  merchants  and
their  agents  in  Virginia,  he  was  complimented  by
being  made  a  li  burgess  and  gild  brother "  of  the
city  of  Glasgow  in  1720.  He  represented  Stafford
county  in  the  Virginia  assembly  in  1718-'23  and
VOL.  iv. — 16


1726.  The  county  originally  embraced  all  that
part  of  the  Northern  Neck  north  of  Westmoreland
county.  Col.  Mason  owned  estates  on  both  the  Mary
land  and  the  Virginia  side  of  the  Potomac,  arid
he  was  living  on  one  of  his  plantations  in  Charles
county,  Md.,  when  he  was  drowned  while  crossing
that  river.  The  mother  of  the  third  George  Mason
was  Mary  Fowke,  granddaughter  of  Col.  Gerard
Fowke,  of  "  Gunston  Hall,"  Staffordshire,  a  royalist
officer  who  came  to  Virginia  at  the  same  time"  with
the  first  Col.  Mason.  The  third  George  Mason
married,  in  1721,  Ann  Thomson,  daughter  of  Ste
vens  Thomson,  attorney-general  of  Virginia,  and
granddaughter  of  Sir  William  Thomson,  of  Lon
don. — The  third  George's  son,  George,  statesman,
b.  in  Doeg's  (afterward  Mason's)  Neck,  Stafford
(now  Fairfax)  co.,  Va.,  in  1725;  d.  there,  7  Oct..
1792,  after  his  marriage  built  Gunston  Hall,  or,
the  Potomac,  which  continued  in  the  family  until
after  the  civil  war.  It  is  situated  in  Truro  parish,


which  includes  Mount  Vernon.  There  he  resided
until  his  death.  (See  accompanying  illustration.)
In  1709  he  drew  up  the  non-importation  resolu
tions  which  were  presented  by  Washington  in  the
Virginia  assembly,  and  unanimously  adopted.  One
of  these  pledged  the  Virginia  planters  to  purchase  no
slaves  that  should  be  brought  into  the  country  after
1  Nov.  of  that  year.  In  support  of  the  political
rights  of  his  native  state,  Mason  printed  a  pamphlet
entitled  "Extracts  from  the  Virginia  Charters,
with  Some  Remarks  upon  Them,"  and  at  a  meeting
of  the  people  of  Fairfax,  18  July,  1774,  he  present
ed  a  series  of  twenty-four  resolutions  reviewing  the
whole  ground  of  controversy  between  Great  Brit
ain  and  the  colonies,  recommending  a  congress,
and  urging  non-intercourse  witli  the  mother-coun
try.  These  were  sanctioned  by  the  Virginia  con
vention  in  the  following  August,  and  substantially
reaffirmed  by  the  Continental  congress  in  October
of  the  same  year.  In  1775  the  convention  of  Vir
ginia  desired  to  elect  him  as  a  delegate  to  congress,
but  he  declined  for  family  reasons.  He  was  made
a  member  of  the  committee  of  safety,  which  was
charged  with  the  executive  government  of  the
colony,  and  in  1770  he  drafted  the  declaration  of
rights  and  the  constitution  of  Virginia,  which  were
unanimously  adopted.  James  Madison  pronounced
Mason  to  be  the  ablest  debater  he  had  ever  known.
His  talents  in  this  direction  were  displayed  in  the
first  legislature  that  was  held  under  the  new  con
stitution  of  Virginia,  when  he  brought  forward  a
measure  that  provided  for  the  repeal  of  all  the  old
disabling  acts,  the  legalizing  of  all  forms  of  wor
ship,  and  the  releasing  of  dissenters  from  the  pay
ment  of  parish  rates.  In  1777  he  was  elected  to
the  Continental  congress,  but  declined  to  serve.
Ten  years  later  he  was  a  member  of  the  conven-


242


MASON


MASON


tion  that  framed  the  constitution  of  the  United
States.  He  took  an  active  part  in  its  debates,
always  being  found  on  the  liberal  side.  In  the  dis
cussion  on  the  question  whether  the  house  of  rep
resentatives  should
be  chosen  directly  by
the  people,  he  main
tained  that  no  repub
lican  government
could  stand  without
popular  confidence,
and  that  confidence
could  only  be  secured
by  giving  to  the  peo
ple  the  selection  of
one  branch  of  the
legislature.  He  also
favored  the  election
of  the  president  by
the  people  for  a  term
of  seven  years  with
ineligibility  after
ward.  Propositions
to  make  slaves  equal
to  freemen  as  a  basis
of  representation  and  to  require  a  property  qualifi
cation  from  voters,  met  with  his  strong  disapproval.
He  also  spoke  with  great  energy  against  the  clause
that  prohibited  the  abolition  of  the  slave-trade  till
1808.  declaring  that,  as  slavery  was  a  source  of
national  weakness  and  demoralization,  the  general
government  should  have  power  to  prevent  its  in
crease.  In  some  of  his  attempts  to  render  the
constitution  more  democratic,  Mr.  Mason  was  de
feated  in  the  convention,  and  when  the  instrument
was  completed  he  declined  to  sign  it.  He  was  es
pecially  dissatisfied  with  the  extended  and  indefi
nite  powers  that  were  conferred  on  congress  and
the  executive.  On  his  return  to  Virginia  he  was
chosen  a  member  of  the  convention  to  which  the
constitution  was  referred  for  ratification  or  rejec
tion,  and,  with  Patrick  Henry,  led  the  opposition
to  its  adoption,  insisting  on  certain  amendments.
These  comprised  a  bill  of  rights  and  about  twenty
alterations  in  the  body  of  the  measure,  several  of
which  were  afterward  adopted.  He  was  elected
the  first  U.  S.  senator  from  Virginia,  but  declined,
and  retired  to  Gunston  Hall,  where  he  resided  un
til  his  death.  Mr.  Mason  is  referred  to  by  Thomas
Jefferson  as  "  a  man  of  the  first  order  of  wisdom,
of  expansive  mind,  profound  judgment,  cogent  in
argument,  learned  in  the  lore  of  our  former  con
stitution,  and  earnest  for  the  republican  change  on
democratic  principles."  He  is  described,  when
fifty  years  of  age,  as  of  commanding  presence  and
lofty  bearing,  of  an  athletic  and  robust  frame,  a
swarthy  complexion,  with  black  hair  sprinkled  with
gray,  a  grave  face,  and  dark,  radiant  eyes.  His
statue  stands,  with  those  of  Jefferson,  Henry,  and
other  illustrious  Virginians,  at  the  base  of  Craw
ford's  colossal  statue  of  Washington  in  front  of
the  capitol  at  Richmond. — The  fourth  George's
brother,  Thomson,  lawyer,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1733;
d.  there  in  1785,  studied  law  in  London  and  at
tained  to  eminence  at  the  bar.  He  sat  in  the  Vir
ginia  assembly  for  ten  years  before  the  Revolution,
and  took  strong  ground  against  the  aggressions  of
the  British  government.  As  early  as  1774  he  pub
lished  a  series  of  papers  in  which  he  maintained
the  duty  of  open  resistance  to  the  mother-country.
The  early  numbers  of  the  series  were  signed  "  A
British  American,"  but,  with  rare  courage  consider
ing  the  circumstances,  to  the  concluding  one  he
appended  his  own  name.  In  1778  he  was  appoint
ed  a  member  of  the  first  supreme  court  of  Virginia,


but  lie  did  not  long  occupy  the  bench.  He  was
afterward  one  of  the  live  judges  of  the  general
court.  Subsequently  he  was  nominated,  with  his
brother,  one  of  the  revisers  of  the  state  laws  by  the
senate.  In  1779  and  1783  he  was  elected  a  member
of  the  house  of  delegates,  and  served  as  chairman
of  the  committee  on  courts  of  justice. — Thomson's
son,  Stevens  Thomson,  senator,  b.  in  Stafford
county,  Va.,  in  17(iO;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  10
May,  1803,  was  educated  at  William  and  Mary  col
lege.  He  served  as  a  volunteer  aid  to  Gen.  Wash
ington  at  the  siege  of  Yorktown,  and  was  after
ward  a  general  of  militia.  He  was  a  member  of
the  house  of  delegates,  sat  in  the  State  constitu
tional  convention  in  1788,  and  was  then  elected  to
the  U.  S.  senate,  where  he  served  from  7  Dec.,  1795,
till  3  March,  1803.  Much  comment  was  caused  by
his  action  regarding  the  Jay  treaty.  John  Jay
had  been  sent  to  England  in  1794  to  negotiate  a
treaty  that  should  settle  all  existing  differences
between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain.  In
June,  1795,  it  was  laid  before  the  senate,  and  its
provisions  were  fiercely  discussed  for  a  fortnight
in  secret  session,  when  it  was  ratified  by  barely  a
constitutional  majority,  20  to  10.  The  senate  then
removed  the  seal  of  secrecy  from  its  proceedings,
but  forbade  any  publication  of  the  treaty  itself.
Enough  of  its  "character,  however,  had  been  re
vealed  to  cause  it  to  be  violently  attacked  by  the
press,  when  Mason  caused  first  a  full  abstract  and
afterward  a  perfect  copy  of  it  to  be  published  in
the  Philadelphia  "Aurora."  For  this  action  he
was  extolled  by  the  Republicans  (the  Democrats
of  that  day),  but  bitterly  assailed  by  the  Federal
ists.  The  popular  clamor  was  so  great  against  the
treaty  that  its  supporters  were  threatened  with
mob  violence  in  the  large  cities,  Alexander  Ham
ilton  being  assaulted  at  an  open-air  meeting  in
New  York.  "These  are  hard  arguments,"  he  is
said  to  have  exclaimed  as  a  stone  struck  him  on
the  head.  Mason  was  a  warm  personal  friend
of  Thomas  Jefferson,  and  always  his  stanch  po
litical  ally.  He  enjoyed  great  personal  populari
ty,  and  as  an  orator  his  exceptional  command  of
wit  and  sarcasm  gained  him  a  wide  reputation. —
Another  son  of  Thomson,  John  Thomson,  law
yer,  b.  in  Stafford  county,  Va.,  in  1764;  d.  in  De
cember,  1824,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  in  early  life  removed  to  Maryland,  where  he
took  high  rank  in  his  profession.  The  office  of
U.  S.  attorney-general  was  offered  him  by  Presi
dent  Jefferson,  and  in  1806,  by  the  state  of  Mary
land,  those  of  chief  justice  and  attorney-general,
all  of  which  he  declined,  or  occupied  only  for  a
brief  period.  In  1811  he  refused  the  office  of  U.  S.
attorney-general  a  second  time  on  its  being  offered
to  him  by  President  Madison.  In  1816  he  was  the
Democratic  candidate  for  U.  S.  senator,  in  opposi
tion  to  Robert  G.  Harper,  but  lost  the  election  by
a  single  vote. — Armistead  Thomson,  senator,
son  of  Stevens  Thomson,  b.  in  London  county,
Va.,  in  1787;  d.  in  Bladensburg,  D.  C.,  6  Feb.,
1819,  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in  1807,
engaged  in  farming,  and  served  as  colonel  of  a  cav
alry  regiment  during  the  war  of  1812.  He  subse
quently  became  brigadier-general  of  Virginia  mili
tia.  He  sat  several  years  in  the  state  legislature,
and  in  1815  was  elected  U.  S.  senator,  serving
from  22  Jan..  1816,  till  3  March,  1817,  when  he  re
signed,  at  the  suggestion  of  his  friends,  to  contest
the  strongly  Federal  congressional  District  of  Lou-
don.  It  was  supposed  that  he  alone  could  com
pete  successfully  with  the  opposing  candidate,
Charles  F.  Mercer,  but  he  was  defeated  by  a  small
majority.  The  contest  was  one  of  great  personal


MASON


MASON


243


bitterness,  and  gave  rise  to  several  duels,  among
them  the  encounter  with  his  brother-in-law.  John
M.  McCarty,  which  resulted  in  Mason's  death  at
the  age  of  thirty-two.  The  quarrel  was  an  exceed
ingly  violent  one,  and  Mason  insisted  that  his  op
ponent  should  fight,  while  McCarty  did  all  in  his
power  to  avoid  a  meeting.  The  latter  at  first  pro
posed  that  muskets,  charged  with  buckshot,  should
be  used  and  the  distance  fixed  at  twelve  feet.
This  was  finally  increased  to  six  paces,  and  a  sin
gle  ball  was  substituted  for  buckshot.  Col.  Mason
fell  at  the  first  fire  and  died  before  he  could  be
removed  from  the  field.  lie  left  an  only  child,
Stevens  Thomson,  who  subsequently  volunteered
in  the  Mexican  war,  was  promoted  captain  of
rifles,  and  fell  mortally  wounded  while  making  a
charge  on  the  enemy  at  Cerro  Gordo. — The  fourth
George's  grandson.  Richard  Barnes,  soldier,  b.
in  Fairfax  county.  Va..  10  Jan.,  1797;  d.  in  St.
Louis,  Mo.,  25  July,  1850,  was  appointed  2d  lieu
tenant  in  the  8th"  U.  S.  infantry,  2  Sept.,  1817.
He  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant  in  the  same  month,
and  made  captain,  31  July,  1819,  major,  1st  dra
goons,  4  March,  1833,  lieutenant-colonel,  4  July,
183(5.  and  colonel.  30  June,  1840.  He  was  brevette'd
major,  31  July,  1829,  for  ten  years'  faithful  service
in  one  grade,  and  brigadier-general,  30  May,  1848,
for  meritorious  conduct.  He  served  in  the  Black
Hawk  war  and  commanded  the  U.  S.  forces  in  Cali
fornia,  being  ex-officio  the  first  military  and  civil
governor  of  that  state. — James  Murray,  senator,
another  grandson  of  the  fourth  George,  b.  on  Ma
son's  island,  Fairfax  co.,  Va..  3  Nov.,  1798;  d.  near
Alexandria,  Va.,  28  April.  1871,  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1818,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  to  practise
in  Winchester,  Va.  He  was  a  member  of  the
house  of  delegates  from  1820  till  1832,  of  the  Vir
ginia  constitutional  convention  in  1829.  a  presiden
tial  elector  on  the  Jackson  ticket  in  1833,  and  was
elected  a  member  of  congress  as  a  Jackson  Demo
crat,  serving  from  4  Sept.,  1837,  till  3  March,  1839.
At  the  expiration  of  his  term  he  was  offered  a  re
election,  but  declined,  and  returned  to  the  prac
tice  of  his  profession.  In  1847  he  was  elected  by
the  Virginia  legislature  U.  S.  senator,  to  fill  an  un-
expired  term,  and  was  twice  re-elected.  His  last
term  would  have  expired  in  1803.  but  he  left  his
seat  early  in  1801  on  the  secession  of  his  state.
During  his  term  of  fourteen  years,  although  he
made  no  notable  speeches  and  was  never  regarded
as  a  brilliant  senator,  he  manifested  a  capacity
for  steady  work,  which  made  him  a  valuable
member.  For  ten  years  he  was  chairman  of  the
committee  on  foreign  relations.  A  decided  Demo
crat  and  a  strict  constructionist  of  the  State-rights
school,  he  vehemently  opposed  all  anti-slavery  agi
tation,  and  was  the  author  of  the  fugitive-slave
law  of  1850.  His  arguments  in  its  favor  were
characterized  by  much  of  the  vindictive  sectional
feeling  and  partisan  eloquence  of  that  day.  In
the  autumn  of  1801  he  was  appointed,  with  John
Slidell.  Confederate  commissioner  to  England,  and
set  sail  from  Charleston  for  Cuba  on  12  October.
After  remaining  a  few  days  at  Havana,  where
they  were  formally  received  by  the  captain-gen
eral,  the  commissioners  took  passage  on  the  Brit
ish  mail-steamer  "  Trent."  and  were  passing  through
the  Bahama  channel  when  they  were  captured  by
Capt.  Charles  \Vilkes.  brought  to  the  United
States,  and  subsequently  confined  in  Fort  Warren,
Boston  harbor.  After  his  release,  on  2  Jan.,  1802,
on  the  demand  of  the  British  authorities,  Mr.  Ma
son  and  his  colleague  sailed  for  Europe,  where
they  continued  to  urge  the  recognition  of  the  Con-


|  federacy  until  its  final  collapse.  At  the  close  of
the  war  Mr.  Mason  went  to  Canada,  where  he  re
mained  three  years,  but  he  returned  to  Virginia  in
1808,  and  resided  there  until  his  death. — Stevens
Thomson,  governor  of  Michigan,  grandson  of
Stevens  Thomson,  b.  in  Loudoun  county,  Va.,  in
1811 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  4  Jan.,  1843,  was  taken
to  Kentucky  by  his  father,  John  T.  Mason,  where
he  was  educated.  In  1831  he  was  appointed  by
President  Jackson  secretary  of  the  territory  of
Michigan,  and  in  that  capacity,  on  the  transfer  of
the  governor,  Lewis  Cass,  to  the  war  department
at  Washington,  he  became  acting  governor.  Dur
ing  this  period  a  controversy  began  between  Ohio
and  Michigan  regarding  their  boundary-line.  It
excited  intense  interest  and  aroused  bitter  feelings,
and  thousands  of  troops  were  marched  to  the  fron
tier  in  expectation  of  a  bloody  conflict.  Gov.  Ma
son,  throughout  the  entire  controversy,  though  but
a  mere  youth,  acted  with  calmness,  ability,  and
courage.  In  1835,  when  the  territory  became  a
state,  he  was  unanimously  elected  its  first  gov
ernor,  and  at  the  end  of  his  term  was  re-elected.
On  leaving  office  in  1839  he  retired  from  public
life,  and.  removing  to  New  York  city,  began  the
practice  of  the  law. — Stevens  Thompson  Mason's
sister,  Emily  Virginia,  b.  in  Lexington,  Ky.,  15
Oct..  1815,  was  educated  at  Troy  female  seminary,
X.  Y.  For  several  years  before  the  civil  war  she
resided  in  Fairfax  county,  Va.,  and  when  hostili
ties  began  she  left  her  home  near  Alexandria  and
offered  her  services  in  the  Confederate  hospitals.
She  served  as  matron  at  Greenbrier,  White  Sul-
|  phur  Springs,  Charlottesville,  Lynchburg,  and
Richmond,  Va.,  successively.  In  order  to  obtain
money  to  educate  the  orphan  daughters  of  Con
federate  soldiers,  Miss  Mason  collected  and  ar
ranged  ''Southern  Poems  of  the  War"  (Balti
more,  1807),  which  met  with  a  very  large  sale.
After  the  war  she  spent  fifteen  years  in  Paris,
France,  most  of  the  time  acting  as  assistant  prin
cipal  of  an  American  school  for  young  ladies.  Miss
Mason  has  written  a  "  Life  of  Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee  "
(Baltimore,  1871),  and  has  also  edited  the  "Journal
of  a  Young  Lady  of  Virginia  in  1782  "  (1871).

MASON,  George  Chaniplin,  author,  b.  in  New
port,  R.  I.,  17  July,  1820.  He  is  a  great-nephew  of
Christopher  Grant  Champlin  (q.  v.).  He  was  edu
cated  at  Newport,  and  has  followed  the  profession
of  an  architect,  chiefly  in  that  city.  He  has  been
for  thirty  years  a  director  of  the  Redwood  library
in  Newport,  and  a  trustee  of  the  Newport  hospital
from  its  foundation  in  1873.  Besides  editing  the
Newport  "  Mercury  "  from  1851  till  1858  and  other
wise  contributing  to  the  press.  Mr.  Mason  has  pub
lished  "  Newport  and  its  Environs "  (Newport,
1848) ;  "  Newport  Illustrated  "  (New  York,  1854) ;
"  The  Application  of  Art  to  Manufactures "  and
"George  Ready,"  a  story  (1858);  "Reunion  of  Sons
and  Daughters  of  Newport."  (Newport.  1859) :  "New
port  and  its  Cottages"  (Boston.  1875):  "The  Old
House  Altered  "  (New  York,  1878) ;  "  The  Life  and
Works  of  Gilbert  Stuart"  (1879);  and  "Reminis
cences  of  Newport "  (Newport.  1884).

MASON,  James Louis,  soldier,  b. in Provi
dence,  R.  I.,  in  1817; d.  in  San  Francisco.  Cal.,  5
:  Sept.,  1853. He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
'  tary  academy  in  1830.  standing  second  in  his  class.
j  and  was  made  2d  lieutenant  in  the  corps  of  engi-
!  neers. During  183G-'40  he  served  as  assistant  in
!  building  Fort  Adams.  Newport.  R.  I.,  as  superin-
,  tendent  engineer  of  the  construction  of  the  pier,
dike,  and  light-house  on  Goat  island  in  Newport
harbor,  and  of  the  building  of  Fort  Montgomery,
N.  Y. He  participated  in  the  war  with  Mexico,


244


MASON


MASON


and  was  engaged  at  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz  and  the
battle  of  Cerro  Gordo,  becoming  captain  of  en
gineers  on  24  April,  1847.  Subsequently  he  was
present  at  the  capture  of  San  Antonio  and  the
battles  of  Contreras,  Churubusco,  and  Molino  del
Key,  receiving  wounds  that  prevented  his  return
to  active  service  until  1850.  Thereafter  he  served
as  superintending  engineer  of  Fort  Marion  and
Fort  Clinch.  Fla.,  and  in  the  construction  of  the
defences  at  Fort  Point,  San  Francisco,  Cal.  For
his  services  in  Mexico  he  received  the  brevets  of
major  and  lieutenant-colonel.  Besides  various  mili
tary  and  scientific  memoirs  and  reports,  he  pub
lished  •'  An  Analytical  Investigation  of  the  Resist
ance  of  Piles  to  Superincumbent  Pressure  "  (1850).
MASON,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  England  in  1(500 ;
d.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  in  1073.  After  serving  in
the  Netherlands  under  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax,  he
came  about  1630  to  Dorchester,  Mass.,  whence  in
1635  he  removed  to  Connecticut,  and  aided  in
founding  there  the  town  of  Windsor.  The  slaugh
ter  of  a  party  of  whites  at  Wethersfield  by  Pequot
Indians  in  "April,  1637,  called  for  retaliatory
measures,  and  Mason  was  commissioned  by  the
general  court  to  descend  the  Connecticut  with
ninety  men  and  attack  the  savages  at  the  mouth
of  Pequot  (now  Thames)  river.  Accompanied  by
seventy  friendly  Mohegan  Indians,  he  reached  the
English  fort  at  Saybrook  in  the  middle  of  May,
and  put  off  into  Long  Island  sound,  intending  to
follow  the  coast  to  the  Narragansett  country,  and
fall  upon  his  enemies  by  a  retrograde  inarch
along  the  shore.  On  the  23d  he  landed  in  Narra
gansett  bay,  near  Point  Judith,  secured  the  co
operation  of  200  Narragansetts,  and,  having  sent
back  his  boats  to  meet  him  at  the  mouth  of  the
Pequot,  proceeded  by  quick  marches  to  Mystic
river,  in  the  neighborhood  of  which  wrere  the
enemy's  two  principal  forts.  Although  his  Indian
allies  were  now  swelled  in  numbers  to  about  500,
such  was  their  terror  of  the  Pequots  that  Mason
was  compelled  to  begin  the  attack  almost  unaided.
Before  daybreak  on  the  26th  he  surprised  the
nearest  fort,  and,  gaining  an  entrance  within  the
palisades,  fell,  sword  in  hand,  upon  the  enemy.
Finding  it  difficult. to  dislodge  the  Indians,  he  set
fire  to  their  wigwams,  the  whites  and  their  allies
forming  a  circle  around  the  fort  to  prevent  escape.
Between  600  and  700  Pequots  perished,  seven  were
captured,  and  seven  escaped.  Of  the  English,  two
were  killed  and  twenty  wounded.  He  then  marched
to  the  mouth  of  Pequot  river,  into  which  his  ves
sels  sailed  soon  afterward.  They  were  attacked  on
the  way  by  300  Indians  from  the  other  fort,  who
soon  retired.  Mason,  putting  his  wounded  aboard
the  vessels,  marched  with  a  small  detachment  by
land  to  Saybrook.  Aided  by  a  party  from  Massa
chusetts,  he  then  pursued  the  remnant  of  the  Pe
quots  toward  New  York,  killed  and  captured  many
more,  and  divided  the  few  who  remained  in  Con
necticut  between  the  Mohegans  and  Narragansetts,
stipulating  that  the  very  name  of  Pequot  should
become  extinct.  By  these  prompt  measures  a  hand
ful  of  whites  was  within  a  few  weeks  enabled  to
annihilate  a  powerful  native  tribe  and  to  secure  a
general  peace  with  the  Indians,  which  remained
unbroken  for  forty  years.  After  the  Pequot  war
he  settled  at  Saybrook,  at  the  request  of  the  inhabi
tants,  for  the  defence  of  the  colony,  whence  in
1659  he  removed  to  Norwich.  He  was  major  of
the  colonial  forces  more  than  thirty  years,  and  be
tween  1660  and  1670  he  was  deputy  governor  of
Connecticut.  He  was  also  a  magistrate  from  1642
till  1668.  At  the  request  of  the  general  court  of
Connecticut  he  prepared  an  account  of  the  Pequot


war,  published  by  Increase  Mather  in  his  "  Relation
of  Trouble  by  the  Indians"  (1677),  and  republished,
with  an  introduction  and  notes,  by  the  Rev.  Thomas
Prince  (Boston,  1736).  See  his  "  Life,"  by  George
E.  Ellis,  in  Sparks's  "American  Biography"  (Bos
ton,  1844). — Jeremiah,  senator,  fifth  in  "descent
from  Maj.  John  Mason,  b.  in  Lebanon,  Conn.,  27
April,  1768 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  14  Oct.,  1848,  was
the  son  of  Jere
miah,  a  colonel  in
the  Revolutionary
army,  who  com
manded  a  com
pany  of  minute-
men  at  the  siege
of  Boston.  The
son  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1788,
admitted  to  the
bar  in  1791,  and
began  to  practise
at  Westmoreland,
N.  II.  He  removed
to  Walpole  in
1794,  and  to  Ports-  0,

mouth,  N.  II.,  in  of,  ^AAJ^i^-i-i.

1797,  and  ere  long  ^

became engaged

in  an  extensive  practice.  In  1802  he  was  appointed
attorney-general  of  New  Hampshire.  In  1807  Dan
iel  Webster  came  to  Portsmouth,  and  lie  and  Mr.
Mason  were  on  opposite  sides  in  most  of  the  im
portant  cases  in  New  Hampshire.  He  was  elected
to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Federalist,  serving  from  13
June,  1813,  until  1817,  when  he  resigned  to  resume
the  practice  of  his  profession.  While  in  the  senate
he  took  an  active  part  in  debates  on  subjects  that
grew  out  of  the  war  of  1812.  He  was  with  diffi
culty  induced  to  prepare  any  of  his  speeches  for
the  press.  Those  that  were  written  out  most  fully
by  him  are  on  the  "Embargo"  and  on  the  Con
scription  bill,  and  were  delivered  respectively  in
1814  and  1815.  He  was  for  several  sessions  a  mem
ber  of  the  New  Hampshire  legislature,  in  which  he
took  an  active  part  in  the  revision  of  the  state  code.
He  drafted  the  report  of  the  legislature  on  the
Virginia  resolutions  referring  to  the  Missouri  com
promise.  In  1829  Mr.  Mason  was  the  involuntary
cause  of  the  repeal  of  the  charter  of  the  U.  S.  bank.
He  had  been  appointed  president  of  the  Ports
mouth,  N.  II.,  branch  of  that  institution,  and  by
his  skilful  management  and  legal  acumen  had  saved
the  bank  a  large  amount  of  money,  with  the  loss  of
which  it  was  threatened  through  the  operations  of
a  defaulter.  Isaac  Hill,  of  New  Hampshire,  then
second  comptroller  of  the  treasury,  and  other  ad
herents  of  Jackson  in  that  state,  were  anxious  to
secure  Mason's  removal,  and  based  a  movement
looking  to  that  end  on  some  slight  dissatisfaction
caused  by  Mason's  vigor  in  enforcing  the  payment
of  certain  protested  notes,  and  generally  by  the
prompt  and  uncompromising  discharge  of  his  offi
cial  duties.  It  was  also  charged  that  Mason  owed
his  appointment  to  political  influence,  and  espe
cially  to  being  the  friend  of  Daniel  Webster,  and
two  petitions  were  forwarded  to  the  parent  bank
urging  his  removal.  These  led  to  a  correspond
ence,  lasting  from  June  till  October,  that  finally  re
solved  itself  into  a  passage-at-arms  between  Nicho
las  Biddle,  president  of  the  U.  S.  bank,  and  Sam
uel  D.  Ingham,  secretary  of  the  treasury,  which  re
sulted  in  President  Biddle's  refusal  to  entertain
the  protests.  On  the  contrary,  the  bank,  by  way
of  answer,  re-elected  the  implicated  official.  The
victory,  however,  was  short-lived,  as  in  his  message


MASOX


MASON


245


to  congress  in  December  President  Jackson,  in
censed  because  he  could  not  dispose  of  the  bank
appointments  like  other  Federal  patronage,  in  a
brief  paragraph  sounded  what  proved  to  be  the
death-knell  of  the  institution.  In  the  summer  of
1832  Mason  removed  to  Boston,  and,  although
sixty-four  years  of  age.  he  continued  to  practise  in
the  courts  until  he  had  entered  his  seventieth  year,
after  which  he  retired,  but  was  still  consulted  as
chamber  counsel.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  Bowdoin  in  1815,  Harvard  in  1817.  and  Dart
mouth  in  1823.  He  was  personally  little  known
out  of  Xew  England,  but  his  name  and  presence
were  familiar  to  every  lawyer  of  his  own  and  the
adjoining  states;  in  fact,  nothing  could  exceed  the
respect,  and  almost  terror,  that  was  felt  at  the  bar
for  the  acuteness,  rapidity,  and  vigor  of  his  mind.
"  I  am  bound  to  say."  said  Daniel  Webster  in  refer
ring  to  him,  "  that  of  my  own  professional  discipline
and  attainments,  whatever  they  may  be,  I  owe  much
to  that  close  attention  to  the  discharge  of  my  du
ties,  which  I  was  compelled  to  pay  for  nine  succes
sive  yeai-s,  from  day  to  day,  by  Mr.  Mason's  efforts
and  arguments  at  the  same  bar.  .  .  .  The  charac
teristics  of  his  mind,  as  I  think,  were  real  greatness,
strength,  and  sagacity.  He  was  great  through
strong  sense  and  sound  judgment." — Another  de
scendant.  Theodore  Lewis,  physician,  b.  in  Coop-
erstown.  X.  Y.,  30  Sept.,  1803 ;  d.  "in  Brooklyn,  X.  Y.,
12  Feb.,  1882,  was  educated  under  his  grandfather,
Rev.  Isaac  Lewis,  D.  D.,  and  was  graduated  at  the
Xew  York  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in
1825.  After  practising  at  Wilton,  Conn.,  he  lived
in  Xew  York  city  from  1832  until  1834.  when  he
went  to  Brooklyn.  When  Dr.  Mason  moved  to
that  city  there  was  no  provision  there  for  the  medi
cal  relief  of  the  poor.  Through  his  efforts  the
common  council  appropriated  a  small  annual  sum,
by  means  of  which  a  hospital  was  opened,  and
Dr.  Mason  became  its  senior  surgeon.  It  was  soon
closed,  owing  to  a  change  in  municipal  legislation,
but  public  sentiment  had  in  the  mean  time  been
aroused,  and  a  movement  was  begun  which  resulted
in  the  establishment  of  a  permanent  city  hospital,
of  which  he  continued  to  act  as  the  senior  surgeon.
In  1858  he  was  active  in  the  organization  of  the
Long  Island  college  hospital.  He  was  chosen  the
first  president  of  the  collegiate  department,  and  he
remained  such  until  a  year  before  his  death,  when
age  and  failing  health  compelled  him  to  resign — a
period  of  twenty-one  years.  Dr.  Mason  was  early
interested  in  sanitary  reform,  and  was  a  founder
of  the  Inebriates'  home  for  Kings  county,  and  of
the  American  association  for  the  cure  of  inebri
ates,  of  which  he  became  president  in  1875.  He
wrote  and  spoke  extensively  on  the  subject  of  in
ebriety,  and  one  of  his  addresses,  "  Inebriety  a  Dis
ease,"  was  afterward  published  and  extensively  cir
culated,  not  only  in  this  country  but  in  England,
where  it  was  quoted  extensively  in  arguments
urging  the  establishment  of  inebriate  asylums
throughout  Great  Britain.  He  was  twice  presi
dent  of  the  Kings  county  medical  society,  and  be
longed  to  other  professional  associations.  He  was
a  founder  of  the  Long  Island  historical  society,
and  was  chosen  in  1874  vice-president  of  the
American  colonization  society. — Another  descend
ant,  Charles,  lawyer,  b.  in  Pompey,  Onondasra  co..
X.  Y.,  24  Oct.,  1804;  d.  in  Burlington.  Iowa,  25
Feb.,  1882,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1829,  and  assigned  to  the  engineer
corps.  After  serving  two  years  at  the  academy  as
principal  assistant  professor  of  engineering,  he  re-  j
signed  from  the  army,  31  Dec.,  1831,  and,  having
meantime  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in


1833.  He  practised  two  years  in  Xewburg,  X.  Y.,
and  then  removed  to  Xew  York  city,  where  he  was
a  frequent  contributor  to  the  "  Evening  Post,"  of
which  he  acted  as  editor  during  William  Cullen
Bryant's  absence  in  Europe,  1834-'6.  Pie  afterward
removed  to  the  west,  and  purchased  a  large  tract  of
land  in  the  town  of  Burlington,  Iowa,  where  he
made  his  home.  In  1838,  on  the  organization  of
the  territory  of  Iowa,  he  was  made  chief  justice,
which  office  he  filled  until  he  resigned,  16  May,
1847.  He  was  attorney  for  the  state  in  the  adjust
ment  of  its  southern  boundary  from  1847  till  1850.
In  1848  he  was  appointed  one  of  three  commis
sioners  to  draft  an  entire  code  of  laws  for  the  state,
which  was  adopted  in  1851.  He  was  judge  of
Des  Moines  county  court  in  1851 -'2,  U.  S.  commis
sioner  of  patents  from  1853  till  1857,  and  commis
sioner  to  adjust  the  extent  of  the  Des  Moines  river
land  grant  in  1858-'9.  In  1861  he  acted  as  com
missioner  to  control  a  state  war  fund  of  §800.000.
He  then  returned  to  the  practice  of  his  profession,
and  devoted  much  time  to  the  promotion  of  various
public  works  in  Burlington. — Another  descendant,
John  S.,  soldier,  b.  in  Steubenville,  Ohio,  21  Aug.,
1824.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1847,  and  assigned  to  the  artillery,
served  in  the  war  with  Mexico,  and  acted  as  regi
mental  quartermaster  from  1854  till  1858.  He
was  commissioned  captain,  14  May,  1861,  and  was
made  colonel  of  the  4th  Ohio  regiment  on  3  Oct.
of  the  same  year.  He  was  made  brevet  lieiiten-
ant-colonel  for  gallantry  at  the  battle  of  Freder-
icksburg,  and  became  brigadier-general  of  volun
teers,  29  Xov.,  1862.  He  was  promoted  major,  14
Oct.,  1864,  and  brevetted  colonel  and  brigadier-
general,  in  the  regular  army,  13  March,  1865,  for
gallant  and  meritorious  services  during  the  war,
since  which  time  he  has  been  chiefly  engaged  in
frontier  duty  with  different  regiments.  He  was
made  lieutenant-colonel,  11  Dec.,  1873,  and  colonel,
9th  infantry,  2  April,  1883,  a  commission  he  still
(1888)  holds.

MASON,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Linlithgow-
shire,  Scotland,  in  1734 ;  d.  in  Xew  York  city,  19
April,  1792.  His  early  training  was  under  the  influ
ence  of  the  Associate,  or  Secession,  church  of  Scot
land  in  its  best  days.  When  it  became  divided
in  1746  young  Mason  identified  himself  with  the
Anti-Burger  party  and  pursued  his  theological
studies  at  Abernethy.  At  the  age  of  twenty  he
spoke  Latin,  and  at  twenty-four  was  assistant  pro
fessor  in  logic  and  moral  philosophy  in  the  in
stitution  at  which  he  had  been  graduated.  In
1761  he  was' ordained  to  the  ministry  and  sent  to
this  country  to  take  charge  of  the  Cedar  street
church,  Xew  York  city.  Believing  that  the  causes
that  divided  the  Presbyterians  of  Scotland  did  not
exist  in  the  United  States,  he  labored  for  their
union  into  one  denomination.  Although  this  course
displeased  his  brethren  at  home  and  he  was  sus
pended  by  the  Scotch  synod,  he  persevered  in  his
project,  and  on  13  June.  1782,  a  general  union  of
the  Reformed  Presbyterians  was  effected  under  the
title  of  the  "  Associate  Reformed  church."  Of
this  body  Dr.  Mason  was  the  first  moderator.
After  laboring  nearly  thirty  years  in  his  first  and
only  pastorate,  his  memory  suddenly  failed  him  in
the  midst  of  a  sermon,  and  death  occurred  soon
afterward.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Princeton  in  1786.  and  served  as  a  trustee  of  that
institution  from  1779  till  1785. — His  son,  John
Mitchell,  clergyman,  b.  in  Xew  York  city,  19
March,  1770;  d."  there.  26  Dec.,  1829,  was  gradu
ated  at  Columbia  in  1789.  He  went  to  Scotland  in
1791  and  studied  theology  at  the  University  of  Ed-


246


MASON


MASON


inburgh,  whence  he  was  suddenly  recalled  the  fol
lowing  year  by  his  father's  death.  On  his  return  he
was  installed  pastor  over  his  father's  congregation.
The  Associate  Reformed  church  had  been  wont  to

celebrate  the  Lord's
Supper  but  once  or
twice  annually ;  but
Dr.  Mason  believed
in  more  frequent
communion,  and
both  with  tongue
and  pen  urged  a
reform  in  this  re
spect.  A  pamphlet
which  he  issued  on
the  subject,  entitled
"  Letters  on  Fre
quent  Communion  "
(New  York,  1798),
first  brought  him
prominently  before
the  religious  pub
lic.  He  also  be
lieved  that  his  de
nomination  should  not  be  dependent  on  foreign
institutions  for  the  education  of  her  ministry,
and  thus  began  a  movement  that  resulted  in
founding  the  Union  theological  seminary,  of
which  he  was  appointed  first  professor  on  its
opening  in  1804.  In  1800  he  projected  the  "  Chris
tian  Magazine,"  in  the  pages  of  which  he  con
ducted  a  friendly  controversy  with  Bishop  Ilobart
on  the  claims  of  the  episcopacy.  In  1810  he  re
signed  his  pastoral  charge  to  form  a  new  congre
gation.  The  intimate  relations  that  he  now  estab
lished  with  the  Presbyterians  were  objected  to  by
many  of  his  own  denomination,  and  in  1811  a  charge
was  brought  against  him  ;  but  the  synod  refused  to
censure  him.  The  same  year  he  was  elected  provost
of  Columbia  college.  In  1816  he  severed  his  con
nection  with  the  college  on  account  of  failing
health  and  sailed  for  Europe.  On  his  return  in
1817  he  again  devoted  himself  to  his  ministerial
duties,  but  in  1821  he  accepted  the  presidency  of
Dickinson  college,  Pa.  In  1822  he  became  con
nected  with  the  Presbyterian  church.  Finding  the
duties  of  his  new  office  too  onerous  for  his  dimin
ished  strength,  he  resigned  and  returned  to  New
York  in  1824 ;  but  he  was  never  again  able  to  as
sume  any  official  employment.  As  a  pulpit  orator
Dr.  Mason  has  had  few  equals  in  the  United  States.
His  physical  and  intellectual  powers  were  of  the
most  robust  order,  his  theology  was  Calvinistic,
and  his  style  of  eloquence  irresistible.  When  Rob
ert  Hall  first  heard  him  in  London,  whither  he
had  gone  to  raise  money  for  the  new  seminary,  on
the  occasion  of  his  delivering  his  celebrated  ser
mon,  "  Messiah's  Throne,"  in  1802,  he  is  said  to
have  exclaimed :  "  I  can  never  preach  again."
Robert  McCartee  thus  describes  the  effect  that
was  produced  by  one  of  Dr.  Mason's  fast-day  ser
mons  at  a  time  of  great  political  excitement,
caused  by  a  proposed  alliance  of  the  United  States
with  France  :  "  The  doctor  chose  for  his  text  Eze-
kiel  ii.  3,  and  the  whole  chapter  was  read  in  the
most  impressive  manner.  .Near  the  close  of  the
discourse  he  brolca  forth  in  a  solemn  and  impas
sioned  apostrophe  to  Deity  in  nearly  these  words :
'  Send  us,  if  thou  wilt,  murrain  upon  our  cattle,  a
famine  upon  our  land,  cleanness  of  teeth  in  our
borders  ;  send  us  pestilence  to  waste  our  cities ;
send  us,  if  it  please  thee,  the  sword  to  bathe  itself
in  the  blood  of  our  sons,  but  spare  us,  Lord  God
Most  Merciful,  spare  us  that  direst  and  most  dread
ful  of  all  thy  curses — an  alliance  with  Napoleon


Bonaparte.'  As  he  uttered  these  rousing  sentences
the  blood  gushed  from  his  nostrils.  He  uncon
sciously  put  his  handkerchief  to  his  face,  and  the
next  instant  made  a  gesture  which  looked  as  if  he
were  designedly  waving  it  like  a  bloody  and  sym
bolic  flag.  You  can  fancy  better  than  I  can  de
scribe  the  impression  which  this  incident,  coupled
with  the  awful  apostrophe,  made  upon  the  crowded
assembly."  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  Besides  many  es
says,  reviews,  orations,  and  sermons,  Dr.  Mason
published  "A  Plea  for  Sacramental  Communion
on  Catholic  Principles"  (New  York,  1810).  His
best-known  orations  are  those  on  Washington  and  on
Alexander  Hamilton.  See  "The  Writings  of  the
Late  John  M.  Mason,  D.  D.,"  by  his  son,  Ebenezer
(4  vols.,  New  York,  1832;  new  ed.,  greatly  en
larged,  1849),  and  "  Memoirs  of  John  M.  Mason,
D.  D.,''  by  his  son-in-law,  Jacob  Van  Vechteii,  I).  I).
(2  vols.,  1856).— John  Mitchell's  son,  Erskinc,  cler
gyman,  b.  in  New  York  city,  16  April,  1805 :  d.
there,  14  May,  1851,  was  graduated  at  Dickinson
college  in  1823,  and  became  pastor  of  a  Presbyte
rian  church  at  Scliencctady  in  1827  and  of  the
Bleecker  street  church  in"  New  York  in  1830.
From  1836  till  1842  he  was  professor  of  ecclesias
tical  history  in  Union  theological  seminary.  In
1837  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Colum
bia.  Dr.  Mason's  style  of  preaching  was  rigorous
ly  intellectual.  He  published  several  occasional
sermons  during  his  lifetime,  and  a  collection  of
his  discourses  appeared  after  his  death,  under  the
title  of  "A  Pastor's  Legacy,"  with  a  sketch  of  his
career  by  the  Rev.  William  Adams,  I).  I).  (New
York,  1853). — Erskine's  son,  Erskinc,  surgeon,  b.
in  New  York  city,  8  May,  1837;  d.  there,  13  April,
1882,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1857,  and  in
1860  at  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in
New  York  city,  where  he  afterward  practised  his
profession.  From  1861  till  1870  he  was  assistant
demonstrator  and  then  demonstrator  of  anatomy
in  the  latter  institution.  He  was  connected  with
various  hospitals,  and  was  adjunct  professor  of  sur
gery  in  the  medical  department  of  the  University
of  New  York,  which  chair  lie  resigned  in  June,
1876.  and  from  1879  till  1882  he  was  clinical  lec
turer  on  surgery  in  Bellevue  hospital  medical  col
lege.  Dr.  Mason  was  a  member  of  various  profes
sional  bodies  and  president  of  the  Pathological
society  in  1873.  Among  his  frequent  contributions
to  medical  periodical  literature  may  be  mentioned
those  on  " Lumbar  Colotomy  "  (1873);  "The  Opera
tion  of  Laparotomy,  with  a  Case  "  and  "  Perityph-
litis"  (1876);  and  "Amputation  at  the  Hip-Joint."
MASON,  John,  founder  of  New  Hampshire,  b.
in  Lynn  Regis,  Norfolk,  England ;  d.  in  London
in  December,  1635.  In  1610  he  had  charge  of  a
naval  expedition  that  was  sent  by  James  I.  to  sub
due  a  rebellion  in  the  Hebrides.  He  went  to  New
foundland  in  1616  as  governor,  surveyed  the  isl
and,  and  published  a  description  of  it  (Edinburgh,
1620),  and  a  map  (London,  1626).  In  1617  he  ex
plored  the  New  England  coast,  and  on  9  March,
1622,  he  obtained  from  the  Great  council  a  grant
of  a  tract  of  land  on  the  sea-coast  between  Nauin-
keag  and  Merrimack  rivers,  called  "  Mariana,"  now
the  northeast  part  of  Massachusetts.  In  the  fol
lowing  August  he  secured  a  patent,  jointly  with
Sir  Ferdinando  Gorges  (q.  v.),  for  a  tract  on  the  sea-
coast  between  the  Merrimack  and  Sagadahoc  rivers
called  the  province  of  Maine.  Early  in  1623  he
sent  a  party  of  emigrants  to  settle  on  the  west
bank  of  the  Piscataqua,  the  nucleus  of  the  first
settlement  in  that  locality.  During  the  war  with
Spain  in  1624-'9  he  acted  as  treasurer  and  paymas-


MASON


MASON


247


ter  of  the  English  forces.  In  November  of  the
latter  year  he  procured  from  the  council  for  New
p]ngland  a  grant  of  territory  on  the  coast  between
Merrimack  and  Piscataqua  rivers,  which  was  des
ignated  as  New  Hampshire,  and  also  a  patent  for
a  tract  embracing  Lake  Champlain  and  its  vicin
ity,  styled  Laconia.  In  1630  he  despatched  addi
tional  colonists  to  the  Piscataqua,  and  the  next
year  formed  a  partnership  with  Gorges  and  others
for  the  purposes  of  trade  and  settlement  there.  In
16:32  he  became  a  member  of  the  Great  council  for
New  England,  and  was  soon  afterward  chosen
vice-president.  About  this  time  he  was  appointed
captain  of  the  South  sea  castle,  a  fortress  at  the
entrance  of  Portsmouth  harbor,  England.  He  was
judge  of  the  Hampshire  courts  in  1635,  and  sub
sequently  a  commissioner  to  visit  annually  all  the
forts  and  castles  throughout  England.  'lie  was
then  appointed  vice-admiral  of  New  England,  and
was  about  .sailing  for  this  country  to  assume  the
duties  of  the  office,  when  he  died.  He  was  buried
in  Westminster  Abbey.  Mason's  rights  in  New
Hampshire  were  sold  to  Gov.  Samuel  Allen  in
1691.  and  proved  a  fruitful  source  of  litigation  to
that  official  and  his  heirs.  In  January,  1746,  JOHX
TUFTOX  MASO.V,  a  descendant,  disposed  of  his  rights
for  £1.500  to  twelve  gentlemen  of  Portsmouth,  who
were  known  as  the  "Masonian  Proprietors."

MASON,  John  Yoiinsf,  cabinet  officer,  b. in
Greensville  county,  Va.,  18  April,  1799 :  d.  in  Paris.
France.  3  Oct..  1859. He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  North  Carolina  in  1816,  studied  law
at  Litchfield,  Conn.,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1819.  and  practised  with  great  success  in  South
ampton  county,  Va. He  was  successively  a  mem
ber  of  the  legislature  of  Virginia  and  of  the  State
constitutional  convention  of  1829,  a  member  of  '
congress  from  1831  till  1837,  and  chairman  of  the  ;
committee  on foreign affairs  and judge  of  the  j
U.  S.  district  court  and  of  the  circuit  court  of  Vir-  ;
ginia. In  1844  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  the  !
navy  by  President  Tyler,  and  in  1845  President  !
Polk  made  him  attorney-general  of  the United  !
States,  but  the  next  year  he  was  again  placed  at
the  head  of  the  navy  department. In  1849  he  re
moved  to  Richmond,  Va.,  and  resumed  the  prac
tice  of  the  law. He  was  president  of  the  Virginia
constitutional  convention  of  1850. In  1853  he  was
appointed  U.  S.  minister  to  France,  and  he  was
reappointed  by  President  Buchanan,  remaining  in
that,  post  until  his  death.

MASON,  Jonathan,  senator,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  30  Aug.,  1752;  d.  there,  1  Nov.,  1831.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1774,  studied  law
under  John  Adams,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1777.  On  5  March,  1780,  he  delivered  the  offi
cial  oration  before  the  authorities  of  Boston  on  the
tenth  anniversary  of  the  Boston  massacre,  of  which
he  had  been  an  eye-witness.  He  was  repeatedly
sent  to  the  legislature,  was  a  member  of  the  gov
ernor's  council  in  1798.  and  was  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate  to  fill  a  vacancy,  serving  from  19  Dec.,
1800,  till  3  March,  1803.  In  that  body  he  took  an
active  part  in  the  debates,  especially  those  on  the
repeal  of  the  judiciary  act  of  1801.  "  He  was  elect
ed  to  the  lower  house  of  congress  as  a  Federalist,
serving  from  1  Dec.,  1817,  till  15  May,  1820,  when
he  resigned.  Mr.  Mason  held  a  high  position  at
the  bar  and  possessed  great  dignity  of  character.

MASON.  Lowell,  musician,  b.  in  Medfield.  Nor
folk  co..  Mass.,  8  Jan.,  1792  ;  d.  in  Orange,  N.  J.,
11  Aug..  1872.  His  father  was  a  mechanic  in  a
small  New  England  village,  and  his  early  opportu
nities  for  education  were  meagre  :  but  he  had  from
childhood  a  passion  for  music,  and  before  he  was


twenty  years  of  age  had  learned  to  play  on  every
kind  of  musical  instrument  that  had  come  within
•  his  reach.  He  was  also  so  proficient  in  vocal  music
that  at  sixteen  he  was  leader  of  the  village  choir,
and  a  teacher  of  singing-classes.  At  twenty  he
went  to  Savannah,  where  he  continued  to  practise,
lead,  and  teach.  While  residing  there  he  arranged,
with  some  assistance,  a  collection  of  psalm  tunes,
that  was  based  on  Gardiner's  "  Sacred  Melodies,"
which  latter  was  compiled  from  the  works  of
Haydn,  Mozart,  and  Beethoven,  adding  to  them
tunes  of  his  own  composition.  This  was  published
by  the  Handel  and  Haydn  society  in  1821  as  the
"  Boston  Handel  and  Haydn  Society's  Collection
of  Church  Music,"  the  compiler's  name  being  al
most  entirely  suppressed.  The  book  was  a  decided
success  and  led  to  Mason's  removal  to  Boston  in
1827,  and  his  taking  "  general  charge  of  music  in
the  churches  there."  He  now  began  the  instruc
tion  of  classes  in  vocal  music,  devoting  special  at
tention  to  the  training  of  children  to  the  per
formance  of  the  alto  part  in  chorals,  and  to  the
introduction  of  vocal  music  into  the  public  schools.
In  1829,  his  attention  being  called  to  the  Pesta-
lozzian  method  of  teaching  music,  and  especially
to  the  various  improvements  upon  it,  Mr.  Mason
adopted  it  after  care
ful  and  protracted
examination.  Juve
nile  classes  were  es
tablished  and  taught
gratuitously  by  him
for  many  years,  but
he  was  soon  com
pelled,  by  the  extent
of  his  labors,  to  take
an  assistant.  Under
his  influence  vocal
music  received  a  new
and  extraordinary
impulse  in  Boston
and  throughout  New
England.  Eminent
teachers  were  intro-  s?  flfl  /  /

duced  into  private  aLerWAUU -M&kin*' .
schools ;  the  Boston

academy  of  music  was  established  by  him  in  1832 ;
music  was  prescribed  as  a  regular  branch  of  in
struction  in  the  public  schools  of  Boston,  and  sub
sequently  very  generally  throughout  the  entire
country;  permanent  musical  classes,  lectures  on
music,  concerts,  schools  for  instrumental  music,
and  teachers'  institutes,  were  also  widely  estab
lished.  In  1837  he  visited  Europe  and  made  himself
acquainted  with  all  the  improvements  in  music-
teaching  in  the  continental  cities.  On  his  return  he
published  the  results  of  his  journey  in  "  Musical
Letters  from  Abroad  "  (New  York,  1853).  In  1855
Mr.  Mason  received  from  the  University  of  the
city  of  New  York  the  degree  of  doctor  of  music,
the  first  instance  of  the  conferring  of  that  degree
by  an  American  university.  The  growing  taste
for  music  that  he  had  inspired  incited  him  to  pre
pare  about  this  time  numerous  text-books  for
juvenile  classes,  glee  -  books,  and  collections  of
church  music.  During  his  later  years  he  labored
diligently  to  promote  the  introduction  of  strictly
congregational  singing  into  the  churches,  and  to
this  end  he  devoted  much  time  to  the  preparation,
in  connection  with  Edwards  A.  Park  and  Austin
Phelps.  of  "The  Sabbath  Hymn-  and  Tune-Book"
(New  York,  1859),  which  attained  instant  popu
larity.  The  last  years  of  his  life  were  passed  with
his  sons  at  Orange.  N.  J.,  and  his  devotion  to  mu
sical  study  and  composition  continued  to  the  end.


248


MASON


MASON


Here  he  had  brought  together  one  of  the  most  ex
tensive  and  valuable  musical  libraries  in  the  United
States,  which,  after  his  death,  his  family  presented
to  Yale  college.  "-Dr.  Mason,"  says  Rev.  Octavius
B.  Frothingham,  "  did  moi'e  to  make  the  practice
of  vocal  music  popular  than  to  raise  the  standard
of  musical  culture,  and  long  before  his  death  the
influence  of  his  school  had  yielded  to  the  power
of  more  finished  art.  Still,  his  work  was  of  great
value  in  its  time."  His  published  works  exceed
fifty  volumes,  and  many  of  them  have  had  an
immense  sale.  The  aggregate  circulation  of  the
collections  of  church  music  somewhat  exceeded
two  million  copies,  and  several  of  the  juvenile
collections  have  sold  very  largely.  The  following
are  some  of  his  principal  books,  in  compiling
which  he  "had  no  assistance  and  which  contain
many  of  his  own  compositions:  "Juvenile  Psal
mist"  (Boston,  1829);  "Juvenile  Lyre,"  the  first
book  of  school  songs  published  in  the  United
States  (1880);  "The  Choir,  or  Union  Collection"
(1832) ;  "  Manual  of  Instruction  in  Vocal  Music  "
(1834) ;  "  The  Boston  Academy  Collection  "  (1835) ;
"Lyra  Sacra ":" Occasional  Psalmody"  (1837);
"  Songs  of  Asaph  "  ;  "  The  Seraph  "  (1838) ;  "  The
Modern  Psalmist"  (1839);  "Cannina  Sacra,"  of
which  and  its  two  revisions,  the  "  New  Cannina
Sacra  "  and  the  "  American  Tune-Book,"  more  than
six  hundred  thousand  copies  had  been  sold  at  the
time  of  Dr.  Mason's  death  (1841);  "The  Gentle
man's  Glee-Book  "  (1842) ;  "  American  Sabbath-
School  Singing-Book  "  (Philadelphia,  1843) ;  "  Bos
ton  Academy  Collection  of  Choruses "  (Boston,
1844);  "Song-Book  of  the  School-Room"  (1845);
"Primary-School  Song-Book"  (1840);  "The  Na
tional  Psalmist"  (1848);  "The  Hand  -  Book  of
Psalmody"  (London,  1852);  "The  Hallelujah"
(New  York,  1854);  "The  Normal  Singer"  (185(5);
and  "Mammoth  Musical  Exercises"  (1857). — His
son,  William,  pianist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  24  Jan.,
1829,  made  his  first  public  appearance  as  a  pianist
at  a  symphony  concert  in  Boston,  7  March,  1846.
He  appeared  frequently  in  concerts  until  the  spring
of  1849,  when  he  went  to  Leipsic,  Germany,  and
studied  the  piano-forte  under  Moscheles,  harmony
under  Moritz  Hauptmann,  and  instrumentation
under  E.  F.  Richter.  Later  he  was  instructed  by
Alexander  Dreyschock,  in  Prague,  and  finally  by
Liszt,  at  Weimar,  in  1853-'4.  He  played  in  public
in  Prague.  Frankfort,  and  Weimar,  "and  in  1853
made  a  brief  visit  to  London.  He  returned  to  this
country  in  July,  1854,  and  shortly  after  his  arrival
made  a  concert  tour,  playing  at  each  representation
through  a  programme  of  eight  or  ten  piano-forte
pieces,  illustrating  different  styles.  It  is  believed
that  these  were  the  first  concerts  of  the  kind  con
sisting  of  piano-forte  playing  solely,  without  other
attraction,  that  were  given  either  'in  this  country
or  abroad.  On  his  return  he  settled  in  New  York,
where  he  has  since  mainly  occupied  himself  in
teaching,  playing  in  public  occasionally.  In  the
winter  of  1855-'6  he  established,  in  connection
with  Carl  Bergmann  and  Theodore  Thomas,  a  series
of  classical  soirees,  at  which  the  instrumental
works  of  Haydn,  Mozart,  Beethoven,  Schubert,
Schumann,  and  others  were  performed.  These
concerts  became  known  as  the  Mason  and  Thomas
soirees  of  chamber  music,  and  were  continued  with
out  interruption  until  18(58.  Mr.  Mason,  in  con
nection  with  Eli  S.  Hoadly,  is  the  author  of  two
piano-forte  methods  (Boston,  1867-'71),  and  also  of  a
system  of  "  Piano-forte  Technics  "  (1878),  in  which
latter  work  William  S.  B.  Mathews  was  connected
with  him  as  associate  editor.  He  has  also  published
about  forty  compositions  for  the  piano-forte,  a  few


of  which  are  adapted  for  concert  purposes,  but
consisting  chiefly  of  smaller  "  pieces  de  salon,"
such  as  scherzos,  ballades,  romanzas,  nocturnes,
caprices,  reveries,  etc.  Most  of  these  have  been
republished  in  Europe.  In  1872  Mr.  Mason  re
ceived  from  Yale  the  degree  of  doctor  of  music.

MASON,  Melancthon  Wells,  inventor,  b.  in
Cheshire,  Berkshire  co.,  Mass.,  in  1805;  d.  in  Roch
ester,  N.  Y.,  20  June,  1875.  He  possessed  much
mechanical  ability,  and  early  turned  his  attention
to  devising  various  novelties  in  machinery.  He
also  devoted  years  of  close  study  to  the  inanage-
ment  of  railways,  and  filled  many  important  offices
on  several  roads.  While  he  was  master  mechanic
of  the  Syracuse  and  Auburn  railway  he  invented
many  important  improvements  in  locomotives  that
have  since  come  into  general  use.  lie  designed  the
lap-and-lead  valve,  which  was  put  on  the  first  en
gine  in  1840.  He  also  invented  the,  four-driving-
wheel  locomotive,  the  first  that  was  built  being  the
"  Phoenix."  Mr.  Mason  is  perhaps  best  known  by
his  locomotive  head-light,  which  he  perfected  in
1842.  In  recognition  of  this  important  addition  to
the  safety  of  railway  travelling,  he  received  a  silver
medal  from  the  New  York  state  agricultural  so
ciety.  He  also  invented  a  snow-plough,  and  was
the  builder  of  the  first  four-cylinder  engine,  the
"  E.  P.  Williams."

MASON,  Otis  Tufton,  ethnologist,  b.  in  East-
port,  Me.,  10  April,  1838.  He  was  graduated  at
Columbian  university  in  18(51,  and  subsequently
had  charge  of  its  preparatory  school  until  1884.
He  then  became  curator  of  the  department  of  eth
nology  in  the  U.  S.  national  museum,  which  olfice
he  sti'll  (1887)  holds.  His  special  work  since  1872
has  been  devoted  to  giving  a  comprehensive,  defi
nite,  and  scientific  value  to  the  word  "  anthro
pology."  He  has  insisted  that  the  most  rigid
methods  of  the  naturalist  shall  be  applied  to  the
investigation  of  human  problems,  and  that  every
human  act  and  invention  be  subject  to  this  close
scrutiny.  Prof.  Mason  is  a  member  of  scientific
societies,  and  his  publications  have  appeared  in
"  The  American  Naturalist."  and  as  memoirs  issued
by  the  Smithsonian  institution.

"MASON,  Richard  Sharp,  clergyman,  b.  in
Barbadoes,  W.  I.,  29  Dec.,  1795;  d.  in  Raleigh,
N.  C.,  in  1875.  He  was  brought  to  this  country
by  his  parents  when  quite  young,  educated  in
Philadelphia,  and  graduated  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1812.  He  was  made  deacon  in  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church  by  Bishop  White  in
1817,  and  became  rector  of  Christ  church,  New
Berne, .  N.  C.,  in  1818.  In  1820  he  was  ordained
priest,  still  retaining  his  charge,  and  remaining
there  for  ten  years.  In  1829  he  was  elected  presi
dent  of  Geneva  (now  Hobart)  college,  New  York,
having  the  previous  year  become  rector  of  St.
Matthew's  at  that  place.  In  1835  he  was  called  to
be  the  head  of  a  similar  educational  institution  at
Newark,  Del.  In  1840  he  returned  to  North  Caro
lina,  having  been  called  to  the  rectorship  of  Christ
church,  Raleigh,  where  he  labored  for  thirty-five
years  until  his  death.  When  Dr.  Mason  first  went
to  New  Berne  the  Episcopal  church  had  but  a
slight  footing  in  the  diocese,  and  his  work  was
largely  missionary  in  its  character.  By  his  earnest
and  self-denying  efforts  he  greatly  increased  the
strength  of  his  denomination,  lie  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of  Pennsyl
vania  in  1829.  He  is  the  author  of  "  A  Letter  to
the  Bishop  of  North  Carolina  on  the  Subject  of  his
Late  Pastoral  "  (New  York,  1850),  and  "  The  Bap
tism  of  Infants  defended  from  the  Objections  of
Antipaedo  Baptists,"  edited  by  his  son  (1874).


MASON


MASSIE


249


MASON.  William  Powell,  lawyer,  1>.  in  Bos
ton,  Mass.,  9  Dec.,  1791 ;  d.  in  1867.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Harvard  in  1811,  studied  law,  and  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar.  Subsequently  he  succeeded
John  Gallison  as  reporter  of  the  first  circuit  of  the
United  States.  lie  published  "  Reports  of  Cases
in  the  Circuit.  Court  of  the  United  States  for  the
First  Circuit,  from  1816  to  1830"  (5  vols.,  Boston,
1819-'31),  and  a  second  series  (5  vols..  1836).  The
decisions  in  these  reports,  comprising  those  of  Mr.
Justice  Story,  relate  to  a  great  variety  of  subjects,
constitutional,  admiralty,  personal,  and  real  law
and  chancery,  and  are  characterized  by  "  the  pro
found  learning,  acuteness,  and  thoroughness  of
research  "  that  are  distinguishing  traits  of  their
author.  See  an  article  by  Henry  Wheaton  in  the
"North  American  Review'"  (vol.  viii.,  p.  253).

MASSASOIT,  Indian  chief,  b.  in  what  is  now
Massachusetts  about  1580 ;  d.  there  in  the  autumn
of  1660. His  dominions  extended  over  nearly  all
the  southern  part  of  Massachusetts,  from  Cape  Cod
to  Narragansett  bay,  but  his  tribe,  the  Wampanoags,
once  supposed  to  have  numbered  several  thousand,  j
had  been,  shortly  before  the  landing  of  the  Pilgrims
at  Plymouth,  reduced  to  about  300  warriors  by  a
disease  supposed  to  have  been  yellow  fever. In
March,  1621,  three  months  after  the  founding  of  !
Plymouth,  an  Indian  named  Samoset  entered  the
town and exclaimed  in  English, which he had
learned  from  the  Penobscot  fishermen,  "  Welcome,
Englishmen  !  " He  announced  himself  as  the  en
voy  of  Massasoit,  "  the  greatest  commander  of  the
country." After  some  negotiation  the  latter  came
in  person  and  was  received  with  due  ceremony.
A  treaty  of  friendship  was  then  completed  in  few
and  unequivocal  terms. Both  parties  promised  to
abstain  from  mutual  injuries,  and  to  deliver  offend
ers  ;  the  colonists  were  to  receive  assistance  if  at
tacked,  to  render  it  if  Massasoit  should  be  unjustly
assailed. The  treaty  included  the  confederates  of
the  sachem,  and  is  the  oldest  act  of  diplomacy  re
corded  in  New  England. It  was  sacredly  kept  for
fifty-four  years,  the  friendly  disposition  of  Massa
soit  toward  the  colonists  never  relaxing. His  resi
dence  was  within  the  limits  of  what  is  now  the
town  of  Warren,  R.  I.,  near  an  abundant  spring  of
water  which  still  bears  his  name. Roger  Williams,
when  banished  from  the  Massachusetts  colony  and
on  his  way  to  Providence,  was  entertained  by  him
for  several  weeks  at  this  place. Massasoit  was  hu
mane  and  honest,  never  violated  his  word,  and  con
stantly  endeavored  to  imbue  his  people  with  a  love  '
of  peace. He  kept  the  Pilgrims  advised  of  any  !
warlike  designs  toward  them  by  other  tribes. In
person,  says  Nathaniel  Morton  in  his  ''  New  Eng
land's  Memorial,"  he  was  "  a  very  lusty  man  in  his  ,
best  years,  an  able  body,  grave  of  countenance,  and  !
spare  of  speech." Two  of  his  sons  were  named  j
Wamsutta  and  Pometacom. Soon  after  the  death  i
of  Massasoit  these  sons  went  to  Plymouth  and  re-  j
quested  the  Pilgrims  to  give  them  English  names.
The  court  named  them  Alexander  and  Philip. The  j
former  became  chief  sachem,  but  died  within  a  year,  ,
and  was  siicceeded  by  his  brother  Philip  (q.  r.).

MASSE,  Enemoud,  clergyman,  b.  in  France  in
1574 ;  d.  in  Canada,  12  May,  1646. He  entered  the
Society  of  Jesus  in  1596,  and  was  sent  by  his  su
periors  to  Port  Royal  (now  Annapolis),  in  Acadia,  ,
where  he  landed,  12  June,  1611. Every  obstacle  '
was  thrown  in  their  way  by  Biencourt,  the  governor  '
of  the  settlement,  a  boy  of  eighteen,  and  at  last,  in  j
despair,  he  resolved  to  return  to  Europe. But  after  j
embarking  he  was  forced  by  Biencourt  to  re-land  j
and treated  with great indignity. At last  the  j
Marchioness  de  Guercheville,  who  had  supplied  the  I


funds  for  the  enterprise,  resolved  to  found  a  mission
colony  in  some  other  place.  A  vessel  was  fitted
out  which  sailed  for  Port  Royal,  took  Masse  on
board,  and  landed  him  on  Mount  Desert  island.
Here  he  established  a  mission  settlement  under  the
name  of  the  Holy  Saviour.  A  fort  was  built,  but
it  was  soon  after  attacked  by  Samuel  Argal  (q.  v.),
who  took  the  missionaries  and  most  of  the  colonists
to  Virginia.  Masse  appears  to  have  been  allowed
to  return  to  France  in  1614.  According  to  one
account  he  was  turned  adrift  in  a  small  boat  and
picked  up  by  a  French  vessel.  He  endeavored  to
persuade  the  younger  members  of  his  order  to
follow  him  to  Canada,  whither  he  returned  in  1625.
He  labored  among  the  Algonquins  and  Montagnais
till  Quebec  was  taken  in  1629,  when  he  was  a  sec
ond  time  made  prisoner.  In  1633  he  was  again
sent  to  Canada,  and  remained  there  till  his  death.

MASSEY,  Eyre,  Lord  Clarina,  British  soldier,
b.  in  County  Limerick.  Ireland,  24  May,  1719 ;  d.  in
Bath,  England,  17  May,  1804.  He  entered  the
British  army  at  an  early  age,  was  wounded  at  Cul-
loden  in  1745,  and  again  at  Morro  castle,  Havana,
where  he  led  the  grenadiers  that  stormed  and  cap
tured  it.  and  also  served  at  the  taking  of  Marti
nique.  He  was  one  of  Wolfe's  companions  at  Quebec,
captured  Fort  Oswegatchie  in  August,  1760,  and
during  the  Revolution  was  a  brigadier-general,
commanding  at  Halifax.  He  was  made  an  Irish
peer,  under  the  title  of  Lord  Clarina,  27  Dec.,  1800.

MASSEY,  Hart  Almerrin,  Canadian  manufac
turer,  b.  in  Haldimand,  Ont.,  29  April,  1823.  His
grandfather,  a  native  of  Vermont,  settled  in  Can
ada  in  1807.  The  grandson  was  educated  in  Wa-
tertown,  N.  Y.,  and  at  Victoria  college,  Cobourg,
and  became  interested  in  the  management  of  his
father's  farms.  In  1852  he  became  partner  and
business  manager  of  his  father's  foundry  and  ma
chine-shop  at  Newcastle,  and  in  1855  sole  proprie
tor,  his  father  having  retired  from  the  business.
From  this  time  until  1864,  when  the  Newcastle
establishment  was  burned,  Mr.  Massey's  reapers
and  mowers  and  other  agricultural  implements
came  into  general  use  throughout  Canada.  New
and  larger  buildings  soon  replaced  those  which  had
been  destroyed.  In  1870  the  Massey  manufactur
ing  company  was  organized,  of  which  he  has  since
been  president.  In  1879  the  comp?nv's  establish
ment  was  removed  to  Toronto.  The  company  is
now  (1888)  the  largest  manufacturer  of  agricul
tural  implements  in  the  Dominion,  and  has  invent
ed  and  introduced  new  features  and  improvements
in  connection  with  many  farm  implements.  Mr.
Massey  was  the  first  manufacturer  in  Canada  to
make  a  mowing-machine  and  self-raking  reaper.

MASSIE,  James  William,  Irish  clergyman,  b.
in  Ireland  in  1799  ;  d.  in  Kingstown,  Ireland,  8  May,
1869.  He  began  his  ministry  as  a  missionary  of
the  English  Independent  church  to  India,  and"  af
ter  laboring  there  several  years  returned  to  Great
Britain  and  was  pastor  in  Perth,  Scotland,  Dublin,
Ireland,  and  Salford,  England,  subsequently  re
moving  to  London,  where  he  was  secretary  to
the  Home  missionary  society.  He  was  an  advo
cate  of  free-trade,  the  anti-slavery  movement,  and
the  Union  and  anti- slavery  societies  that  were
formed  during  the  civil  war  in  this  country.  He
visited  the  United  States  several  times,  and  is  the
author  of  numerous  works,  including  "  The  Evan
gelical  Alliance"  (London.  1847);  "Slavery  the
Crime  and  Curse  of  America  "  (1852) :  "  The  Ameri
can  Crisis  in  Relation  to  the  Anti-Slavery  Cause  "
(1862) ;  and  "  America,  the  Origin  of  her  Present
Conflict,  illustrated  by  Incidents  of  Travel  during
a  Tour  of  the  United 'States  "  (1864).


250


MASSIE


MATAMOROS


MASSIE,  Nathaniel,  pioneer,  b.  in  Goochland
county,  Va.,  28  Dec.,  1703  ;  d.  in  Paint  Creek  Falls,
Ohio,  13  Nov.,  1813.  lie  entered  the  Revolution
ary  array  at  seventeen  years  of  age,  served  for  a
short  time,  and  subsequently  became  a  surveyor
and  locater  of  lands,  gradually  acquiring  large
tracts  of  uncultivated  territory.  He  surveyed  the
first  settlement  within  the  Virginia  military  dis
trict  of  Ohio  in  1791  between  the  Scioto  and  Little
Miami  rivers,  and  in  1793-'0  was  engaged  in  an
extensive  survey  of  the  same  region,  in  the  latter
year  laying  out  on  his  own  land  the  town  of  Chilli-
cothe.  '  At  the  beginning  of  the  19th  century  he
was  one  of  the  largest  land-owners  in  Ohio.  lie
was  active  in  the  early  Indian  wars,  was  state  sena
tor,  and  for  one  term  speaker,  major-general  of
militia  for  several  years,  and  a  member  of  the  Ohio
constitutional  convention  of  1802.  Me  was  a  can
didate  for  governor  in  1807,  and  his  opponent  re
ceived  the  largest  number  of  votes,  but  was  de
clared  ineligible.  The  office  thus  devolved  on  Mr.
Massie,  but  he  declined  it.

MASSON,  Louis  Francois  Roderique,  Cana
dian  statesman,  b.  in  Terreuonne,  Quebec,  7  Nov.,
1833.  He  was  educated  at  the  Jesuit  college,
Georgetown,  D.  C.,  at  Worcester,  Mass.,  and  at  the
College  of  St.  Hyacinthe,  Quebec,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  November.  1859.  lie
represented  Terrebonne  in  the  Canadian  parlia
ment  from  1807  till  30  Sept.,  1882,  when  he  became
a  member  of  the  senate.  Mr.  Masson  was  minister
of  militia  and  defence  from  October,  1878,  till
1880,  when  he  resigned  and  accepted  the  portfolio
of  president  of  the  council,  which  ill  health  com
pelled  him  to  resign  in  November  of  the  latter
year.  On  the  resignation  of  Joseph  A.  Mousseau,
premier  of  Quebec,  Mr.  Masson  was  requested  by
the  lieutenant-governor  to  form  an  administra
tion,  but  declined.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant-
governor  of  Quebec  in  1884,  and  has  been  mayor
of  Terrebonne.  lie  has  held  a  commission  in  the
Canadian  volunteers  since  October,  1802,  was  bri
gade  major,  8th  military  district  of  Lower  Canada,
from  1803  till  1808,  and"  was  promoted  lieutenant-
colonel  in  1807.  He  served  on  the  frontier  during
the  first  Fenian  raid  in  March,  1800,  and  was  in
active  service  during  the  second  raid  that  year.

MASSUE,  Louis  Huet,  Canadian  member  of
parliament,  b.  in  Varennes.  Lower  Canada,  3  Nov.,
1828.  His  father,  Aime  Massue,  seigneur  of  St.
Aime,  represented  the  county  of  Vercheres  in  the
legislative  council  in  1810.  The  son  was  educated
at  St.  Hyacinthe  college,  afterward  became  well
known  as  a  scientific  agriculturist,  and  has  done
much  to  improve  the  system  of  farming  through
out  his  native  province.  He  has  been  for  the  last-
six  years  president  of  the  Council  of  agriculture  of
the  province  of  Quebec,  is  a  director  of  the  Provi
dent  mutual  association  of  Canada,  and  was  vice-
president  of  the  Bank  of  Jacques  Cartier.  He  was
elected  to  the  parliament  of  Canada  in  1878,  re-
elected  in  1882,  and  succeeded  Sir  Adolphe  Caron
as  leader  of  the  French  Canadian  conservatives.

MASTIN,  Claudius  Henry,  surgeon,  b.  in
Huntsville,  Ala.,  4  June,  1820.  He  received  his
collegiate  education  at  the  University  of  Virginia,
was  graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1849,  went  abroad
in  1850,  studying  in"  Edinburgh,  Paris,  and  Lon
don.  On  his  return  he  settled  in  Mobile,  where  he
has  since  practised,  chiefly  as  a  surgeon.  During
the  civil  war  he  served  in  the  latter  capacity  in  the
Confederate  army.  In  1885  he  presented  a  memoir
to  the  American  surgical  association,  then  in  ses
sion  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  which  resulted  in  unit


ing  the  various  special  American  medical  associa
tions  into  a  common  body,  under  the  name  and
title  of  the  "Congress  of  American  physicians  and
surgeons,"  which  organization  was  completed,  5
Oct.,  1887.  He  was  vice-president  of  the  Ameri
can  surgical  association  in  1883.  He  has  invented
several  surgical  instruments  and  contributed  large
ly  to  medical  journals,  especially  on  genitourinary
surgery.  The  University  of  Pennsylvania  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1875.

MASTRILL1,  Nicolas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Italy
in  1570;  d.  in  Lima.  Peru,  14  Feb.,  1053.  He  be
came  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  in  1587,
and  embarked  several  years  afterward  for  Peru,
where  he  took  the  name  of  Duran,  and  labored  ar
dently  for  the  conversion  of  the  natives.  Besides
two  volumes  of  sermons  (Lima,  1032),  he  wrote
"  Lit  terse  annua^  (1020  et  1027)  provincia-  Para-
quaria*  Societatis  Jesu  "  (Antwerp,  103(5).  This  was
translated  into  French  under  the  title  "Relation
des  progres  de  la  religion  chrestienne  faits  an  Para
guay  dans  les  annees  1020  et  1027"  (Paris,  1038).

MATAMOROS,  Mariano  (mah  -  tali  -  mo'  -  ros),
Mexican  patriot,  d.  in  Valladolid,  3  Feb.,  1814.
Nothing  certain  is  known  of  the  place  and  date  of
his  birth  nor  of  his  early  life.  He  is  first  men
tioned  in  the  beginning  of  1810  as  substitute  par
ish  priest  of  Jantetelco,  a  small  village  south  of
Mexico.  He  was  often  molested  by  royalist  troops.
and  after  the  rising  of  Hidalgo,  as  he  was  sus
pected  of  sympathy  with  the  revolutionary  move
ment,  an  order  of  arrest  was  issued  against  him.
He  now  fled  to  Izucar,  where,  on  10  Dec.,  1811,  he
joined  Morelos  (q.  v.\  who,  recognizing  military
genius  in  him,  appointed  him  colonel.  He  justi
fied  Morelos's  good  opinion  by  displaying  talent
and  courage,  and  speedily  acquired  popularity
among  the  troops  and  influence  in  the  general
council.  He  accompanied  Moi'elos  on  his  expedi
tion  to  Tasco  and  in  the  heroic  defence  of  Cuaut-
la,  where,  to  obtain  provisions,  he  broke  through
the  besieging  army  on  21  April,  1812.  with  only
100  men  ;  but,  on  his  return  with  supplies  six  days
later,  he  was  defeated.  When  Morelos  evacuated
Cuautla  early  in  May.  he  was  joined  by  Matamoros,
who  was  ordered  to  reorganize  his  division  in  Izu
car,  promoted  brigadier,  took  part  in  the  capture
of  Oajaca  on  25  Nov.,  and  was  sent  to  the  south,
where  he  defeated  the  royalist  Lambrini  at  Tonalo
on  19  April,  1813,  and  was  made  lieutenant-gen
eral.  In  October  he  won  the  victory  of  San  Agus-
tin  del  Palmar,  where  the  Spaniards  lost  215
killed  and  308  prisoners.  He  now  established  his
quarters  at  Tehuicingo  till  he  was  ordered  by  Mo
relos  to  co-operate  in  the  attack  on  Valladolid,
where  the  allied  forces  took  position  on  22  Dec.,

1813.  On  the  next  day  their  attack  on  the  city
was  repulsed,  during  the  night  of  the  24th  their
camp  surprised  by  Iturbide.  and  their  forces  dis
persed. Matamoros  reorganized  some  of  the  troops
and  took  position  in  the  estate  of  Puruaran,  about
sixty  miles  from  Valladolid,  where  Morelos,  against
Matamoros's  advice,  resolved  to  wait  for  the  ene
my. Matamoros,  who  had  been  intrusted  with  the
command,  organized  his  troops,  and  on  15  Jan.,

1814,  they  were  attacked  by  overwhelming  forces
under  Iturbide  and  Llano  and  totally  routed,  and
Matamoros,  defending  the  retreat  of  Morelos  with
great  personal  bravery,  was  captured. lie  was  car
ried  to  Valladolid,  and,  after  trial  and  degradation
from  holy  orders,  executed  in  the  market-place.
He  was  one  of  the  most  active  and  successful  lead
ers  of  the  insurrection,  gifted  with  a  military  tal
ent,  of  pure  and  noble  character,  and  his  memory
is highly honored in Mexico. His bones were


MATERNA


MATHER


251


placed  with  those  of  Hidalgo  and  Morelos  in  the
cathedral  of  Mexico,  and  his  name  has  been  given
to  two  towns  and  to  districts  in  several  states.

MATERNA.  A  malic.  German  singer,  b.  in  St.
Georgen,  Austria,  10  July,  1847.  Her  first  appear
ance  was  made  in  the  Thalia  theatre,  in  Gratz,  about
1804,  and  she  afterward  married  Karl  Friedrich,  an
actor,  and  was  engaged  with  him  in  suburban  thea
tres  near  Vienna,  where  she  sang  in  operettas.  In
1809  she  appeared  in  the  Imperial  opera-house,
Vienna,  as  Selika  in  "  L'Africaine "  with  signal
success,  and  in  1870  earned  a  world-wide  reputa
tion  by  her  impersonation  of  Brunhilde  in  the
Xiebelungen  trilogy  at  the  Wagner  festival  in  Bei-
reuth.  She  sang  at  the  Wagner  concerts  of  Eng
land  in  1877,  and  came  to  the  United  States  in
1882  to  sing  in  the  Xew  York  music  festival  of
that  year.  Since  that  time  she  has  sung  in  Wag
ner's  operas  in  tin's  country  for  several  seasons  with
great  acceptability.

MATHER,  Fred,  pisciculturist,  b.  in  Albany,
X.  Y.,  in  August,  1833. In  1854  he  became  inter
ested  in  the  lead-mines  of  Potosi,  \Vis.,  and  after
ward  hunted  and  trapped  in  the  Bad  Axe  country
in  that  state. Here  he  learned  enough  of  the  Chip-
pewa  language  to  become  interpreter  to  the  gov
ernment survey  in  northern  Minnesota. During
the  political  troubles  in  Kansas  he  served  under
Gen.  James  Lane,  and  was  one  of  Jennison's  "  Jay-
hawkers." He enlisted in the 113th  Xew  York
regiment  in  1802,  and  became  1st  lieutenant  two
years  later. At  the  close  of  the  civil  war  he  took
a  clerkship  in  the  live-stock  yards  near  Albany. In
1808  he  bought  a  farm  at  Honeoye  Falls,  X.  Y.,
and  began  to  hatch  fish  of  various  kinds. When
the  U.  S.  fish  commission  was  formed  in  1872  he
was  sent  for  by  Prof.  Spencer  F.  Baird  to  hatch
shad  for  the  Potomac  river. In  1875  he  established
hatcheries  at  Lexington  and  Blacksburg  for  the
state  of  Virginia. A  year  earlier  he  had  hatched
the  first  sea-bass  and  graylings. After  several  vain
attempts  to  transport  salmon-eggs  to  Europe,  he
devised  a  refrigerator-box,  and  in  1875  succeeded
in  carrying  the  eggs  to  Germany. He  also,  at  the  {
same  time,  invented  a  conical  hatching  apparatus,  i
by  which,  through  the  admission  of  water  at  the  I
bottom,  shad  and  other  eggs  were  hatched  in  bulk
instead  of  in  layers  upon  trays  or  floating  boxes.  •
In  1884  he  hatched  the  adhesive  eggs  of  the  smelt,
although  all  previous  attempts  had  been  failures.
He has been sent  abroad several times  by the  j
U.  S.  government  in  connection  with  fish-culture,  j
and  he  has  medals  and  testimonials  from  many  '
scientific  societies  of  Europe. In  1877  he  became  :
fishery  editor  of  "  The  Field  "  in  Chicago,  and  since
1880  he  has  held  a  like  position  with  "  Forest  and  :
Stream  "  in  Xew  York  city. In  1882  he  was  sent  j
by  Prof.  Baird  to  Roslyn,  Long  Island,  to  hatch  :
salmon  for  the  Hudson  river. In  1883  he  was  ap-  j
pointed  superintendent  of  the  Xew  York  fish  com-  !
mission  station  at  Cold  Spring  Harbor.  Long  Island,  j
Here  the  hatching  of  lobsters,  codfish,  and  other  |
marine  forms  was  begun. He  has  published  "  Ich-  j
thyology  of  the  Adirondacks"  (1885),  which  de-  \
scribes  several  fishes  heretofore  unknown.

MATHER.  Frederic  (irearory,  journalist,  b.  in
Cleveland.  Ohio,  11  Aug.,  1844. He  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  in  1867.  and  studied  law  in  Cleve-  |
land,  but  did  not  practise,  having  chosen  commer-  |
cial and literary  pursuits. In 1874 he became  j
managing  editor  of  the  "Times "at  Binghamton,  ;
X.  Y..  and  in  1875  editor-in-chief  of  the  "Republi-  \
can ''  in  the  same  city,  but  resigned  the  place  in  I
1879. He  wrote  editorials  for  the  Albany  "  Evening
Journal"  in  1880,  and  then  became  the  resident


Albany  correspondent  of  several  newspapers.  He
has  frequently  contributed  to  periodicals,  chiefly
on  historical,  economic,  and  scientific  subjects.

MATHER,  Moses,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lyme,  Conn..
23  Feb.,  1719;  d.  in  Darien,  Conn..  21  Sept.,  1800.
i  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1739,  and  ordained
I  over  the  Congregational  church  in  Darien  in  1744,
which post he held till  his  death. During  the
Revolution  he  was  several  times  imprisoned  as  a
patriot. Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1791. He  was  noted  as  a  controversialist. He  pub
lished "Infant Baptism Defended" (1759),  and
"Election  Sermons"  (1781).

MATHER.  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lowton,
Lancashire,  England,  in 1590 ;  d.  in Dorchester,
Mass.,  22  April,  1069. He  was  the  progenitor  of
the  Mather  family  in  Xew  England. His  father
•  was  Thomas  Mather, and  his  grandfather was
John  Mather,  of  the  chapelry  of  Lowton,  in  the
parish  of  Winwick,  Lancashire. In  the  early  days
i  of  the  17th  century,  during  the  reign  of  James  L,
i  a  band  of  Puritans  cleared  away  the  heavy  forests
at  the  south  of  the  city  of  Liverpool,  and  settled
what  was  known  as  Toxteth  Park. They  looked
upon  the  burning  of  John  Bradford,  at  Smithfield,
!  as  a  martyrdom,  and  they  erected  a  stone  chapel
in  which  they  might  hear  the  doctrines  of  the  Ref
ormation. The  chapel  is  still  in  existence. It  is
plain  and  square,  with  no  steeple  or  belfry  of  any
:  description. The exterior is covered with ivy.
Among  the  tablets  upon  the  interior  wall  is  one
!  bearing  this  inscription  :  "  Xear  this  walk  rest  the
i  remains  of  several  generations  of  an  ancient  fami
ly  of  yeomanry  named  Mather,  who  were  settled  in
;  Toxteth  Park  as  early  as  the  reign  of  Queen  Eliza
beth. They  were  distinguished  by  many  virtues
and  by  strong  religious  feeling,  and  were  among
the fairest specimens of those who, in former
times,  were  called  Puritans." Richard  Mather  was
called  at  a  very  early  age  to  act  as  instructor  to
the  youth  of  this  church. While  filling  this  post
he  resolved  to  prepare  for  the  ministry,  and  to  this
;  end he  entered Brasenose college, Oxford. In
:  1020  he  was  ordained  by  the  bishop  of  Chester  and
i  was  settled  over  the  church  in  Toxteth,  where  he
I  remained until 1035.  when he removed to this
;  country. This  step  was  taken  because  he  had  been
i  suspended  twice  for  non-conformity,  and  because
he  foresaw  the  troubles  under  Charles  I.  arid  Arch
bishop  Laud. He  took  the  ship  "Bristol"  on  16
j  April  and landed in Boston,  in disguise,  on  17
j  Aug. His  manuscript  journal  for  1035  is  among
i  the  collections  of  the  Dorchester  antiquarian  and
historical  society. It  was  printed  in  Boston in
1850. In  regard  to  the  immigration  of  those  days
Daniel  X'eal  wrote  that  he  had  a  list  of seven  ty-
i  seven  divines,  ordained  in  the  Church  of  England,
that  became  pastors  of  churches  in  this  country
before  1040,  and  that  Richard  Mather  was  one  of
the  number. On  his  arrival  in  Boston,  Mr.  Mather
found the  church  of  Dorchester  deserted  by  its
minister,  who  had  become  a  colonist  at  Windsor,
Conn.,  with  a  part  of  his  flock. He  was  called  to
the  vacant  church  and  served  it  from  1030  till  his
death. His  preaching  was  direct  and  without  the
use  of  quotations  from  the  Latin. Thomas  Hooker
said  of him : "  My  brother  Mather  is  a  mighty
man." In  his  time  the  religious  discussion  was  not
so  much  upon  the  doctrines  as  upon  the  forms  of
worship  and  the  status  of  church  government. In
such  discussions  he  took  an  active  part,  and  an
swered  for  the  ministers  of  the  colony  the  thirty-
two  questions  relating  to  church  government  that
were propounded  by  the  general  court in 1030.
He  was  a  member  of  the  svnod  of  1648,  and  drew


252


MATHER


MATHER


up  the  celebrated  Cambridge  platform  of  disci
pline.  He  was  one  of  three  ministers  to  prepare
the  New  England  edition  of  the  Psalms  (1(540).  and
he  was  the  author  of  several  minor  works,  chiefly
on  church  discipline,  including  "  Discourse  on  the
Church  Covenant"  (1639),  and  "Treatise  on  Justi
fication"  (1652).  He  married  in  1642  Catharine,
•(.laughter  of  Edward  Holt,  of  Bury,  Lancashire,  the
mother  of  his  six  children,  who  were  all  sons,  and
four  of  whom  were  ministers — Samuel,  Nathaniel,
Eleazer,  and  Increase.  In  1056  he  married,  for  his
second  wife,  Sarah  Story,  widow  of  the  Rev.  John
Cotton,  of  Boston,  who  survived  him.  His  will  is
considered  one  of  the  most  remarkable  productions
of  its  kind  that  has  ever  been  written.  His  tomb,
with  Latin  inscription,  is  in  the  old  burying-
grotind  at.  Dorchester.  See  "  Life  and  Death  of
Richard  Mather,"  bv  his  son  Increase  (1670). — His
•eldest  son,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Toxteth,
England.  13  May,  1026 ;  d.  "in  Dublin,  Ireland,  29
Oct.,  1671,  came  to  this  country  with  his  father,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1643,  and  was  the
first  graduate  to  be  retained  as  a  tutor.  He  was
so  beloved  as  a  teacher  that  the  students  wore
badges  of  mourning  for  thirty  days  when  he  took
his  leave.  Soon  after  entering  the  ministry  at
Rowley  he  was  asked  to  be  the  pastor  of  the  new
North  church,  a  colony  of  the  old  South  church,
in  Boston.  He  consented  for  a  few  months,  and
then  he  left  for  England.  His  popularity  abroad
soon  became  great,  and  his  health  was  so  seriously
impaired  that  he  was  in  danger  of  losing  his  life.
He  was  appointed  chaplain  to  the  lord  mayor  of
London,  which  post  brought  him  in  contact  with
many  eminent  ministers.  He  preached  at  Graves
t-mi  and  in  the  cathedral  in  Exeter,  and  was  made
chaplain  of  Magdalen  college,  Oxford,  where  he
remained  for  some  time.  Having  accompanied  the
English  commissioners  into  Scotland,  he  labored
in  that  country  for  two  years.  In  1000  he  went  to
Ireland  with  several  other  ministers  and  the  lord
•deputy,  Henry  Cromwell.  He  was  made  joint  pas
tor  of  the  Church  of  St.  Nicholas,  in  which  he  was
.afterward  buried,  and  also  senior  fellow  of  Trinity
•college,  Dublin.  All  these  appointments  he  re
ceived  during  the  protectorate  and  in  return  for
his  non-conformist  views.  While  his  ideas  were
positive,  they  were  liberal.  He  refused  to  displace
several  Episcopal  ministers,  when  opportunity  of
fered,  on  the  ground  that  he  would  hinder  no  one
from  preaching  the  gospel.  Upon  the  Restoration
he  was  suspended  for  sedition  in  preaching  two
.anti-Episcopal  discourses.  Being  debarred  from
Ireland,  he  established  himself  at  Burton  Wood  in
Lancashire,  until,  with  2,000  other  non-conformist
•ministers,  he  was  ejected  from  England  in  1662.
Returning  to  Dublin,  he  founded  a  Congregational
church,  to  which  he  ministered  till  the  day  of  his
•death.  His  writings  were  chiefly  against  the  Es
tablished  church  and  in  favor  of  "a  united  effort  by
the  several  churches  of  the  Dissenters.  His  expos
ure  of  a  religious  quack  was  approved  by  the  king's
privy  council  in  Ireland.  He  stood  in  the  first
rank  of  pulpit  orators,  and  it  was  said  of  him  :
•"  Mr.  Charnock's  invention,  Dr.  Harrison's  ex
pression,  and  Mr.  Mather's  logic  would  make  the
.perfectest  preacher  in  the  world."  His  epitaph,
translated,  reads :  "  He  lived  long,  although  he  did
not  continue  long."  He  published  many  sermons
and  tracts,  "  Old  Testament  Types  Explained  and
Improved"  (London,  1673),  anil  "Life  of  Nathan
iel  Mather"  (1689).— Richard's  third  son,  Nathan
iel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lancashire,  England,  20
March,  1630 ;  d.  in  London,  26  July,  1697,  came  to
this  country  with  his  father,  and  was  graduated


,-it  Harvard  in  1647.  After  entering  the  ministry
he  followed  his  elder  brother  Samuel  to  England,
and  was  presented  by  Oliver  Cromwell  with  a  liv
ing  in  Barnstable,  which  he  held  from  1656  till
1662.  He  was  then  ejected  for  non-conformity,
after  which  he  ministered  to  an  English  church  in
Rotterdam.  After  the  death  of  Samuel  in  1671  he
succeeded  to  the  vacant  pulpit  in  Dublin.  After
ward  he  was  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  in
London  and  one  of  the  lecturers  at  Pinner's  hall.
He  was  the  author  of  several  religious  works.  On
his  tombstone  in  the  cemetery  near  Bunhill  Fields
is  a  long  inscription  in  Latin,  prepared  by  Dr.
Isaac  Watts,  which  ascribes  to  him  high  character
and  ability. — Richard's  fifth  son,  Eleazer,  cler
gyman,  b.  in  Dorchester,  Mass.,  13  May,  1637 ;  d.
in  Northampton,  Mass.,  24  July,  1009,  was  gradu
ated  at  Harvard  in  1056,  and  at  the  age  of  nine
teen  began  to  preach.  He  was  ordained  minister
over  the  first  church  that  was  organized  in  North
ampton,  Mass.,  in  1658,  and  retained  that  pastor
ate  till  his  death.  He  is  said  to  have  been  "  a  very
zealous  preacher  and  a  pious  walker."  He  married
a  daughter  of  Rev.  John  Warhain,  of  Dorchester
and  Windsor,  Conn.  After  his  death  she  married
his  successor,  the  celebrated  Rev.  Solomon  Stod-
dard,  and  became  the  grandmother  of  Rev.  Jona
than  Edwards.  Mr.  Mather's  only  daughter  mar
ried  Rev.  John  Williams,  of  Decrfield,  Mass.,  and
was  slain  by  the  Indians  in  their  attack  on  that
place  in  1704.  After  Mr.  Mather's  deatli  appeared
"  A  Serious  Exhortation  to  the  Succeeding  and
Present  Generation,  being  the  Substance  of  Several
Sermons  "  (1671). — Richard's  sixth  and  youngest
son,  IncreavSe,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dorchester,  Mass.,
21  June,  1639;  d.  in  Boston,  23  Aug.,  1723,  pur
sued  his  studies  out  of  college,  and  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  165(5  with  his  elder  brother  Eleazer.
At  the  request  of  his
brother  Samuel,  in  Ire
land,  and  Nathaniel,  in
England,  he  followed
them  to  their  fields  of
labor,  and  took  his  sec
ond  degree  at  Trin
ity  college,  Dublin,  in
1658.  His  first  minis
terial  charge,  at  Great
Torrington,  in  Devon
shire,  was  given  at  the
instance  of  John  Howe,
one  of  Cromwell's  chap
lains.  In  1659  Mr.
Mather  became  chap
lain  of  the  English
garrison  on  the  island
of  Guernsey,  and  he
also  preached  in  the  cathedral  in  St.  Mary's.  Return
ing  to  his  chaplaincy  at  Guernsey,  he  remained  till
1661,  when,  refusing  to  conform  and  accept  various
livings  that  were  offered  on  that  condition,  he  re
turned  to  Massachusetts.  He  preached  alternately
for  his  father  in  Dorchester,  and  for  the  new  North
church,  a  branch  of  the  old  South  church,  in  Bos
ton.  In  1664  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  North
church,  which  office  he  held  till  his  death — nearly
sixty  years.  For  a  considerable  part  of  this  time
his  son  Cotton  was  his  colleague,  and  their  bodies
lie  side  by  side  in  the  Mather  vault  in  Copp's  Hill
cemetery  nearly  opposite  Christ  church.  As  a  pas
tor,  his  sermons  and  prayers  were  full  of  originality
and  fervor.  He  kept  frequent  fasts  and  recorded
his  daily  life  in  a  book.  II is  life  with  his  family
is  said  to  have  been  most  delightful.  During  his
pastorate  the  churches  of  New  England  were  dis-


MATHER


MATHER


253


cussing  the  right  of  those  who  were  not  members
in  full  communion  to  bring  their  children  to  bap
tism.  It  was  a  transition  state  of  the  colony.  The
older  churches  had  been  established  for  nearly  a
generation,  and  many  of  the  younger  people  did
not  regard  themselves  as  regenerated  persons.  Ac
cording  to  the  rules  of  the  church,  their  children
could  not  be  baptized.  This  question  was  begun
in  Connecticut,  but  it  soon  spread  to  Massachu
setts  and  the  other  colonies.  In  the  discussion,
Mr.  Mather  united  his  efforts  with  those  of  Presi
dent  Chauncy  and  John  Davenport  in  opposition
to  the  general  synod's  decree  in  favor  of  the  "  half
way  covenant."  He  afterward  gave  in  a  modified
consent  to  the  decision.  He  urged  a  stronger
union  of  all  anti-Episcopal  believers  both  in  Eng
land  and  in  America,  and  anticipated  the  doctrine
of  Jonathan  Edwards  in  regard  to  the  millennium.
It  was  his  discussion  of  the  subject,  together  with
that  of  Samuel  Hopkins  and  Joseph  Bellamy,  that
reversed  the  previously  received  notions  of  the
coming  thousand  years  of  peace.

In  1669  he  was  prostrated  by  fever,  but  in  1670
resumed  his  pulpit.  In  1675  he  declared  to  his
people  that  King  Philip's  Indian  war  had  come
upon  them  because  of  their  iniquities.  During  the
second  year  of  the  war  his  church  and  library  were
destroyed  by  a  fire  that  was  set  by  the  Indians.
Then  came  the  small-pox,  which  led  to  the  calling
of  a  synod  at  the  suggestion  of  himself  and  several
others  to  make  inquiry  what  follies  had  provoked
the  Lord  to  bring  his  judgment  upon  New  Eng
land.  This  synod  declared  that  the  work  of  ref
ormation  must  begin  with  the  magistrates  and
all  those  who  are  in  authority,  and  it  enjoined
greater  strictness  in  the  admission  of  members  to
the  church.  The  well-known  New  England  con
fession  of  faith  was  also  adopted.  This  was,  in
substance,  the  Savoy  confession,  together  with
some  of  the  points  of  the  Westminster  confession.
The  confession  was  printed  with  the  Cambridge
platform  of  1648  as  the  book  of  doctrine  for  the
churches  of  the  Massachusetts  colony.  Mr.  Mather
was  a  strong  supporter  of  the  established  order  of
things  within  the  New  England  churches.  It  was
the  custom  to  require  of  persons  that  were  admit
ted  to  communion  some  account  of  their  religious
experience.  It  was  declared  by  some  clergymen
that  no  such  evidence  of  regeneration  should  be
required,  but  this  was  opposed  by  Mr.  Mather.
Another  innovation  that  he  opposed  was  the  aban
donment  by  particular  churches  of  their  separate
action  in  the  choice  of  pastors  and  their  con
senting  to  vote  only  in  connection  with  the  con
gregations.  The  Brattles  and  John  Leverett,
afterward  president  of  Harvard,  were  leaders  in
this  movement,  and  took  church  affairs  out  of
the  hands  of  the  whole  membership  as  a  body.
Dr.  Elliot  speaks  of  Increase  Mather  as  "  the  father
of  the  New  England  clergy."  President  Quincy
said  that  he  was  an  effective  agent  in  producing
the  excitement  relating  to  witchcraft.  The  fact
is  that  he  was  in  England  nearly  all  the  time  of
the  greatest  excitement,  and  that  on  his  return
he  immediately  prepared  a  book  entitled  "  Causes
of  Conscience  concerning  Witchcraft"  (1693).  in
which  he  refuted  the  doctrine  of  "  spectral  evi
dence"  on  the  ground  of  which  so  many  innocent
persons  had  been  condemned.  The  governor  im
mediately  pardoned  the  condemned,  and  the  accused
were  acquitted.  Thus  while  Mr.  Mather  wrote
sermons  and  books  against  witches,  yet  he  also  be
came  a  powerful  factor  in  subduing  the  excitement.
He  looked  with  sorrow  upon  the  innovations  that
have  been  noted  above.  He  always  insisted  upon


'  filling  the  churches  with  converted  members  and
the  right  of  each  church  to  decide  upon  what  min
ister  it  should  have.  It  is  claimed  for  him  that  he
was  the  man  who,  in  the  face  of  much  personal
sacrifice,  saved  the  great  body  of  Massachusetts
Congregational  churches  from  the  ruin  which
threatened  them.  President  Quincy  says  he  was
influenced  by  worldly,  selfish,  and  ambitious  mo
tives,  but  this  has  hardly  been  substantiated.

Side  by  side  with  his  duties  in  the  line  of  religion
Mr.  Mather  became  one  of  the  chief  educators  in
this  country.  In  1681  the  Rev.  Uriah  Oakes,  presi
dent  of  Harvard,  died,  and  Increase  Mather  was
appointed  his  successor,  taking  the  chair  and  con
ferring  the  degrees  at  the  following  commence
ment.  His  church,  however,  refused  to  give  him  a
dismission,  and  he  at  once  resigned  the  office.  The
offer  of  the  presidency  was  renewed  in  1685  after
the  death  of  President  John  Rogers.  This  time  it
was  accepted,  with  the  understanding  that  Mr.
Mather  was  to  reside  in  Boston  and  spend  part
of  his  time  in  Cambridge.  Thus  he  remained  the
sixth  president  of  Harvard  college  until  1701.  Be
fore  this  time  the  classes  at  Harvard  had  usually
consisted  of  from  two  to  ten  students,  but  during
Mr.  Mather's  presidency  the  number  increased  so
that  the  classes  often  contained  more  than  twenty.
While  serving  the  colony  in  England  he  presented
the  claims  of  the  college  to  the  king,  and  solicited
not  only  royal  but  private  patronage.  In  this  way
he  secured  the  benefits  that  came  from  the  dona-
tions  of  Thomas  Hollis.  During  the  four  years  of
his  absence  from  the  country  the  college  was  com
mitted  to  the  care  and  instruction  of  John  Leverett
and  William  Brattle,  the  tutors.  In  1692  he  pre
pared  a  charter  for  the  college,  which  received  the
sanction  of  the  general  court,  but  it  was  afterward
vetoed  in  England.  Several  times  Mr.  Mather
attempted  to  go  to  England  to  procure  a  charter
that  would  receive  the  signature  of  the  king,  but
was  prevented  and  the  college  continued  in  a  very
unsatisfactory  state.  President  Mather  repeatedly
proposed  to  resign,  the  corporation  as  repeatedly
prevailed  upon  him  to  reconsider  his  determination,
and  finally  induced  him  to  remove  to  Cambridge.
Finding  that  he  could  not  do  justice  to  his  pastoral
work  also,  he  sent  in  his  resignation.  President
Mather  was  not  only  active  in  affairs  of  religion  and
education,  but  he  served  the  colony  well  at  a  most
critical  time.  In  1682  Charles  II.  demanded  the
surrender  of  the  charter  that  had  been  granted  to
the  colony  of  Massachusetts  bay.  In  case  of  refusal
he  threatened  that  &quo  u-urranto  should  be  prose
cuted  against  the  colony.  The  people  were  led  by  Mr.
Mather  in  their  opposition  to  the  surrender,  the
ground  being  that  by  voluntarily  yielding  the  char
ter  the  people  lent  aid  to  the  plots  of  designing  men,,
but  if  they  were  overpowered  the  sole  responsibility
would  be  on  their  oppressors.  For  his  activity  Mr.
Mather  had  the  enmity  of  Edward  Randolph,  the
king's  emissary,  who  was  afterward  the  secretary  of
Sir  Edmund  Andros.  After  the  charter  had  been
taken  away,  and  while  Andros  was  governor,  Mr.
Mather  was  sent  to  England  in  1689  as  the  agent
of  the  people  to  ask  redress  from  the  king.  The
hostility  of  Andros  and  Randolph  was  so  great
that  he  was  obliged  to  go  on  board  ship  in  disguise
to  avoid  the  service  of  a  writ  that  Randolph  had
taken  out  against  him.  Samuel  Xowel.  Elisha
Hutchinson.  and  Richard  Wharton  met  him  in
London.  Randolph,  in  a  letter  to  the  lords  of
trade,  dated  29  May,  1689,  gives  a  narrative  of  the
unsettled  state  of  'the  territory  of  New  England
and  speaks  of  "  some  persons,  inhabitants  of  Boston,
who  had  pretended  grievances  against  the  governor


254


MATHER


MATHER


and  who  wished  to  obtain  a  renewal  of  their  former
charter  from  the  king."  At  the  time  of  Mr.
Mather's  visit  in  England  the  Revolution  had  placed
William  and  Mary  on  the  throne.  Mr.  Mather  had
frequent  interviews  with  King  William  and  his
ministers,  in  which  he  asked  the  restoration  of  the
former  charter  with  enlargements.  When  this  was
found  impossible,  he  procured  a  new  charter  under
which  the  united  colonies  of  Massachusetts  bay  and
Plymouth  lived  down  to  the  time  of  the  American
Re'yolution.  Owing  to  his  efforts,  the  Plymouth
colony  was  prevented  from  being  annexed  to  New
York.  So  great  was  the  confidence  that  was  re
posed  in  him  by  the  king  that  he  was  allowed  to
name  the  governor,  lieutenant-governor,  and  first
board  of  council  to  be  appointed  by  the  king.  He
arrived  in  Boston  in  May,  1092,  and  the  speaker  of
the  general  assembly,  in  the  name  of  the  representa
tives,  returned  him  thanks  for  his  faithful  endeav
ors  to  serve  the  colony.  In  the  same  year  Har
vard  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  1).,  the  first  that
was  conferred  in  this  country.

There  was  opposition  to  the  new  charter  on  the
ground  that  it  contained  restrictions  not  in  the
old  charter.  Mr.  Mather  lost  some  of  his  friends
among  those  who  insisted  upon  popular  rights,
but  he  was  sustained  by  the  more  conservative.
President  Quincy  declared  that  his  policy  was
mainly  successful  and  that  his  conduct  entitled
him  to  unqualified  approbation.  The  election  of
John  Leverett  as  president  of  Harvard  in  1708
was  brought  about  by  Gov.  Joseph  Dudley.  There
is  no  doubt  that  this  election  was  distasteful  to  Mr.
Mather,  and  he  has  been  charged  with  seeking  the
place  for  himself  or  for  his  son  Cotton.  He  ad
dressed  a  spicy  letter  to  Gov.  Dudley  which  has
been  made  the  basis  of  considerable  criticism  by
President  Quincy  and  others.  But  a  study  of  the
character  of  Dudley  shows  that  his  connection  with
Andros  was  such  as  to  be  a  cause  of  uneasiness  to
Mr.  Mather  and  his  friends.  Gov.  Ilutchinson
says  of  Dudley :  "  Ambition  was  his  ruling  passion,
and  perhaps,  like  Caesar,  he  had  rather  be  the  first
man  in  Xew  England  than  the  second  in  Old."  It
would  seem  that  Mr.  Mather  was  justified  in  feel
ing  grieved  at  the  influence  that  Dudley  had
obtained  in  the  colony,  and  especially  in  the  affairs
of  Harvard.  That  Mr.  Mather  was  influential  in
affairs  of  state  is  proved  from  another  source.  In
the  year  1700  the  Earl  of  Bellomont  wrote  from
New  York  to  the  lords  of  trade  in  London  to  the
«ffect  that  Sir  Henry  Ashurst,  along  with  Mr.
Mather,  had  "got  Sir  William  Phipps  made  governor
of  New  England."  During  the  four  years  that  he
remained  in  England  in  the  service  of  the  colony
he  worked  without  any  charge.  "  I  never  demand
ed,"  wrote  he,  "the  least  farthing  as  a  recompense
for  the  time  I  spent,  and  I  procured  donations  to
the  province  and  the  college  at  least  £900  more
than  all  the  expenses  of  my  agency  came  to."  Dr.
Mather  married,  in  1002,  Maria,  daughter  of  John
Cotton,  by  whom  he  had  seven  daughters  and  three
sons.  Mrs.  Mather  died  in  1714.  and  he  took  for
his  second  wife  Anna,  daughter  of  Capt.  Thomas
Lake,  and  widow  of  Rev.  John  Cotton,  of  New
Hampshire,  a  grandson  of  his  first  wife's  father.
Dr.  Mather's  publications  number  136.  Many  of
these  were  preserved  in  the  collection  of  George
Brinley,  of  Hartford,  Conn.,  which  was  sold  in  New
York  city  in  1879.  The  Antiquarian  society  at
Worcester,  Mass.,  has  probably  the  largest  number
of  his  works  that  have  been  gathered  in  any  one
place.  Among  his  books  are  "  The  Life  and  Death
of  Rev.  Richard  Mather"  (1670);  "Important
Truths  about  Conversion"  (1674);  "A  Discourse


concerning  Baptism  and  the  Consociation  of
Churches  (1675) ;  "A  History  of  the  War  with  the
Indians  "(1676;  reprinted,  with  notes  and  an  intro
duction  by  Samuel  G.  Drake,  Boston,  1862) ;  "  A
Relation  of  Troubles  of  New  England  from  the
Indians"  (1677;  with  notes  and  introduction  by
Samuel  G.  Drake,  Boston,  1864):  "  Cometographia,
or  a  Discourse  concerning  Comets"  (1683);  "  Re
markable  Providences"  (1684;  republished,  with
an  introduction  by  Charles  Offer,  London,  1850):
"Several  Papers  relating  to  the  State  of  New
England"  (1690):  and  "Dying  Pastor's  Legacy"
(1722).  See  Joseph  Sabin's  "  Dictionary  of  Works
relating  to  America"  (New  York.  1867).  His
life  was  written  by  his  son  Cotton  (Boston,  1724).
— Richard's  grandson.  Samuel,  clergyman,  eldest
son  of  Timothy  Mather,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dorches
ter,  Mass.,  5  July,  1650;  d.  in  Windsor.  Conn.,  18
March,  1728,  took  honors  at  Harvard  in  1671.
and  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Congregational
church  in  Windsor,  Conn.,  in  1682.  This  church
had  removed  from  Dorchester  to  Windsor,  and
was  in  a  weak  state  when  he  took  charge  as  its
third  minister  and  brought  unity  and  prosperity.
He  was  one  of  the  trustees  of  Yale  from  1700  till
1724.  and  published  several  religious  books,  among
them  "The  Dead  Faith,"  and  "On  renouncing  our
Righteousness.'' — Increase's  son,  Cotton,  clergy
man,  b.  in  Boston,  12  Feb.,  1663;  d.  there.  13  Feb.,
1728,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1678,  when
scarcely  sixteen  years  of  age.  An  impediment  in
his  speech  was  apparently  an  obstacle  to  his  becom
ing  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  but  lie  cured  his  habit
of  stammering  by  prolonging  his  syllables  as  in
singing.  His  speech  being  perfected,  he  renewed
his  theological  stud
ies,  and  began  to
preach  before  he  was
eighteen  years  old.
In  1684  lie  was  or
dained  colleague  pas
tor  of  the  North
church  in  Boston,  in
connection  with  his
father,  and  his  life
ministry  was  spent  in
that  pulpit.  One  of
the  earliest  develop
ments  of  his  charac
ter  was  his  desire  to
be  useful.  To  this
end  he  devised  a  plan
of  voluntary  associa
tions,  in  every  neigh
borhood, to  watch  and
suppress  all  evils.  lie  wrote  and  published  much
against  intemperance,  established  at  his  own  expense
a  school  for  colored  children  in  Boston,  advised  the
christianizing  of  negroes,  devoted  his  energies  to
the  benefit  of  the  seamen,  and  fostered  with  xealous
care  the  introduction  of  inoculation.  To  assist  in
this  work,  as  well  as  in  the  duties  of  a  faithful
pastor,  he  prepared  a  series  of  questions  for  every
day  in  the  week,  which  he  asked  of  himself  year
after  year.  As  the  outcome  of  these  endeavors  he
compiled  a  small  book,  "  Essays  to  do  Good  "  (1710 ;
new  ed.,  Glasgow,  1838),  which  is  better  known
than  a:iy  of  the  other  381  volumes  that  he  wrote.
In  a  letter  to  Cotton  Mathers  son.  Samuel,  dated
Passy,  France,  10  Nov.,  1779,  Benjamin  Franklin
said,  "Permit  me  to  mention  one  little  instance
which,  though  it  relates  to  myself,  will  not  be  quite
uninteresting  to  you.  When  I  was  a  boy  I  met
with  a  book  entitled  '  Essays  to  do  Good,'  which  I
think  was  written  by  your  father.  It  had  been  so


CcHon  c/llutfi


SV


MATHER


MATHER


255


little  regarded  by  its  former  possessor  that  several
leaves  of  it  were  torn  out ;  but  the  remainder  gave
me  such  a  turn  of  thinking  as  to  have  an  influence
on  my  conduct  through  life;  for  I  have  always  set
a  greater  value  on  the  character  of  a  doer  of  good
than  any  other  kind  of  reputation,  and  if  I  have
been,  as  you  seem  to  think,  a  useful  citizen,  the
public  owes  the  advantage  of  it  to  that  book."  He
was  systematic  in  his  work,  and  over  his  study-
door  was  the  warning  to  all  comers  "  Be  short."
While  he  had  considerably  less  to  do  with  civil
affairs  than  his  father,  yet  it  was  his  interposition,
both  oral  and  written,  that  saved  Gov.  Andros  and
his  subalterns  from  being  put  to  death  by  the  peo
ple  of  Boston.

His  literary  life  was  perhaps  more  remarkable
than  that  of  any  other  American  of  his  day.  His
prolific  writing  has  been  the  cause  of  much  diverse
criticism.  Dr.  Charles  Chauncy  wrote :  '•  In  re
gard  to  literature,  or  an  acquaintance  with  books
of  all  kinds,  I  give  the  palm  to  Cotton  Mather.
No  native  of  this  country  had  read  so  much,  or
retained  more  of  what  he  read.  He  was  the  great
est  redeemer  of  time  I  ever  knew.  There  were
scarcely  any  books  written  but  he  had,  somehow  or
other,  got  the  sight  of  them.  His  own  library  was
the  largest,  by  far,  of  any  private  one  on  the  con
tinent.  .  .  .  He  knew  more  of  the  history  of  this
country  than  any  man  in  it ;  and,  could  he  have
conveyed  his  knowledge  with  proportionate  judg
ment,  he  would  have  given  the  best  history  of  it."
Ilis  son  Samuel  writes  :  "  In  two  or  three  minutes'
turning  through  a  volume  he  could  easily  tell
whether  it  would  add  to  his  stock  of  ideas.  If  it
would  not,  he  quickly  laid  it  by.  If  otherwise,
passing  over  those  parts  which  contained  the  things
he  had  known  before,  he  perused  those  only  which
contained  what  was  new."  Of  himself,  Cotton
Mather  wrote:  ';I  am  able,  with  little  study,  to
write  in  seven  languages.  1  feast  myself  with  the
sweets  of  all  the  sciences  which  the  more  polite
part  of  mankind  ordinarily  pretend  to.  I  am
entertained  with  all  kinds  of  histories,  ancient  and
modern.  I  am  no  stranger  to  the  curiosities  which,
by  all  sorts  of  learning,  are  brought  to  the  curious.
These  intellectual  pleasures  are  far  beyond  any
sensual  ones."  Glasgow  university  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1710,  and  he  was  made  a  fellow
of  the  Royal  society  in  1713,  being  the  first  Ameri
can  to  receive  this  distinction.  He  had  a  very
extensive  correspondence  with  philosophers  and
literary  men  in  all  parts  of  the  world  and  in  vari
ous  languages,  but  more  especially  with  August
Herman  Francke,  leader  of  the  German  Pietists
and  founder  of  the  orphan  house  at  Halle,  for
which  he  obtained  many  benefactions  on  both  sides
of  the  Atlantic.  He  also  corresponded  with
Franc-Ice's  pupils,  and  especially  with  those  who
became  Danish  missionaries  at  Tranque  bar.  He
was  an  admirer  of  Father  Jacques  Bruyas,  the
French  philologist,  who  prepared  a  dictionary  and
catechism  for  the  Mohawk  Indians :  and  at  the
very  beginning  of  his  "  Magnalia "  he  quoted  a
short  poem  of  Dominie  Selyns,  the  Dutch  pastor  at
Xew  Amsterdam.  And  yet,  in  spite  of  a  world
wide  acquaintance,  a  cosmopolitan  education,  and
most  uncommon  ability,  his  very  best  friends  mus-t
concede  that  his  judgment  was  ill-balanced,  and
that  he  was  vain  to  the  last  degree.

He  was  active  in  the  witchcraft  persecutions.  In
1G85  he  published  "Memorable  Providences  re
lating  to  Witchcraft  and  Possessions."  and,  when
the  children  of  John  Goodwin  became  curiously
affected  in  1688.  he  was  one  of  the  four  ministers
of  Boston  who  held  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer,


and  favored  the  suspicion  of  diabolical  visitation.
He  afterward  took  the  eldest  daughter  to  his  house
in  order  to  observe  the  phases  of  the  phenomena.
When  the  first  phenomena  occurred  at  Salem  in
1692,  he  at  once  became  a  prominent  adviser  con
cerning  them,  and.  in  order  to  convince  all  who
doubted  the  possessions  and  disapproved  of  the
executions,  he  wrote  his  "  Wonders  of  the  Invisible
World"  (London,  1692).  When  the  reaction  in  the
popular  mind  followed,  he  attempted  to  arrest  it ;
and  though  he  afterward  admitted  that  "  there  had
been  a  going  too  far  in  that  affaii',"  he  never  ex
pressed  regret,  and  charged  the  responsibility  upon
the  powers  of  darkness.  His  course  in  the  matter
has  been  the  subject  of  much  criticism,  some  of  it
unjust.  The  belief  in  witches  had  been  world-wide
for  hundreds  of  years  before  he  was  born ;  thou
sands  of  such  accused  persons  had  been  put  to
death  in  Germany,  France,  and  Spain,  and  hun
dreds  in  England  during  the  century  before  the
date  of  his  birth  ;  and  later,  during  the  years  of
his  youth,  thousands  of  alleged  witches  were  burned
in  England  under  the  judicial  administrations  of
Sir  Matthew  Hale  and  Chief-Justice  Holt.  It  was
therefore  not  strange  that  an  intensely  spiritual
and  trusting  nature  like  that  of  Cotton  Mather
fell  in  with  a  belief  that  was  shared  by  many  who
did  not  sympathize  with  him  in  other  things.
Among  those  who  believed  in  the  reality  of  witches
were  the  president  and  fellows  of  Harvard,  the
French  and  Dutch  ministers  of  the  province  of
New  York,  and  William  Penn,  in  America,  and
Richard  Baxter  and  Isaac  Watts  in  England.  Even
so  late  as  1780  Sir  William  Blackstone  declared  a
similar  belief.  It  must  be  admitted  that  he  did
not  rejoice  at  the  earlier  allegations ;  that  he  ad
vised  the  separation  of  the  accused  and  the  use  of
milder  measures :  that  when  judicial  proceedings
had  been  determined  upon  he  opposed  the  admis
sion  of  the  "  spectral,"  or  any  other,  evidence  rest
ing  on  the  authority  of  the  devil ;  that  though  he
protested  to  the  judges  against  such  evidence,  yet
he  did  not  in  the  end  think  it  his  duty  to  abuse
the  judges  in  writing  a  history  of  the  trials :  and
that,  with  his  associates,  he  saw  the  measure  of  the
delusion  and  ended  it  years  before  it  was  ended  in
England.  The  Rev.  Chandler  Robbins,  in  his  his
tory  of  the  Second  church,  declares  that  he  ap
proached  the  discussion  of  Cotton  Mather's  char
acter  with  much  prejudice  against  him :  but  that
a  full  investigation  of  the  whole  subject,  and  a
due  regard  for
the  times  in
which  he  lived,
led  him  (Robbins)
to  form  a  most
favorable  opinion.
This  analysis  of
Cotton  Mather's
character  by  Rob-
bins  is  the  most
complete  that  has
ever  been  attempt
ed.  Cotton  Math
er  is  buried  in
Copp's  Hill  bury-
ing-ground.  in  the
older  part  of  Bos
ton.  (See  illustra
tion.)  The  follow
ing  inscription  is
on  a  slab  :  "  Rev
erend  Drs.  Increase,  Cotton,  and  Samuel  Mather
were  interred  in  this  vault.  'Tis  the  tomb  of  our
fathers,  Mather's  and  Crocker's."  Several  years  ago


256


MATHER


MATHER


a  story  was  published  to  the  effect  that  a  visitor
to  the  inner  tomb  had  discovered  that  the  dust  of
several  generations  had  vanished,  and  that  lit
erally  nothing  remained.  This  was  a  mistake.
The  real  tomb  is  a  large  room  containing  nearly
forty  coffins,  all  of  which,  so  far  as  can  be  learned,
are  as  well  preserved  as  could  reasonably  be  ex
pected.  Chief  among  Mather's  works  is  his  "  Mag-
nalia  Christi  Americana,"  a  mass  of  chaotic  ma
terial  for  an  ecclesiastical  history  of  New  Eng
land  (London,  folio.  1702;  2  vols., 'Hartford.  1820;
3d  American  ed.,  with  introduction  and  notes  by
Thomas  Robbins,  I).  D.,  translations  of  the  quota
tions  by  Lucius  P.  Robinson,  and  a  memoir  by
Samuel"  T.  Drake.  2  vols.,  Boston,  1855).  His
"Psaltcrium  Americanum''  (1718)  is  an  exact  un-
rhymed  metrical  translation  of  the  Psalms,  printed
as  "prose,  and  was  an  attempt  to  improve  the  care
less  current  versions.  He  left  several  large  works
in  manuscript,  the  chief  of  which  was  the  "  Biblia
Americana,  or  Sacred  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and
New  Testament,  Illustrated.''  The  list  of  his  pub
lications,  appended  to  his  life  by  his  son,  Samuel
Mather,  numbers  382,  and  a  list  recently  compiled
by  John  Langdon  Sibley,  in  his  work  on  the  early
graduates  of  Harvard,  is  even  larger.  A  sum-total
of  242  volumes  was  all  that  had  been  gathered
down  to  the  year  1879  by  the  American  antiquarian
society,  the  Massachusetts  historical  society,  the
Boston  athenanun,  and  the  Prince  collection  in
the  Boston  public  library.  The  number  in  the

Sossession  of  each  ranged  from  eighty  to  one  hun-
red  and  thirty;  but  of  114  there  was  only  a  sin
gle  copy  in  all  of  the  libraries  named.  The  British
museum  and  the  Bodleian  library  at  Oxford  have
made  a  specialty  in  collecting  the  works  of  In
crease  and  Cotton  Mather.  The  Brinley  collection
of  the  works  of  Cotton  Mather  was  the  best  in  the
United  States.  It  was  gathered  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
and  sold  in  New  York  city  in  1879.  Book  hunters
have  paid  enormous  prices  for  some  of  these  rare
books,  and  others,  heretofore  unknown,  are  fre
quently  found.  Although  the  earliest  book  thus
far  discovered  was  printed  when  Cotton  Mather
was  twenty-two  years  old,  yet  it  is  known  that  he
had,  at  that  time,  written  many  poems,  and  com
piled  several  almanacs,  one  of  the  latter  being  pub
lished  without  his  name,  as  a  "  happy  snare  "  to
give  information  and  to  "  warn  sinners."  It  is
thought  that  some  of  these  stray  volumes  may  yet
be  found  and  identified.  Cotton  Mather's  life  was
written  by  his  son,  Samuel  Mather  (Boston,  1729),
and  by  W.  B.  0.  Peabody  in  Sparks's  "  American
Biography."  See  also  Charles  W.  Upham's  '•  His
tory  of  the  Delusions  in  Salem  in  1692"  (1831);
"  The  Mather  Family,"  by  Rev.  Enoch  Pond  (1844) ;
and  Chandler  Robbins's  "History  of  the  Second
Church,  or  Old  North,  in  Boston  "  (1852). — In
crease's  second  son,  Nathaniel,  b.  in  Boston,  6
July,  1669 ;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  17  Oct.,  1688,  was
noted  for  his  precocity.  His  mental  powers  ex
hausted  his  vitality,  and  he  died  at  the  age  of  nine
teen.  At  sixteen  he  was  a  graduate  of  Harvard,
and  he  was  also  a  thorough  scholar  in  Greek,  Latin,
and  Hebrew.  His  cast  of  mind  was  highly  relig
ious.  His  epitaph  in  the  Charter  street  cemetery
in  Salem  reads  thus :  •'  Memento  Mori.  Mr.  Na"-
thaniel  Mather.  Died  October  ye  17th,  1688.  An
aged  person  who  had  seen  but  nineteen  winters  in
the  world.  He  was  the  youngest  brother  of  the
famous  Cotton  Mather,  who  came  to  Salem  during
Nathaniel's  illness,  and  closed  his  dying  eyes.  .  .
He  was  possessed  of  wonderful  attainments,  was  a
prodigy  of  learning,  and  his  first  published  work
appeared  in  print  when  he  was  only  fifteen  years  of


|  age."  He  prepared  "The  Boston  Ephemeris,  an
j  Almanack  for  1680."  —  Increase's  youngest  son,
i  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,  28  Aug.,  1674;
I  d.  in  Witney.  Oxfordshire,  England.  He  was  grad
uated  at  Harvard  in  1690,  and  established  a
( 'ongregational  church  at  Witney,  where  he  died
and  was  buried  in  the  church-yard  of  St.  Mary.  He
wrote  several  religious  works,  including  "  The  God
head  of  the  Holy  Ghost  "  (London,  1719),  and  "  A
Vindication  of  the  Holy  Bible"  (1723). — Cotton's
son,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,  30  Oct.,
1706;  d.  there,  27  June,  1785,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1723,  and  received  the  degree  of  D.I),
from  the  same  institution  in  1773.  In  1732.  four
years  after  his  father's  death,  he  was  ordained  as
colleague  pastor  over  the  same  church  to  which  his
father  and  his  grandfather,  Increase,  had  so  long
ministered.  Differences  arose  in  the  congregation  in
1742  relative  to  the  subject  of  revivals,  and  a,  sepa
rate  church  was  established  under  Mr.  Mather  in
North  Bennett  street.  He  published  "  Life,  of  Cot
ton  Mather  "  (1729) :  "  Essay  on  Gratitude  "  (1732) ;
"  Apology  for  the  Liberties  of  the  Churches  in  New
England  (1738);  "America  Known  to  the  An
cients  "  (1773) ;  "  The  Sacred  Minister,"  a  poem  in
blank  verse  (1773) ;  and  occasional  sermons.  He  is
buried,  with  his  father  and  grandfather,  in  Copp's
Hill  cemetery,  Boston.

MATHER,  Richard  Henry,  educator,  b.  in
Binghamton,  N.  Y.,  12  Feb.,  1835.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Amherst  in  1857,  appointed  tutor  of  Greek
in  1859,  assistant  professor  of  that  branch  in
1861,  professor  of  Greek  and  German  in  1864,  and
professor  of  Greek  and  lecturer  on  sculpture  in
1878.  He  lias  secured  for  Amherst  college  the  fin
est  collection  of  plaster  casts  in  the  United  States,
excepting  only  the  one  in  Boston,  and  he  has  as
sisted  in  the  growth  and  development  of  the  college
in  many  other  ways.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Bowdoin  in  1879.  Although  never  the
pastor  of  a  church,  he  often  supplies  the  pulpits  of
New  York,  Boston,  and  other  cities.  He  has  edited
Greek  text-books  for  use  in  colleges,  which  have
j  passed  through  several  editions.  The  principal
ones  are  Herodotus  (1872);  selections  from  Thucy-
dides,  the  "Electra"  of  Sophocles  (1873);  abstract
of  lectures  upon  sculpture  (1882) ;  and  the  "  Pro
metheus  Bound  "  of  ./Eschylus  (1883).  He  spent
the  winter  of  1887-'8  in  Athens  in  connection  with
the  work  of  his  professorships.

MATHER,  Samuel  Holmes,  financier,  b.  in
Washington,  N.  II. ,20  March,  1813.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Dartmouth  in  1834,  studied  law  in  Gene
va,  N.  Y.,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  Colum
bus,  Ohio,  in  1837.  After  practising  twelve  years
in  Cleveland,  he  organized  the  Society  for  savings
in  that  city.  The  middle  western  states  were  then
overrun  with  "  wild-cat "  banks,  and  the  experi
ment  of  a  conservative  savings-bank  on  the  plan
of  similar  institutions  in  Massachusetts  was  not
promising.  His  faith  in  the  sober  judgment  of
the  western  people  was  not  shaken,  and  the  bank
grew  stronger  every  year,  constantly  maintaining
its  place  as  a  large  institution,  both  as  to  deposits
and  surplus,  equalled  only  by  a  few  in  New  York
and  the  New  England  states.  He  has  been  presi
dent  of  the  bank  for  many  years,  and  his  judg
ment  upon  financial  ventures  and  investments  is
considered  of  great  value.

MATHER,  William  Williams,  geologist,  b.  in
Brooklyn,  Conn.,  24  May,  1804;  d.  in  Columbus,
Ohio,  20  Feb.,  1859.  He  was  a  lineal  descendant
of  Richard  Mather's  son  Timothy.  He  was  ad
mitted  to  the  U.S.  military  academy  in  1823.  In
1826  and  1827  he  led  his  class  in  the  newly  estab-


MATHESON


MATHEW


257


lished  department  of  chemistry  and  mineralogy,
and  to  him  were  submitted  the  proof-sheets  of
Webster's  chemistry,  then  in  process  of  publica
tion.  He  also  invented  an  apparatus  for  drawing
water  from  the  lowest  depths  of  the  Hudson  river,
and  noting  its  temperature.  After  his  graduation  in
1828  he  remained  at  West  Point  as  acting  assistant
instructor  of  artillery  during  the  annual  encamp
ment,  and  was  then  stationed  at  the  school  of
practice  at  Jefferson  barracks  until  April,  1829.
Prom  June,  1829,  he  was  for  six  years  the  acting
assistant  professor  of  chemistry,  mineralogy,  and
geology  at  West  Point.  He  was  then  ordered  on
topographical  duty  as  assistant  geologist  to  George
W.  Featherstonhaugh,  to  examine  the  country  from
Green  Bay  to  the  Coteau  de  Prairie.  This  survey
was  the  basis  of  a  report  and  a  topographical  map
of  St.  Peter's  river  valley.  He  then  joined  his
regiment  at  Fort  Gibson,  and  marched  into  the
Choctaw  country.  In  1830  he  resigned  from  the
army,  and  thereafter  devoted  himself  exclusively  to
science.  While  still  in  the  army,  and  acting  as
an  instructor  at  West  Point,  he  published  several
papers  on  chemistry  and  geology,  in  the  "  American
Journal  of  Science  and  Arts."  He  also  prepared  a
small  work  on  geology  for  the  use  of  schools
(Washington,  1833),  and  a  treatise  on  "  Diluvion,"
for  the  use  of  the  cadets.  With  the  consent  of  the
secretary  of  war  he  acted,  in  1833,  as  professor  of
chemistry,  geology,  and  mineralogy  in  the  Wes-
leyan  university,  Middletown,  Conn.,  and  in  1834
that  institution  gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  In
183G  he  was  appointed  geologist  of  the  first  district,
or  twenty-one  counties,  of  the  state  of  New  York.
This  work  required  seven  years,  and  his  final
report  was  a  quarto  of  671  pages,  with  forty-six
colored  plates,  a  great  undertaking  for  the  early
days  of  geological  research.  From  1837  to  1840
he  also  superintended  the  geological  survey  of  the
state  of  Ohio,  and  made  elaborate  reports  (2  vols.,
Columbus,  1838).  In  1838-'9  he  made  a  report
upon  the  geological  reconnoissance  of  the  state  of
Kentucky.  In  1842  he  became  professor  of  natu
ral  science  in  Ohio  university,  and  in  1845  was
its  acting  president.  He  was  acting  professor  of
chemistry,  mineralogy,  and  geology  in  Marietta
college  in  1846,  and  from  1847  till  1850  vice-presi
dent  and  professor  of  natural  science  in  Ohio  uni
versity.  During  his  professional  life,  between  the
years  1846  and  1850,  he  acted  as  geologist  and
mining  engineer  to  various  companies  on  Lake  Su
perior,  and  a  part  of  his  labors  is  recorded  in  thirty-
three  analyses  of  ores.  Eight  reports  were  also
made  upon  mines  in  Massachusetts,  New  Jersey,
and  Virginia.  From  1850  till  1854  he  was  the
agricultural  chemist  for  the  state  of  Ohio,  and
editor  of  the  "  Western  Agriculturist."  In  1853  he
was  appointed  geologist  of  Lieut.  Williamson's
party  of  exploration  across  the  Sierra  Nevada  for
the  Pacific  railroad,  but  declined  through  physical
disability.  From  1837  till  his  death  he  gathered  a
cabinet  of  minerals  that  finally  numbered  22,000
specimens.  He  was  a  member  of  many  scientific
and  historical  societies,  and  for  fifteen  years  a
trustee  of  Granville  college.  Ohio.  Brown  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1853.

MATHESON,  Roderick,  Canadian  senator,  b.
in  Koss-shire,  Scotland,  about  1792 ;  d.  in  Ontario
in  1872.  He  was  educated  at  Inverness,  emigrated
to  Canada,  and  served  in  the  war  of  1812  as  an  en
sign  in  the  Glengarry  light  infantry.  He  was  at
the  actions  at  York,  Sackett's  Harbor,  Fort  George,
Lundy's  Lane,  and  Fort  Erie,  and  was  wounded  at
one  of  these  engagements.  He  was  subsequently
appointed  colonel  commanding  the  1st  military
VOL.  iv. — 17


district  of  Ontario.  Col.  Matheson  became  a  mem
ber  of  the  legislative  council  in  1847,  and  in  1867
a  member  of  the  Dominion  senate.

MATHEW,  Edward,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Eng
land  in  1729 ;  d.  in  Claville  Lodge,  Hants,  Eng
land,  26  Dec.,  1805.  He  was  ensign  in  the  Cold-
stream  guards  in  1746,  captain  and  lieutenant-
colonel  in  1762,  colonel  in  1775,  and  aide-de-camp
to  George  III.  the  same  year.  He  came  to  the
United  States  in  1776  in  command  of  a  brigade  of
guards,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general,  par
ticipated  in  the  capture  of  Fort  Washington,  led
the  party  that  was  sent  to  destroy  Gosport,  Va.,
and  after  his  return  accompanied  Sir  Henry  Clin
ton  up  the  Hudson.  He  was  colonel  of  the  65th
regiment  in  1779,  appointed  major-general  the
same  year,  and  in  1780  was  stationed  at  or  near
New  York,  but  returned  to  England  the  same  year.
He  was  commander-in-chief  of  the  forces  of  the
West  Indies  in  November.  1782,  governor-general
of  Granada  and  the  southern  Carribean  islands  in
1783,  and  in  1797  was  given  the  rank  of  general.

MATHEW,  Theobald,  apostle  of  temperance,
b.  in  Thomastown,  County  Tipperary,  Ireland,  10
Oct.,  1790;  d.  there,  8  Dec.,  1856.  He  was  edu
cated  in  the  College  of  Maynooth,  and  entered  a
Capuchin  convent  at  Kilkenny,  where  he  remained
until  after  his  ordination  in  1814,  when  he  took
charge  of  a  chapel  in  Cork.  His  urbane  manners
and  charitable  disposition  soon  acquired  for  him
great  influence.  He  interested  himself  warmly  in
the  condition  of  the  lower  classes,  and  organized
a  religious  association  for  visiting  the  poor  and
the  sick,  which  he  induced  many  young  men  to
join.  In  1838  a  Quaker  first  directed  his  attention
to  the  necessity  of  suppressing  intemperance,  and
soon  afterward  he  was  invited  to  Cork  to  join  in
devising  a  crusade  against  drunkenness.  A  total
abstinence  society  was  formed,  of  which  he  was
chosen  president.  Thirty-five  persons  took  the
pledge  at  once,  and  the  following  day  several  hun
dred  joined  the  society.  In  the  course  of  five
months  he  administered  the  pledge  at  Cork  alone
to  150,000  people,  and  no  small  part  of  this  success
was  due  to  Father  Mathew's  personal  influence.  He
was  then  invited  to  all  parts  of  Ireland,  and  was  fol
lowed  by  great  crowds.  After  visiting  every  town
in  Ireland  he  went  to  England,  where  he  was  re
ceived  with  enthusiasm.  His  benevolences  had  in
volved  him  deeply  in  debt,  and.  although  he  re
ceived  a  pension  of  £300  from  the  queen,  most  of
it  was  applied  to  paying  an  insurance  on  his  life
for  the  benefit  of  his  creditors.  His  brother,  a
wealthy  distiller  in  Ireland,  also  assisted  him  finan
cially,  until  his  business  was  ruined  by  the  prog
ress  of  the  temperance  movement.  After  his
tour  of  England  he  visited  the  United  States,  ar
riving  in  New  York  in  July,  1849.  He  made  a
successful  visit  to  that  city,  and  did  good  service
in  Boston,  but  alienated  a  number  of  its  citizens
by  his  refusal,  for  diplomatic  reasons,  to  join  the
anti-slavery  societies.  In  Washington  he  was  ad
mitted  to  a  seat  on  the  floor  of  congress,  an  honor
that  had  not  previously  been  conferred  on  any  for
eigner  but  Lafayette.  Beginning  with  Richmond
he  made  a  tour  of  the  southern  states,  subsequent
ly  visiting  Tennessee,  Mississippi,  Arkansas,  and
Missouri.  In  his  farewell  address  to  the  citizens
of  the  United  States,  he  said  that  he  had  obtained
600.000  signatures  to  the  temperance  pledge  in
this  country.  A  statue  to  his  memory  has  been
placed  in  the  central  square  of  Salem,  Mass.,  the
gift  of  Thomas  Horgan  to  that  town.  See  "  Biog
raphy  of  Father  Mathew,"  by  John  Francis  Mc-
Guire  (New  York,  1864).


258


MATHEWS


MATIIEWS


MATHEWS.  Charles.  English  actor,  b.  in  Lon
don,  28  July,  1776;  d.  in  Plymouth,  28  June,  1835.
He  was  the  son  of  a  London  bookseller  and  early
educated  to  his  father's  business,  but  began  to  act
in  1792  at  the  Richmond  theatre,  and,  after  a  long
provincial  experience,  found  his  way  to  the  1 1  ay-
market  theatre,  London,  in  1803,  where,  on  15  May.
he  appeared  as  Jubal  in  "The  Jew/'  In  1804  he
connected  himself  with  Drury  lane  theatre.  After
playing1  for  many  years  in  London  and  the  prov
inces,  he  became  one  of  the  lessees  of  the  Adelphi
theatre  in  18-31.  His  connection  with  the  London
playhouses  was  varied  with  entertainments  in  con
cert-halls,  in  which  he  impersonated  numerous  char
acters.  Mathews  made  two  visits  to  this  country,
in  1822  and  1834.  His  first  venture,  of  less  than  a
year's  duration,  yielded  over  $50,000 :  the  second  was
less  profitable.  '  On  2  Sept..  1822,  the  actor  began
at  the  Holiday  street  theatre,  in  Baltimore,  as  01  la-
pod  in  '•  The  'Poor  Gentleman,"  and  then  in  suc
cession  he  visited  Philadelphia,  New  York,  and  Bos
ton.  On  his  second  visit  it  was  apparent  that  he
had  lost  much  of  his  former  vivacity.  His  last  ef
fort  was  on  11  Feb.,  1835.  at  the  Park  theatre  in
New  York  city.  Dr.  Pangloss,  in  "  The  Heir-at-
Law,''  Ollapod,  in  •'  The  Poor  Gentleman,"  and
Rover,  in  "  Wild  Oats,"  were  among  his  favorite
parts.  He  also  gave  his  "  entertainments,"  of
about  two  hours'  duration,  entitled  "A  Trip  to
Paris,"  "  At  Home,"  "  Mail-Coach  Adventures,"
and  "  Country  Cousins."  all  of  which  were  highly
diverting  and  well  received.  Mathews  was  tall
and  slim,  with  one  leg  shorter  than  the  other.  His
features  were  cast  for  comedy,  being  nervously
drawn  to  strange  expressions  for  the  provocation
of  laughter.  He  was  excellent  as  an  actor  of  ec
centric  characters  and  most  remarkable  as  a  mimic.
He  was  endowed  with  ready  wit,  stored  with  anec
dote,  and  sang  comic  songs  with  unusual  effect.
His  alterations  of  voice  and  features  and  rapid
changes  of  costume  were  marvels.  In  this  he  had
no  rival. — His  son,  Charles  James,  actor,  b.  in
London  in  December,  1803 ;  d.  in  Manchester,  Eng
land,  24  June,  1878,  was  educated  for  the  profes
sion  of  an  architect.  In  1835  he  made  his  debut  at
the  Olympic  theatre,  in  his  native  city,  and  for
many  years  was  connected  as  actor  and  manager
with  the  British  stage.  He  also  appeared  on  several
occasions  in  connection  with  the  French  comedians
in  Paris,  and  toward  the  close  of  his  life  visited
Australia.  Mathews  made  two  visits  to  this  coun
try.  The  first,  in  1837,  in  company  with  his  wife,
formerly  Madame  Vestris,  was  unsuccessful  on  per
sonal  grounds.  The  second,  in  1857,  yielded  him
ample  returns.  He  was  a  finished  performer  in
eccentric  genteel  comedy  parts,  which  he  played
with  remarkable  ease  and  vivacity.

MATHEWS,  Cornelius,  author,  b.  in  Portches-
ter,  N.  Y.,  28  Oct.,  1817.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  New  York  in  1835,  and  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1837,  but  abandoned  his  profession
for  literature,  and  from  1838  till  1850  was  a  vo
luminous  writer  in  a  variety  of  departments,  poet
ry,  the  drama,  prose  'fiction,  satire,  and  journalism.
In  1840-'2,  with  Evert  A.  Duyckinck,  he  edited
"  Arcturus,"  a  monthly  magazine,  and  he  has  since
been  connected  with  other  similar  publications.  He
was  an  early,  active,  and  enthusiastic  worker  in  the
cause  of  copyright,  and  the  chief  founder  in  1843
of  the  old  copyright  club,  of  which  William  Cullen
Bryant  was  president.  Originality,  acute  observa
tion,  fancy,  satirical  power,  and  manliness  of  sen
timent  are  to  be  found  in  all  of  his  works,  but  he
wants  finish  and  style  to  make  him  a  popular
writer.  Some  of  his  most  original  conceptions  are


i  striking  studies  rather  than  completed  works.  He
was  a  life-long  friend  of  Evert  A.  Duyckinck,  and
I  a  correspondent  of  Charles  Dickens  and  Elizabeth
Barrett  Browning,  of  whose  works  he  was  the  first
!  American  editor.  Margaret  Fuller,  in  her  essay
j  on  "American  Literature,"  devotes  four  of  twenty-
I  one  pages  to  Mathews's  "  Poems  on  Man  in  the  Re
public  "  and  "  Witchcraft."  Of  the  latter  she  writes :
"  It  is  a  work  of  strong  and  majestic  lineaments ;
a  fine  originality  is  shown  in  the  conception."  His
works  include  "  The  Motley  Book,"  a  series  of  tales
and  sketches  (New  York,  1838) ;  "  Behemoth,  a
Legend  of  the  Mound -Builders"  (1839);  "The
Politicians."  a  comedy  (1840);  "  Puffer  Hopkins"
(1841);  "Wakemlah,"  an  Indian  poem  (1841);
"  Poems  on  Man  "  (1843) ;  '•  Big  Abel  and  Little
Manhattan"  (1845);  "Witchcraft,"  a  tragedy  on
the  Salem  delusion,  performed  at  the  New  York
and  Philadelphia  theatres  (1846,  reprinted  in  Lon
don);  "Jacob  Leisler,"  a  drama,  of  Dutch  colonial
history,  also  performed  in  Philadelphia  (1848);
|  "Chanticleer:  a  Thanksgiving  Story"  (1S50);
'•  Moneypenny,  or  the  Heart  of  the  World  "  (1850) ;
"Pen-and-ink  Panorama  of  New  York  City"
(1853) ;  "False  Pretences,"  a  comedy ;  and  "Indian
Fairy  Tales"  (1868). — His  cousin.  Albert,  author,
b.  in  New  York  city,  8  Sept.,  1820,  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1842,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  New  York  bar  in  Mav,  1845.  He  has  written
under  the  pen-name  of  "  Paul  Siegvolk,"  and  has
published  "  Walter  Ash  wood  ;  a  Love  Story  "  (New
York.  1860):  and  "A  Bundle  of  Papers"  (1879).

MATHEWS,  (ieorge,  statesman,  b.  in  Augusta
county,  Va.,  in  1739;  d.  in  Augusta,  Ga.,  30  Aug.,
1812.  He  led  a  volunteer  company  against  the
Indians  at  the  age  of  twenty-two,  took  part  in  the
battle  of  Point  Pleasant,  10  Oct.,  1774,  and  at  the
beginning  of  the  Revolution  joined  the  patriot
army,  and  was  placed  in  command  of  the  9th
Virginia  regiment.  He  was  engaged  at  Brandy-
wine  and  at  Germantown,  where  he  was  captured,
after  receiving  nine  bayonet  wounds.  He  was
confined  on  the  prison-ship  in  New  York  harbor
till  his  exchange  in  December,  1781.  when  he
joined  Gen.  Nathanael  Greene's  army  at  the  head
of  the  3d  Virginia  regiment.  He  removed  with
his  family  to  Georgia  in  1785,  and  settled  in  Ogle-
thorpe  county,  on  Broad  river.  He  represented
that  state  in  the  first  congress,  served  from  1781
till  1791,  and  was  governor  of  Georgia  in  1793-'6.
During  his  occupation  of  this  office  the  Indians
constantly  engaged  in  insurrections  which  he
quelled,  but  he  lost  his  popularity  and  excited  the
animosity  of  the  greater  part  of  his  constituents
by  signing  the  Yazoo  fund  bill,  by  which  more
than  half  the  state  was  alienated.  Mathews  is
represented  as  opposed  to  this  act,  and  his  probity
of  character  clears  him  from  the  suspicion  of  cor
ruption,  but  he  judged  that  in  the  passage  of  the
bill  the  legislature  had  not  transcended  its  consti
tutional  powers,  in  which  opinion  he  was  sustained
by  the  supreme  court  of  the  United  States.  He  was
subsequently  brigadier-general  of  militia,  and  in
January,  1811,  was  authorized  by  the  president  to
take  possession  of  West  Florida,  and  captured
Amelia  island. — His  son,  Oeorare,  jurist,  b.  near
Staunton,  Va.,  21  Sept.,  1774 ;  d.  in  Bayou  Sara,
La.,  14  Nov.,  1836,  removed  to  Georgia  in  1785,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1799,  and  emigrating
to  Mississippi  territory  was  appointed  by  President
Jefferson  judge  of  the  superior  court  in  1805.
The  next  year  he  was  transferred  in  the  same  ca
pacity  to  New  Orleans.  On  the  organization  of
the  Louisiana  judiciary  he  became  presiding  jus
tice  of  the  supreme  court,  and  held  office  until


MA THEWS


MATHEWSON


259


his  death.  Judge  Mat  hews,  in  the  beginning  of
his  judicial  career,  possessed  little  knowledge  of
civil  law,  and  no  experience  in  the  complicated  sys
tem  prevailing  in  the  territory,  but  his  decisions
did  much  to  form  a  permanent  system  of  jurispru
dence  in  Louisiana.

MATHEWS.  James  McFarlane,  clergyman,
b.  in  Salem,  X.  Y..  18  March,  1785  ;  d.  in  New"  York
city,  28  Jan..  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
college  in  1803,  and  at  the  theological  seminary  of
the  Associate  Reformed  church  in  1807,  and  was

associate  pro
fessor  of  bibli
cal  literature  in
Dr.  John  M.
Mason's  theo
logical  serai-
nary  in  1812,
founding  the
South  Dutch
church  in  Gar
den  street,  in
which  charge
he  continued
till  1840.  The
engraving  rep
resents  the  old
edifice,  built  in
1693  and  taken
down  in  1813.
In  1^:55  he  built  the  Washington  square  church,
a  branch  of  the  South  Dutch  church.  From  1840
until  his  death  he  held  no  pastorate,  but  was  ac
tive  in  ecclesiastical  affairs,  devoted  much  time  to
the  cause  of  education,  and  delivered  a  series  of
lectures  to  students.  He  was  a  founder  of  the
University  of  New  York,  and  its  first  chancellor,
holding  office  in  1831-'9.  He  organized  and  pre
sided  over  the  Christian  union  council,  which  met
in  New  York  in  1870,  and  his  exertions  in  its  be
half  hastened  his  death.  He  was  in  official  life
for  more  than  fifty  years,  and  was  a  successful
teacher  and  preacher.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Yale  in  1823.  Dr.  Mathews  is  the  au
thor  of  "What  is  Your  Life?"  (New  York.  1840);
'•  The  Bible  and  Men  of  Learning"  (1855);  "The
Bible  and  Civil  Government "  (1858) ;  and  "  Fif
ty  Years  in  New  York "  (1858).  His  daughters,
JOAXXA  H.  and  JULIA,  have  written  Sunday-school
and  juvenile  books.

MATHEWS,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C..  in  1774;  d.  there,  17  Nov.,  1802.  He  was
an  active  promoter  of  the  Revolution,  was  the
first  speaker  of  the  state  house  of  representatives
after  the  dissolution  of  the  royal  government  in
1776.  and  the  same  year  became  an  associate  of
the  supreme  court  of  South  Carolina.  He  served
in  the  Continental  congress  in  1778-'82,  opposed
the  project  of  purchasing  peace  with  Great  Brit
ain  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  Carolinas  and  Georgia,
and  was  a  member  of  the  committee  to  confer  with
the  enemy  on  that  subject.  He  succeeded  Ed
ward  Rutledge  as  governor  of  South  Carolina  in
1782,  and,  with  Gen.  Nathanael  Greene  and  Gen.
Anthony  Wayne,  followed  the  retreat  of  the  Brit
ish  to  their  shipping.  On  the  establishment  of
the  court  of  equity  in  1784,  he  was  chosen  chan
cellor  with  John  Rutledge  and  Richard  Hudson,
serving  until  his  resignation  in  1797.  His  elec
tion  to  that  office  is  described  by  a  contemporary
writer  as  "  a  just  tribute  to  exalted  worth  and
disinterested  services."

MATHEWS,  Vincent,  congressman,  b.  in  Or
ange,  N.  Y..  29  June,  1766 ;  d.  in  Rochester,  X.  Y.,
23  Aug.,  1846.  He  was  educated  under  Noah


Webster,  studied  law  in  New  York  city,  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1790,  and  settled  in  practice
at  Elmira,  N.  Y.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state
house  of  representatives  in  1793,  and  of  the  senate
in  1796,  was  commissioner  to  settle  the  bounty
land-claims  in  1798,  and  in  1808  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Federalist,  serving  from  1809  till
1811.  He  was  state  district  attorney  in  1812-?15,
removed  to  Bath  and  subsequently  to  Rochester,
represented  Monroe  county  in  the  legislature  in
1826.  and  as  chairman  of  the  committee  on  finance
in  that  body  prepared  the  report  in  which  he  op
posed  schemes  of  internal  improvement.  Mr.  Math
ews  served  as  district  attorney  of  Monroe  county
in  1831-'3.  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  senior
member  of  the  bar  of  western  New  York,  and  one
of  its  ablest  practitioners.

MATHEWS.  William,  author,  b.  in  Waterville,
Me.,  28  July,  1818.  He  was  graduated  at  Waterville
college  (now  Colby  university)  in  1835,  and  studied
law  in  Waterville  and  at  Harvard.  He  was  ad
mitted  to  the  Kennebec  county  bar  in  1838,  but
continued  his  law  studies  another  year.  The  suc
ceeding  year  he  spent  in  travel  and  in  teaching  in
Virginia.  He  began  the  practice  of  law  at  Water
ville  in  1841,  and  soon  afterward  he  published  a
literary  and  family  newspaper,  "The  Watervillo-
nian,"  which  after  a  year  was  changed  to  "The
Yankee  Blade."  This  paper,  which  soon  engrossed
all  his  time,  was  removed  in  1843  to  Gardiner,  Me.,
published  there  till  1847.  and  then  transferred  to
Boston,  Mass.,  where  it  was  published  till  1856,
and  then  sold  and  united  with  "  The  Portfolio."
Dr.  Mathews  removed  to  Chicago,  111.,  in  1856,
where  he  became  a  regular  contributor  to  the
press,  and  in  1859
was  appointed  libra
rian  of  the  Young
men's  association.
He  resigned  this  post
in  1862,  and  accept
ed  a  call  to  the  chair
of  rhetoric  and  Eng
lish  literature  in  the
University  of  Chica
go,  which  he  occu
pied  till  1875.  Hav
ing  meanwhile  pub
lished  two  books,
which  had  been  re
ceived  with  unex
pected  favor  by  th*e
public,  he  resigned
his  chair  in  order  to
devote  himself  wholly  to  literature.  He  re
moved  to  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1880,  where,  except
ing  nearly  three  years  of  European  travel,  he
has  since  lived.  In  1868  he  received  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  from  Colby  university.  His  publica
tions  include  "  Getting  on  in  the  World  "  (Chica
go,  1872  ;  reprinted  in  London,  and  translated  into
Swedish  and  Magyar):  "The  Great  Conversers,
and  Other  Essays""  (1873) ;  "  Words,  their  Use  and
Abuse"  (1876:  'enlarged  ed..  1884):  "Hours  with
Men  and  Books"  (1877) :  "  Monday-Chats," a  trans
lation  of  selections  from  the  "  Causeries  du  Lundi "
of  Sainte-Beuve.  with  an  introductory  essay  on  his
life  and  writings  (1877) :  "  Oratory  and  Orators  "
(1879) :  "  Literary  Style,  and  Other'Essays  "  (1881) ;
and  "  Men.  Places,  and  Things  "  (1887).  "  Dr.  Math
ews  has  now  in  preparation  (1888)  "  Wit  and
Humor,  their  Use  and  Abuse."

MATHEWSON.  Elisha.  senator,  b.  in  Scituate.
R.  I.,  18  April,  1767;  d.  there,  6  Feb.,  1853.  His
father,  Thomas,  was  one  of  the  first  white  settlers


260


MATIGNON


MATSELL


of  Scituate,  and  lived  in  a  cave  on  the  farm  on
which  the  son  was  born,  lived,  and  died.  Elisha
received  a  common-school  education,  was  a  suc
cessful  farmer,  served  for  many  years  in  the  legis
lature,  of  which  he  was  at  one  time  speaker,  and
in  1806  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  to  fill  the
unexpired  term  of  James  Fenner,  serving  from
November,  1807,  till  March,  1811.

MATIGNON,  Francis  (mah-teen-yong),  clergy
man,  b.  in  Paris,  France,  in  1753;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  19  Sept..  1818.  He  was  ordained  in  1778,  and
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  at  the  Sor bonne  in  1785.
He  was  for  several  years  professor  of  divinity  in
the  College  of  Navarre,  but  fled  to  England  during
the  reign  of  terror,  and  then  he  resolved  to  go  to
the  United  States.  He  landed  in  Baltimore,  2(5  June,
1792,  and  was  appointed  by  Bishop  Carroll  to  take
charge  of  the  church  in  Boston.  The  entire  Ro
man  Catholic  population  of  the  city  was  less  than
300,  nearly  all  French  and  Irish  of  the  poorer
classes.  For  four  years  he  was  the  only  priest  in
Boston,  and  his  mission  also  embraced  the  whole
of  New  England.  There  were  no  churches,  and
he  had  to  visit  the  Roman  Catholics  that  were
scattered  over  this  territory  at  their  homes.  He
was  so  poor  that  he  had  to  make  his  journeys  on
foot.  In  1796  he  was  assisted  by  the  Abbe  de
Cheverus,  who  had  been  his  pupil  in  France.  In
1803  the  congregation  of  the  Abbe  Matignon  had
increased  so  much  that  a  new  church  became  neces
sary.  Subscriptions  flowed  in  rapidly,  to  a  great
extent  from  Protestants,  the  name  of  the  president
of  the  United  States,  John  Adams,  standing  at  the
head  of  the  list.  In  1808  the  see  of  Boston  was
created,  and  Dr.  Matignon  was  proposed  as  bishop,
but  he  declined.  He  is  considered  the  pioneer  of
the  Roman  Catholic  church  in  New  England.  Dr.
Matignon  was  an  eloquent  preacher  and  profound
scholar,  and  the  rapid  advance  of  his  church  in
numbers  and  consideration  in  Boston  was  mainly
due  to  his  efforts.  Dr.  Matignon  wrote  "  Rules  of
the  Confraternity,  or  Association  of  the  Holy
Cross ''  (Boston,  1817).

MATILE,  George  Aiignste,  jurist,  b.  in  La
Chaux-de-Fonds,  Neufchatel,  Switzerland,  30  May,
1807 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  6  Feb.,  1881.  He
was  educated  in  the  colleges  of  Neufchatel  and
Berne,  studied  law  in  Berlin,  Heidelberg,  and
Paris,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  Neufchatel  in
1830.  He  served  several  terms  in  the  legislature
of  his  canton,  and  was  chosen  professor  of  Roman
law  at  the  University  of  Neufchatel  in  1838.  He
also  served  as  one  of  the  judges  of  the  supreme
court.  He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1849,  in
consequence  of  political  troubles,  and  was  natu
ralized  in  1856.  He  was  professor  of  history  at
Princeton  in  1855-'8,  and  then  accepted  the  chair
of  French  literature  in  the  University  of  Pennsyl
vania.  After  1863  he  held  various  government
posts  in  Washington,  and  he  was  translator  of  the
interior  department  at  the  time  of  his  death.  On
1  Feb.,  1881,  while  ascending  the  steps  of  the  patent-
office  he  was  suddenly  seized  with  an  attack  of
vertigo,  and  fell,  receiving  severe  injuries  about
the  head,  which  resulted  in  his  death.  Like  his
colleague,  Arnold  Guizot,  he  held  that  religion  did
not  necessarily  conflict  with  science,  and  frequent
ly  wrote  articles  for  the  religious  press  of  both
this  country  and  the  old.  Among  these  writings
is  a  pamphlet  bearing  the  title  "  The  True  God."
Prof.  Matile  was  the  first  to  call  the  attention  of
jurists  to  the  importance  of  examining  the  ques
tion  of  patents  from  an  international  standpoint.
Among  his  numerous  works  are  "Points  de  cou-
tume"  (1838);  "  Autorite  du  droit  remain  de  la


Boutume  de  Bourgogne  et  la  Caroline  dans  la
principaute  de  Neufchatel  "  (1838) ;  "  Musee  his-
torique  de  Neufchatel  "  (3  vols.,  1841-'9) ;  "  Monu
ments  de  1'histoire  de  Neufchatel"  (2  vols.,  1844-'8) ;
and  "  Histoire  de  la  seigneurie  de  Valangin "
(1852).  His  son,  LEON,  is  now  (1888)  a  captain  in
the  United  States  army.

MATIS,  Francisco  Javier(mah'-tis),  Colombian
painter  and  naturalist,  b.  in  Guaduas  in  1774  ;  d.  in
Bogota  in  1851.  He  received  a  limited  education,
but  early  showed  great  talent  for  drawing,  and  in
1792  went  to  Bogota,  where  he  found  instruction
in  his  art,  and  soon  became  an  excellent  painter,
especially  of  natural  objects.  This  attracted  the
attention  of  the  naturalist  Jose  Celestino  Mutis,
who  employed  him  in  his  botanical  expedition  as
an  artist,  and  afterward  taught  him  natural  his
tory.  After  Mutis's  death  Matis  was  employed  by
the  viceroy  to  continue  the  scientist's  work,  and
was  made  director  of  the  expedition,  which  post  he
retained  after  the  establishment  of  independence.
He  formed  an  efficient  staff  to  continue  the  work,
but  never  entii'ely  overcame  the  want  of  a  literary
education  in  his  youth,  and  wrote  nothing.

MATLACK,  Timothy,  patriot,  b.  in  Haddon-
field,  N.  J.,  in  1730;  d.  near  Hornesburg,  Pa.,  15
April,  1829.  He  had  been  a  member  of  the  Society
of  Friends,  but  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolu
tion  left  it  for  that  of  the  free  or  "  Fighting  Quak
ers,"  and  is  described  by  Christopher  Marshall  as
"  one  of  the  most  active  spirits  of  the  days  of
1775-'6."  When  he  first  wore  his  sword  in  the
streets  of  Philadelphia,  some  of  the  orthodox
Friends  ridiculed  him,  and  inquired  what  its  use
was.  "  It  is  to  defend  my  property  arid  my  liberty,''
he  replied.  He  was  one  of  the  general  committee
of  safety  in  1 776,  a  colonel  of  the  battalion  that
served  against  the  Delaware  Tories,  who  in  June
of  that  year  had  cut  off  the  land  communication
to  Dover.  He  was  also  a  deputy  with  Benjamin
Franklin,  Thomas  MeKean,  Col.  John  Bayard,  and
others  from  Philadelphia  to  attend  the  state  con
ference  of  14  June,  1776.  He  was  a  delegate  from
Pennsylvania  to  theContinental  congress  in  1780-'7,
and  for  many  years  was  master  of  the  rolls  of  the
state,  residing 'in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  but,  on  becoming
prothonotary  of  one  of  the  courts  of  Philadelphia,
he  returned  "to  that  city.  In  1783  the  committee
of  safety  of  Philadelphia  presented  him  with  a
silver  urn  "  for  his  patriotic  devotion  to  the  cause
of  freedom,  and  the  many  services  rendered  by
j  him  throughout  the  struggle."  With  Benjamin
i  Franklin.  Robert  Morris,  and  others,  he  estab
lished  and  contributed  the  funds  to  build  the  free
Quaker  meeting-house  of  Philadelphia.  He  lived
to  be  more  than  ninety-nine  years  old,  and  retained
his  faculties  to  the  last.

MATSELL,  George  Washington,  chief  of
police,  b.  in  New  York  city,  25  Oct.,  1811  ;  d.
there,  25  July,  1877.  In  1826  he  was  apprenticed
as  a  designer  .in  a  dyeing  and  printing  establish
ment  on  Staten  island.  From  1837  till  1843  he
was  major  of  the  6th  infantry  of  the  New  York
militia,  and  in  1843  was  appointed  a  police  magis
trate  at  the  Tombs.  He  took  an  active  part  in
politics  as  a  Democrat,  was  appointed  a  police
justice,  and,  organizing  a  band  of  detectives,  took
a  personal  part  in  capturing  many  noted  criminals.
In  1844-'5  the  first  municipal  police  force  in  the
United  States  was  originated  and  organized  by
Mat-sell,  of  which  he  was  chief  till  1857,  when  the
legislature  passed  an  act  creating  the  Metropolitan
police,  as  Mayor  Fernando  Wood  had  been  accused
of  using  the  municipal  police  for  political  pur
poses.  Upon  the  creation  of  the  new  police


MATTA


MATTHEWS


261


force  Mayor  Wood  contended  that  the  act  that
established  it  was  unconstitutional,  and  refused  to
obey  the  law.  Matsell  supported  the  mayor,  and
the  force  divided  itself  into  two  factions.  Matsell,
with  his  municipal  police,  intrenched  himself  in
the  city  hall,  and  on  16  June,  1857,  he  and  his
men  repelled  an  attack  of  the  metropolitans.  A
riot  was  prevented  only  by  calling  out  the  militia.
An  armistice  followed,  both  sides  agreeing  to  await
the  verdict  of  the  court  of  appeals,  which  decided
that  the  act  was  constitutional.  On  the  1'eorgani-
zation  of  the  board  of  police  in  1873  he  was  ap
pointed  superintendent,  also  police  commissioner,
and  was  elected  president  of  the  board  of  police.

MATTA,  Manuel  Antonio  (mat-tah),  Chilian
statesman,  b.  in  Copiapo  in  1826,  received  his  pre
paratory  education  in  the  college  of  his  native  city,
and  finished  his  studies  in  the  German  universities,
after  which  he  travelled  extensively  through  Eu
rope  and  America.  After  his  return  to  his  native
country  he  began  his  public  career  in  1858  as
deputy  for  Copiapo  to  the  National  congress,  and
in  1863  founded  the  daily  paper  "  La  Voz  de  Chili."
of  which  he  still  (1888)  continues  chief  editor.  In
1865  he  was  appointed  envoy  to  Columbia.  Till
1874  he  was  steadily  returned  to  congress  from
Copiapo,  where  he  was  the  acknowledged  leader  of
the  Radical  party,  and  considered  one  of  the  most
powerful  orators  of  Chili.  In  1874  he  was  elected
by  congress  councillor  of  state,  and  in  1876  he  was
returned  as  senator  from  Copiapo  for  the  term  of
six  years  and  elected  president  of  that  body.  He
has  also  been  twice  a  candidate  for  the  presidency
of  the  nation.  He  has  published  several  pamphlets
on  Latin-American  politics  and  some  translations
of  German  poetry.  —  His  brother,  Guillermo,
Chilian  poet,  b.  in  Copiapo  in  1829,  received  an  ex
cellent  education,  and  in  early  life  began  a  jour
nalist's  career.  In  1859  he  took  an  active  part  in
the  political  struggle  that  agitated  the  republic,
and  was  banished  to  Europe,  where  he  remained
for  two  years.  He  was  an  editor  of  the  '•  Voz  de
Chile  "  in  1863,  and  also  became  professor  of  phi
lology  in  the  University  of  Chili,  and  a  member  of
many  literary  and  political  societies.  He  was
deputy  to  congress  for  Copiapo  in  1870  and  1873,
and  in  1874  president  of  the  chamber  of  deputies.
In  1882  he  was  appointed  minister  to  Germany
and  the  pope.  On  his  return  to  Chili  he  was
elected  in  1886  senator  for  the  province  of  Copiapo,
and  in  August,  1887,  he  was  appointed  minister
to  the  Argentine  Republic.  His  works  include
•'  Cuento  endemoniado  "  and  "  La  Mujer  misteri-
osa "  (Santiago,  1853) ;  legends,  and  a  collection
of  his  other  poems  (2  vols.,  Madrid,  1858).  Since
that  time  numerous  compositions  of  his  have  ap
peared  in  literary  magazines,  and  a  collection  is  in
preparation  for  publication  (1888).

M ATTACKS,  John,  governor  of  Vermont, b.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  4  March,  1777;  d.  in  Peacham,
Vt.,  14  Aug.,  1847.  His  father  was  treasurer  of
Vermont  in  1776-1801.  The  son  began  the  prac
tice  of  law  in  Danville  in  1797,  but  removed  to
Peacham  in  1798.  He  became  eminent  at  the  bar,
and  served  several  years  in  the  state  legislature  and
in  the  militia,  of  which  he  was  brigadier-general
in  the  war  of  1812-'15.  He  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  Whig  in  1820,  served  in  1821-'3,  was  defeated
at  the  next  election,  and  returned  in  1824,  serving
in  1825-'7.  He  was  judge  of  the  superior  court  of
Vermont  in  1833-'4.  a  member  of  the  Constitu
tional  convention  of  1835,  and  in  1841-'3  was  for
the  third  time  in  congress,  declining  a  re-election
to  accept  the  office  of  governor,  which  he  held  in
1843-'4.


MATTESON,  Joel  Aldrich,  governor  of  Illi
nois,  b.  in  Watertown,  Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.,  2  Aug.,
1808 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111..  31  Jan.,  1883.  He  received
a  common-school  education,  engaged  in  business  in
Canada,  taught  in  Brownsville,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1831
went  to  South  Carolina,  where  he  was  foreman  in
the  construction  of  the  first  railroad  in  that  state.
He  settled  in  Illinois  in  1834,  served  three  terms  in
the  state  senate,  and  became  governor  in  1852.
During  his  administration  he  did  much  to  restore  the
credit  of  the  state  and  to  liquidate  its  debt.  While
in  office  he  was  an  unsuccessful  Democratic  candi
date  for  the  U.  S.  senate.  He  took  heavy  contracts
for  the  construction  of  the  Illinois  and  Michigan
canal,  and,  on  the  failure  of  the  state  to  pay  the
amount  that  was  due  him,  he  bought  all  the  iron
that  Illinois  had  on  hand  for  public  improvements,
and  sold  it  again  with  such  a  profit  that  it  enabled
him  to  pay  all  his  debts.  He  was  active  in  railroad
construction,  was  for  several  years  president  of  the
Chicago  and  Alton  railroad,  and  owned  a  control
ling  interest  in  banks  in  Joliet,  Peoria,  Quincy,  and
Shawneetown,  111.

MATTESON,  Tompkins  Harrison,  artist,  b.  in
Peterborough,  N.  Y.,  9  May,  1813 ;  d.  in  Sherbourne,
N.  Y.,  2  Feb.,  1884.  He  was  an  enthusiastic  stu
dent  of  art  from  his  boyhood,  followed  his  profes
sion  under  many  difficulties,  and  learned  its  rudi
ments  from  an  Indian,  who  was  famous  for  his
carvings  and  drawings.  He  began  to  paint  por
traits  with  some  success  in  1839,  and  was  brought
into  favorable  notice  by  his  "  Spirit  of  '76,"  which
the  American  art  union  purchased.  lie  then  re
moved  to  New  York  city  and  studied  in  the  Na
tional  academy,  of  which  he  became  an  associate
in  1847.  From  1851  until  his  death  he  resided  in
Sherbourne.  He  was  president  of  the  Chenango
agricultural  society  in  1855,  and  a  member  of  the
legislature.  His  works  include  '-The  First  Sabbath
of  the  Pilgrims,"  "  Examination  of  a  WTitch,"
"  Perils  of  the  Early  Colonists,"  "  Eliot  preaching
to  the  Indians,"  "  First  Prayer  in  Congress,"  and
"  Rip  Van  Winkle's  Return  from  the  Mountains."
He  exhibited  "At  the  Stile  "  and  "  Foddering  Cat
tle"  at  the  National  academy  of  design  in  1869.

MATTHEWS,  Brander,  author,  b.  in  New  Or
leans,  La,,  21  Feb.,  1852.  He  was  graduated  at
Columbia  in  1871,  at  the  law-school  in  1873,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  the  same  year,  but  en
gaged  in  literature,  at  first  turning  his  attention  to
the  drama.  He  has  contributed  freely  to  periodi
cals,  and  has  at  times  used  the  pseudonym  "  Ar
thur  Penn."  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
New  York  authors  club,  and  also  took  a  conspicu
ous  part  in  organizing  the  American  copyright
league  and  the  Dunlap  society.  He  has  published
"  The  Theatres  of  Paris  "  (New' York,  1880) ;  "  French
Dramatists  of  the  Nineteenth  Century "  (1881) ;
"The  Home  Library,"  by  Arthur  Penn  (1883);  "In
Partnership,"  with  H.  C.  Bunner  (1884) ;  "  The  Last
Meeting"  (1885):  "A  Secret  of  the  Sea"  (1886);
and  "  Pen  and  Ink  :  Essays  on  Subjects  of  More  or
Less  Importance  "  (1888).  His  plays  include  "  Mar
gery's  Lovers,"  a  comedy,  played  at  the  London
court  theatre  in  1884,  and  in  New  York,  1887 ;  "  A
Gold  Mine,"  a  comedy,  with  George  H.  Jessop
(Memphis,  1887);  and  "'This  Picture  and  That,"  a
comedy  (New  York,  1887).  He  has  edited  "  Come
dies  for  Amateur  Acting"  (New  York,  1879);  "The
Rhymester,"  by  Arthur  Penn,  and  "  Poems  of
American  Patriotism  "  (1882) ;  "  Sheridan's  Come
dies,"  with  a  life  of  their  author  (1884) ;  "  Ballads
of  Books  "  (1886) :  and  "  Actors  and  Actresses  of
Great  Britain  and  the  United  States,"  with  Lau
rence  Hutton  (5  vols.,  1886) ;  and  John  Bernard's


262


MATTHEWS


MATTOON


"  Retrospections  of  America,"  with  Laurence  Hut-
ton  ;  and  William  Dunlap's  "  Andre,"  for  the  Dun-
lap  society  (1887).

MATTHEWS,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Guilford
county,  N.  C.,  19  Jan.,  1772 ;  d.  in  New  Albany.
Ind.,  19  May,  1848.  After  devoting  several  years
to  mechanical  pursuits,  he  studied  under  Rev.
David  Caldwell,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  March,
1801,  and  the  next  winter  was  sent  as  a  missionary
of  the  Presbyterian  church  to  Natchez,  Miss.  He
was  successively  pastor  of  churches  in  Martins-
burg,  Shepherdstown,  Charleston,  and  Harper's
Ferry,  Va..  from  1805  till  1831,  when  he  became
president  of  the  Presbyterian  theological  seminary
at  Hanover,  Ind.  He  continued  in  this  office  sev
enteen  years,  and  was  for  a  part  of  that  time  vice-
president  of  Hanover  college.  Washington  college,
Pa.,  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1823.  Be
sides  publishing  many  sermons,  Dr.  Matthews  was
the  author  of  "  Divine  Purpose  displayed  in  the
Works  of  Providence  and  Grace,"  in  a  series  of
letters,  and  "  Influence  of  the  Bible."

MATTHEWS,  Stanley,  jurist,  b.  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  21  July,  1824.  He  was  graduated  at  Ken-
yon  college  in  1840,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  settling  in  Maury  county,  Tenn.  He

shortly  afterward
returned  to  Cin
cinnati,  early  en
gaged  in  anti-sla
very  movements,
and  in  1846-'9  was
an  assistant  editor
of  the  "  Cincinnati
Herald,"  the  first
daily  anti-slavery
newspaper  in  that
city.  He  became
judge  of  the  court
of  common  pleas
of  Hanover  county
in  1851,  was  state
senator  in  1855,
and  in  1858-'61
was  U.  S.  attorney
f°r  the  southern

T , . ,  . ,-,, .

district of Ohio.

In  March,  of  the
last-named  year,  he  was  commissioned  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  23d  Ohio  regiment,  and  served  in
West  Virginia,  participating  in  the  battles  of  Rich
Mountain  and  Carnifex  Perry.  In  October,  1861,
he  became  colonel  of  the  57th  Ohio  regiment,  and
in  that  capacity  commanded  a  brigade  in  the  Army
of  the  Cumberland,  and  was  engaged  at  Dobb's
Perry.  Murfreesborough,  Chickamauga,  and  Look
out  Mountain.  He  resigned  from  the  army  in
1863,  to  become  judge  of  the  superior  court  of
Cincinnati,  and  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the
Lincoln  and  Johnson  ticket  in  1864,  and  on  the
Grant  and  Colfax  ticket  in  1868.  In  1864  he  was
a^delegate  from  the  presbytery  of  Cincinnati  to  the
General  assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in
Newark,  N.  J.,  and  as  one  of  the  committee  on  bills
and  overtures  reported  the  resolutions  that  were
adopted  by  the  assembly  on  the  subject  of  slavery.
He  was  defeated  as  Republican  candidate  for  con
gress  in  1876,  and  in  the  next  year  was  one  of  the
counsel  before  the  electoral  commission,  opening
the  argument  in  behalf  of  the  Republican  electors
in  the  Florida  case,  and  making  the  principal  argu
ment  in  the  Oregon  case.  In  March  he  was  elected
U.  S.  senator  in  place  of  John  Sherman,  who  had
resigned.  In  1881  he  was  appointed  associate  jus
tice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court.


MATTHIAS,  religious  impostor,  b.  in  Washing
ton  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1790;  d.  in  Arkansas  after
1840.  He  was  a  country  merchant  named  Robert
Matthews,  but,  after  failing  in  business  in  1816,  re-
I  moved  to  New  York,  and  in  1827  to  Albany.  He
professed  conversion  under  the  evangelists  Edward
N.  Kirk  and  Charles  G.  Finney,  subsequently  en
gaged  in  the  temperance  cause,  and,  claiming  to
have  received  a  revelation,  took  to  street-preaching.
Failing  to  convert  Albany,  he  prophesied  its  de
struction,  and  fled  to  New  York,  where  he  involved
several  respectable  families  in  his  delusions,  and
was  tried  and  acquitted  of  poisoning  Elijah  Pier-
son,  a  wealthy  disciple,  in  whose  family  he  lived.
His  impostures  having  been  exposed,  he  disap
peared.  Matthias  claimed  divine  attributes,  denied
the  sanctity  of  marriage,  forbade  the  use  of  meat,
and  dressed  in  what  he  called  a  prophet's  robe,  a
long,  white  garment.  His  sect  dispersed  after  his
exposure.  See  "  Matthias  and  his  Impostures,"  by
William  L.  Stone  (New  York,  1835).  and  "  Fanati
cism  Illustrated  in  the  Case  of  Matthias,"  a  reply
to  the  foregoing,  by  G.  Yale  (1835).

MATTISON,  Hiram,  clergyman,  b.  in  Norway,
N.  Y.,  11  Feb.,  1811:  d.  in  Jersey  City,  N.  J.,  24
Nov.,  1868.  He  entered  the  Methodist  ministry  in
1835,  was  appointed  agent  of  the  American  Bible
society  for  the  state  of  New  Jersey  in  1841,  and,
resuming  pastoral  work  the  next  year,  was  suc
cessively  stationed  in  Watertown  and  Rome,
N.  Y.  From  1846  till  1860  he  was  largely  em
ployed  in  the  preparation  of  works  on  astronomy
and  in  lecturing.  In  1856-'7  he  was  pastor  of
churches  in  Adams  and  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  and  took
an  active  part  in  anti-slavery  movements.  By  cor
respondence  with  the  Methodists  of  Great  Britain
in  1859,  lie  obtained  the  names  of  about  85,000  pe
titioners  to  the  general  conference  of  1860,  praying
that  body  to  extirpate  slavery  from  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church,  and  a  like  paper  from  45.000  pe
titioners  in  central  New  York  was  largely  due  to
his  efforts.  In  November,  1861,  he  withdrew  from
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  because,  as  he
affirmed,  of  its  toleration  of  slave-holding,  soon
afterward  becoming  pastor  of  St.  John's  independ
ent  Methodist  church  of  New  York  city.  lie  re
turned  to  his  former  connection  in  1865,  and  was
stationed  in  Jersey  City,  where  he  vehemently  op
posed  the  claims  of  the  Roman  Catholic  church,
and  published  a  tract  on  the  case  of  Mary  Anne
Smith,  a  Methodist,  whose  father,  a  Roman  Cath
olic,  he  alleged,  had  unjustly  caused  her  arrest  and
detention  in  a  Magdalen  asylum,  in  New  York  city.
His  controversies  with  the  Roman  Catholics  led  to
his  appointment  in  1868  as  district  secretary  to  the
American  and  foreign  Christian  union,  ilis  nu
merous  works  include  "  The  Trinity  and  Modern
Arianism "  (New  York,  1843) ;  "  tracts  for  the
Times  "  (1843) ;  "  Elementary  Astronomy,  accom
panied  by  Maps  "  (1846) ;  Burritt's  "  Geography  of
the  Heavens,"  edited  and  revised  (1850) ;  "High-
School  Astronomy "  (1853);  "Spirit-Rapping  Un
veiled"  (1854);  "'Sacred  Melodies"  (1859):  "Im
pending  Crisis  "  (1859) ;  "  Immortality  of  the  Soul  "
(1866);  "  Resurrection  of  the  Body  ""  (1866) ;  "De
fence  of  American  Methodism  "  (1866):  and  "Pop
ular  Amusements  "  (1867).  See  "  Work  Here,  and
Rest  Hereafter,  a  Life  of  Rev.  Hiram  Mattison,"
by  Rev.  Nicholas  Vansant,  with  an  introduction  by
Rev.  Edward  Thomson  (New  York,  1870).

MATTOON,  Ehenezer,  patriot,  b.  in  Amherst,
Mass.,  19  Aug.,  1755;  d.  there,  11  Sept.,  1843.  He
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1776,  joined  the
army  in  Canada,  was  a  lieutenant  in  an  artillery
company  at  the  battle  of  Bemis  Heights,  7  Oct.,


MATTOOX


MAUDUIT


263


1777,  and  left  the  service  with  the  rank  of  major.
He  served  several  terms  in  the  legislature  after  the
Revolution,  was  state  senator  in  1795-'6,  from  1797
till  181G  was  major-general  of  the  4th  division,  and
in  1800  was  elected  to  congress  in  place  of  Samuel
Lyman,  who  had  resigned,  serving  from  2  Feb.,
1801,  till  3  March,  1803.  He  was  sheriff  of  Hamp
shire  county  twenty  years,  became  adjutant-general
of  Massachusetts  in  1816,  and  the  next  year  com
manded  the  Ancient  and  honorable  artillery.  He
became  blind  about  this  time,  but  served  in  the
State  constitutional  convention  of  1820.  Gen.
Mattoon  was  a  scientific  and  practical  farmer.

MATTOON,  Stephen,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cham
pion,  X.  Y.,  5  May,  1810.  He  was  graduated  at
Union  in  1842.  and  at  Princeton  theological  semi
nary  in  1846,  and  ordained  an  evangelist  of  the
Presbyterian  church  in  February  of  the  latter  year,
becoming  missionary  to  Siara.  He  labored  in  that
field  till  1866,  was  pastor  at  Balston  Spa,  X.  Y.,  in
1867-'9,  and  in  1870-'4  was  president  of  Biddle
university,  Charlotte,  X.  C.  Since  1877  he  has
been  professor  of  systematic  theology  in  its  theo
logical  department.  lie  completed  the  translation
of  the  Xew  Testament  into  Siamese  in  1865,  and
it  was  printed  that  year  complete  at  the  Presby
terian  mission  press  at  Bangkok,  Siam.  Parts  had
been  printed  earlier  as  they  were  finished.  Union
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1870.

MATTOS,  Gregorio  de  (mat-tos),  Brazilian
scholar,  b.  in  Bahia,  7  April,  1613 :  d.  in  Angola  in
1696.  His  parents  sent  him  to  receive  his  scientific
and  literary  training  at  Coimbra,  where  he  began
to  acquire  note  as  a  satirical  poet.  After  spending
some  time  in  the  office  of  a  lawyer  in  Lisbon,  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar.  Having  declined  to  ac
cept  the  appointment  of  judge  in  a  political  case,
he  lost  the  favor  of  the  regent  of  Portugal,  Pedro
II.,  and  returned  to  Brazil,  where  he  found  employ
ment  as  treasurer  of  the  cathedral  of  Bahia.  In
1681  he  received  minor  orders,  but,  as  he  declined
to  use  the  religious  habit  when  he  was  not  in  the
performance  of  his  duties,  he  was  suspected  of  her
esy  and  declined  to  receive  orders.  In  consequence
lie  was  dismissed  from  his  post.  In  1684  he  mar
ried  and  opened  a  law-office  in  Bahia,  but,  as  he  had
the  enmity  of  the  government  and  the  clergy,  he
did  not  improve  his  situation.  He  had  published
several  of  his  poetical  compositions,  which,  though
highly  esteemed  by  intelligent  persons,  were  much
disliked  by  the  political  and  ecclesiastical  authori
ties  on  account  of  their  bitter  satire.  The  un
friendly  feeling  against  him  became  so  strong  that
at  last  he  was  banished  to  Angola,  where  he  found
protection,  and  finished  the  correction  of  his  com
positions,  but  died  soon  afterward.  His  works  in
six  volumes  remained  in  manuscript  till  lately,
when  the  "  Institute  Geographico  Brasileiro  "  took
steps  to  publish  them  under  its  supervision. — His
brother,  Etizebio,  Brazilian  clergyman,  b.  in  Bahia
in  1629 :  d.  there  in  1690,  became  a  Jesuit  in  1644,
but  left  the  company  and  entered  a  convent  of
Carmelites,  where  he  took  the  name  of  Euzebio  da
Soledade.  He  was  an  eloquent  preacher,  and  pub
lished  several  works,  including  "  Ecce  Homo,"
"  Espinhos,  Purpura,  Cordas,  Canna  e  Chagas,"
*•  Titulo  de  homern,"  "  Ora§ao  funebre  feita  a  14
de  Julho  de  1762  ao  bispo  D.  Estevao  dos  Santos,"
"  Sermao  da  Soledade,"  and  •'  Sermoes."  He  also
composed  several  pieces  of  poetry.

MATUBANA,  Marcos  (mah-too-rah'-nah),  Chil-  j
ian  soldier,  b.  in  San  Fernando  in  1802 ;  d.  in  San-  j
tiago  in  1871. In  1818  he  enlisted  as  a  volunteer
in  the  Husares  de  la  muerte,  and  participated  in  ;
the  battle  of  Maipo,  where  he  did  good  service.  ',


He  was  rewarded  with  a  medal  and  a  cadetship  in
the  military  academy,  which  he  left  in- 1820  as  sub
lieutenant  and  marched  with  the  liberating  army
to  Peru,  participating  in  the  siege  of  Callao  till  its
capitulation.  He  also  took  part  in  the  battle  of
Moquegua,  but  at  the  recapture  of  Callao  by  the
Spaniards  was  taken  prisoner  and  kept  for  a  year
in  the  casemates.  In  1825  he  was  sent  as  com
mander  of  artillery  in  the  expedition  to  the  Archi
pelago  of  Chiloe,  taking  part  in  the  capture  of  the
fort  of  Agiii,  and  the  whole  campaign  till  the  peace
of  1827.  Under  Gen.  Joaquin  Prieto  he  was  again
commander  of  artillery  during  the  campaign  of  the
north  in  1829-'30,  which  ended  with  the  battle  of
Lircay.  In  1834  he  had  charge  of  the  artillery  of
the  d'epartment  of  Valparaiso,  and  in  1838-'9"  he-
took  part  in  the  campaign  of  Peru  with  the  army
of  restoration,  participated  in  the  capture  of  Lima
and  the  battles  of  Portada  de  Guias  and  Yungay,
and  in  1847  was  promoted  colonel.  In  1854  he  was
made  brigadier,  and  in  1862  was  secretary  of  war
and  the  navy.  He  was  afterward  appointed  coun
cillor  of  state,  and  elected  senator  of  the  republic,
which  place  he  occupied  till  his  death.

MATURIX.  Edward,  author,  b.  in  Dublin.  Ire
land,  in  1812 ;  d.  in  Xew  York  city,  25  May,  1881.
He  was  descended  from  a  Huguenot  clergyman,
who  settled  in  Ireland  after  the  revocation  of  the
edict  of  Xantes,  and  his  father,  Rev.  Charles  Rob
ert  Maturin,  curate  of  St.  Peter's  church,  Dublin,
was  well  known  as  a  pulpit  orator  and  novelist.
'  The  son  was  graduated  at  Trinity  college,  Dublin,
in  1832,  and  came  to  this  country  with  letters  of
i  introduction  from  Thomas  Moore,  the  poet,  and
|  other  well-known  literary  men. He  studied  law
j  under  Charles  O'Conor  and  elsewhere,  was  admit-
I  ted  to  the  bar,  and.  on  recommendation  of  Prof.
Charles  Anthon.  of  Columbia,  made  professor  of
;  Greek  in  the  College  of  South  Carolina. He  mar-
j  ried  in  that  state,  but  afterward  returned  to  the
north,  and  was  an  instructor  in  Greek  and  Latin  in
•  Xew  York  city  for  thirty  consecutive  years. He  was
I  selected  in  1850  by  the  Bible  union  as  one  of  their
j  corps  of  revisers,  the  gospel  of  St.  Mark  being  as
signed  to  him. Mr.  Maturin  was  the  author  of
,  "  Monteznrna.  the  Last  of  the  Aztecs ;  a  Romance  "
|  (2  vols.,  Xew  York,  1845);  ''Benjamin,  the  Jew  of
Grenada :  a  Romance,"  a  story  of  the  fall  of  the
Moslem  empire  in  Spain  (1848);  "Eva,  or  the  Isles
I  of  Life and Death"  (2  vols.,  1848);  "Lyrics  of
Spain  and  Erin"  (Boston,  1850);  and  "Bianca;  a
Tale  of  Erin  and  Italy  "  (Xew  York,  1852).

MATZ,  Nicholas,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Munster,
Alsace-Lorraine,  6  April,  1850.  He  entered  the
:  Petit  seminaire  of  Finstingen  in  1865.  but  did  not
|  complete  his  classical  course.  In  1868  he  came  to
.  the  United  States  and  prepared  for  the  priesthood
in  the  College  of  St.  Mary's  of  the  West,  Cincin
nati.  In  1874  he  was  ordained  priest  and  ap
pointed  assistant  pastor  of  the  cathedral  of  Den
ver,  and  he  was  transferred  in  1877  to  the  pastor
ate  of  Georgetown.  Col.  After  building  a  church,
school,  and  hospital,  which  latter  he  placed  under
the  charge  of  the  Sisters  of  St.  Joseph,  he  ex
changed  this  parish  for  the  new  one  of  St.  Anne's.
East  Denver.  Here  he  labored  with  the  same  zeal
until  he  was  nominated  in  1887  coadjutor  of  Bishop
Machebeuf,  of  Colorado.  He  was  consecrated  in
the  diocesan  cathedral  on  28  Oct.  Bishop  Matz
is  an  accomplished  linguist,  speaking  French,  Eng
lish.  German.  Italian,  and  Spanish.

MAUDUIT,  Israel,  English  political  writer,  b.
in  Exeter,  England,  in  1708';  d.  16  June,  1787.  He
was  descended  from  a  family  of  French  Protestant
refugees.  His  father,  a  dissenting  minister,  edu-


264


MAUDUIT DU PLESSIS


MAURY


cated  him  for  the  same  profession,  but  he  became
a  prosperous  merchant  and  the  partner  of  his
brother  Jasper  in  London.  In  1703  he  was  in
trusted  with  the  representation  of  the  interests  of
Massachusetts,  of  which  Jasper  Mauduit  was  the
nominal  agent.  He  became  collector  at  Southamp
ton  in  1705,  and  wrote  several  pamphlets  in  behalf
of  Massachusetts  and  of  the  New  England  colonies
during  the  ten  years  of  negotiations  before  the
Revolution.  His  publications  are  "  Considerations
sur  la  guerre  presents  d'Allemagne"  (London,
1760);  "  Memoires  sur  les  finances  et  le  commerce
d'Angleterre,"  translated  from  the  English  of
George  Grenville  (17G9);  a  "Short  View  of  the
History  of  the  Xew  England  Colonies"  (17(59);  a
"  Short  View  of  the  History  of  Massachusetts  Bay  "
(3d  ed.,  1774);  "The  Case  of  the  Dissenting  Minis
ters"  (1774);  and  pamphlets  in  reference  to  the
American  war,  treating  Lord  Howe  and  Sir  William
Howe  with  severity  for  their  conduct  in  Boston. —
His  brother,  Jasper,  wrote  •'  Letter  relative  to  a
Reimbursement  from  Parliament  for  supporting
French  Neutrals  from  Nova  Scotia"  (1763) ;  "  Let
ter  relative  to  the  Duty  laid  on  Foreign  Molasses"
(1763) ;  and  "  Letter  on  Foreign  Molasses,  the  keep
ing  up  Ten  Thousand  Troops  in  America,  etc."
(1764) — all  of  which  are  published  in  the  first  series
of  the  Massachusetts  historical  society's  collections.

MAUDUIT  DU  PLESSIS,  Thomas  Antoine,
Chevalier  de  (mo-dwee),  French  soldier,  b.  in  Hen-
nebon,  Morbihan,  Brittany,  12  Sept.,  1752;  d.  in
Port  au  Prince,  Hayti,  in  1791.  At  the  age  of
twelve  he  ran  away  from  the  artillery  school  at
Grenoble,  went  to  Marseilles,  and,  there  shipping
as  a  cabin-boy,  visited  Alexandria,  Egypt,  and
other  parts  of  the  Orient.  In  Constantinople  the
French  ambassador  became  interested  in  him  and
sent  him  back  to  his  family,  by  whom  he  was  re
ceived  with  joy.  Accompanying  Rochambeau  to
the  United  States  in  1780,  he  served  with  credit  at
the  battle  of  the  Brandywine,  and  left  the  country
with  the  rank  of  major.  In  1787  he  was  ordered
to  Port  au  Prince,  and  placed  in  command  of  the
regiment  stationed  there.  When  the  revolution
began  in  France  he  declared  himself  its  bitter
opponent,  and  took  ground  against  the  emanci
pation  of  the  slaves.  With  the  governor,  Comte
de  Blanchelande,  he  refused  to  publish  the  decrees
that  were  sent  from  France,  disarmed  the  nation
al  guard,  and  organized  a  body  of  royal  volun
teers  under  the  name  of  the  "Pompons  Blancs,"
which  he  recruited  from  among  the  youth  of  the
wealthy  colonial  families.  He  also  "arrested  the
members  of  the  colonial  committee,  dissolved  the
assembly  of  St.  Marc,  and  provoked  an  insurrection
by  a  policy  of  bloody  repression.  On  2  March,
1791,  detachments  of  the  Artois  and  Normandy
regiments  having  arrived,  the  soldiers  fraternized
with  the  people,  and  proved  to  the  colonial  troops
that  their  colonel  had  deceived  them  by  means  of
false  orders  which  he  pretended  came  from  the
home  government.  So  general  was  the  indigna
tion  that  was  aroused  by  the  discovery  of  this
treachery,  that  an  uprising  took  place,  during
which  Mauduit  was  assassinated  by  his  own  men.
He  published  "Relation  d'un  voyage  aux  Echelles
du  Levant"  (Paris,  1785);  and  "left  unfinished  a
history  of  French  dominion  in  Santo  Domingo,
which  is  deposited  in  the  National  library  in  Paris.
See  "Eloge  historique  du  Chevalier  Mauduit  du
Plessis,"  by  De  la  Fosse  de  Rouville  (Senlis,  1818)

MAUREPAS,  Jean  Fr6d6ric  Phelypeaux,
Comte  de  (more-pah),  French  statesman,  b.  in  Ver
sailles,  France,  9  July,  1701 ;  d.  there,  21  Nov.,  1781.
He  was  the  grandson  of  the  chancellor  Pontchar-


train  and  son  of  Jerome  de  Pontchartrain,  minister
of  marine  and  of  the  king's  household,  and,  although
only  fourteen  at  the  time  of  his  father's  forced  res
ignation  in  1715,  was  appointed  the  hitter's  suc
cessor  on  8  Nov.,  1715,  but  he  did  not  administer
the  duties  of  office  until  1718,  when  the  regent  gave
him  letters-patent.  He  became  minister  of  state
in  1738,  but  was  removed  in  1749  for  writing  an
epigram  on  Mine,  de  Pompadour.  lie  was  recalled
in  1774  and  made  president  of  the  council,  and,  re
storing  the  exiled  parliaments,  called  Turgot  and
Necker  successively  into  the  ministry.  When  Lafay
ette  was  soliciting  troops  and  supplies  for  America,
his  importunity  was  such  that  Count  Maurepas  said
one  day:  "  It  is  fortunate  for  the  king  that  Lafay
ette  does  not  take  it  into  his  head  to  strip  Versailles
of  its  furniture  to  send  to  his  dear  Americans,  as
his  majesty  would  be  unable  to  refuse  it."  See  Con-
dqrcet's  "  Eloge  de  M.  de  Maurepas"  (Paris,  1782);
"  Eloge  historique  de  M.  de  Maurepas,"  by  A.  J.
Guyot  (1782) ;  and  "  Memoires  du  Comte  de  Maure
pas,"  bv  N.  N.  de  Salle  (3  vols.,  1792).

MAURVILLE,  Louis  Charles  Joseph,  Count
BIDE  DE  (more-veal),  French  naval  officer,  b.  in
Rochefort,  17  Nov.,  1752;  d.  in  Paris,  11  March,
1840.  He  became  midshipman  in  1764,  and  served
for  several  years  in  Newfoundland,  Louisiana,  and
the  West  Indies,  being  appointed  to  command  the
cutter  "Le  Chasseur,"  which  became  famous  for
its  captures  of  English  vessels  in  the  Gulf  of
Mexico.  He  served  also  under  Admirals  de  Guichen
and  La  Motte-Picquet,  sustaining  with  his  cutter
off  Santo  Domingo,  on  26  April,  1781,  a  battle
against  several  English  ships.  Again,  on  17  Jan.,
1783,  he  drove  an  English  frigate  from  the  harbor
of  Porto  Rico,  and  joining  the  Marquis  of  Vaud-
reuil  took  the  command  of  the  vanguard  of  the
latters  squadron.  He  continued  to  serve  in  the
West  Indies,  and  in  1783  joined  the  fleet  of  Count
de  Soulanges,  which  had  several  encounters  with
the  English,  participating  altogether  in  seventeen
naval  battles  during  the  war  of  1778-'83.  He  was
made  a  knight  of  St.  Louis  at  the  conclusion  of
peace  in  1783,  and  became  a  commander  in  1792.
but  emigrated  to  England  a  few  weeks  later,  re
turning  to  France  in  1802.  Here-entered  the  navy
in  1816  as  rear-admiral,  and  commanded  the  sta
tions  of  the  West  Indies,  but  retired  in  1830.

MAURY,  John  Minor,  naval  officer,  b.  near
Fredericksburg,  Va.,  in  1795;  d.  at  sea,  near  Nor
folk,  Va.,  23  June,  1823.  He  was  the  son  of  Rich
ard  Maury.  of  Huguenot  descent,  who  emigrated
to  Franklin,  Tenn.,  in  1810.  He  was  appointed
midshipman  on  16  Jan.,  1809,  served  on  the  U.  S.
frigate  "  Essex  "  and  on  the  "  Essex,  Jr.,"  and  be
came  1st  lieutenant  on  28  June,  1811.  At  the  age
of  twenty-seven  he  was  flag-captain  of  Com.  David
Porter's  "fleet,  which  destroyed  the  pirates  of  the
West  Indies.  He  died  of  yellow  fever  on  his  re
turn  voyage  from  that  service,  and  was  the  young
est  officer  of  his  rank  at  that  time  in  the  navy. —
His  brother,  Matthew  Fontaine,  scientist,  b.  in
Spottsylvania  county,  Va.,  14  Jan.,  1806;  d.  in
Lexington,  Va.,  1  Feb.,  1873.  In  his  sixteenth  year
young  Maury  entered  Harpeth  academy,  then  under
the  charge  of  Rev.  James  H.  Otey,  afterward  bish
op  of  Tennessee.  On  1  Feb.,  1825,  he  was  ap
pointed  midshipman  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  making
his  first  cruise  in  the  frigate  "  Brandywine,"  on
the  coast  of  Europe  and  in  the  Mediterranean.  In
1826  the  "Brandywine"  returned  to  the  United
States,  and  Maury  was  transferred  to  the  sloop-of-
war  "  Vincennes,"  for  a  cruise  around  the  world.
After  the  expiration  of  the  cruise  he  passed  with
credit  the  usual  examination,  and  in  1831  was  ap-


MAURY


MAURY


265


pointed  master  of  the  sloop-of-war  "  Falmouth,"
then  fitting  out  for  the  Pacific.  He  did  not  com
plete  his  cruise  in  this  vessel,  being  transferred
to  the  schooner  "  Dolphin."  serving  as  acting

1st  lieutenant,  until
he  was  again  trans
ferred  to  the  frig
ate  "  Potomac,"  in
which  he  returned
to  the  United  States
in  1834,  and  pub
lished  his  first  work,
"  Maury's  Naviga
tion,"  which  was
adopted  as  a  text
book  in  the  navy.
Daring  this  inter
mission  of  active  ser
vice  he  married  Miss
Ann  Herndon,  of
Virginia,  a  sister  of
Lieut.  William  L.
Herndon,  of  the  navy,  who  was  conspicuous  on  the
occasion  of  the  foundering  of  the  "  Central  Amer
ica,"  which  he  commanded.  In  1837,  after  thir
teen  years  of  service,  Maury  was  promoted  to  the
grade  of  lieutenant  and  offered  the  appointments
of  astronomer  and  hydrographer  to  the  exploring
expedition  to  the  South  seas,  then  preparing  to  sail
under  the  command  of  Lieut.  Charles  Wilkes.  but
declined.  In  1839  he  met  with  a  painful  accident
by  which  he  was  lamed  for  life.  Being  unable  for
several  years  to  perform  the  active  duties  of  his
profession,  he  devoted  the  time  to  study,  to  the
improvement  of  the  navy,  and  to  other  matters  of
national  concern.  His  forcibly  stated  views  were
published  first  and  mainly  in  the  "  Southern  Lit
erary  Messenger,"  of  Richmond,  Va.,  over  the
pen-name  of  Harry  Bluff,  and  under  the  general
head  of  "  Scraps  from  the  Lucky  Bag."  These
essays  produced  great  reforms  in  the  navy,  and
led  "to  the  foundation  of  a  naval  academy.  He
also  advocated  the  establishment  of  a  navy-yard  at
Memphis,  Tenn.,  which  was  done  by  act  of  con
gress.  Under  his  direction,  Lieut.  Robert  A.
Marr  made  at  that  point  the  first  series  of  observa
tions  on  the  flow  of  the  Mississippi.  He  proposed
a  system  of  observations  that  would  enable  the  in
vestigators  to  give  information,  by  telegraph,  as  to
the  state  of  the  river  and  its  tributaries,  to  the
captains  of  steamers  and  all  others  who  might  be
interested.  He  advanced  the  enlargement  of  the
Illinois  and  Michigan  canal,  that  vessels  of  war
might  pass  between  the  Gulf  and  the  lakes.  For
this  he  received  the  thanks  of  the  Illinois  legisla
ture.  He  suggested  to  congress,  through  one  of
its  committees,  plans  for  the  disposition  of  the
drowned  lands  along  the  Mississippi  belonging  to
the  U.  S.  government.  In  the  interest  of  com
merce  he  brought  forward  and  successfully  advo
cated,  in  a  series  of  papers,  what  is  known  as  the
warehousing  system.  In  1842  he  was  appointed  su
perintendent  of  the  depots  of  charts  and  instru
ments  at  Washington,  afterward  known  as  the
hydrographical  office,  and  upon  the  organization
and  union  with  it  of  the  national  observatory  in
1844.  he  was  made  superintendent  of  the  com
bined  institutions.  To  his  labors  as  astronomer
of  the  naval  observatory  he  added  the  task  of
determining  the  direction  of  the  winds  and  cur
rents  of  the  ocean.  In  pursuance  of  these  ob
jects  he  collected  from  the  log-books  of  ships  of
war,  long  stored  in  the  government  offices,  and
from  all  other  accessible  sources,  the  material  for
his  purpose.  In  1844  he  made  known  his  conclusions


respecting  the  Gulf  stream,  ocean  currents,  and
great-circle  sailing,  in  a  paper  read  before  the  Na
tional  institute,  and  printed  under  the  title  of  "A
Scheme  for  rebuilding  Southern  Commerce  "(1851).
They  were  also  embodied  in  the  "  Wind  and  Cur
rent  Charts  "  and  "  Sailing  Directions  "  issued  by
the  observatory.  With  the  accumulation  of  ma
terial  the  need  was  felt  of  systematizing  the  ob
servations  and  records  themselves,  particularly  as
ships  of  different  nations  used  different  methods
of  observation  and  registry.  Lieut.  Maury  ac
cordingly  suggested  a  general  maritime  confer
ence,  which,  at  the  request  of  the  U.  S.  govern
ment,  assembled  at  Brussels  in  1853.  and  recom
mended  a  form  of  abstract  log  to  be  kept  on  board
ships-of-war  and  merchant  vessels.  The  first  fruits
of  his  investigations  on  the  winds  and  currents  of
the  sea,  with  its  currents  and  its  atmosphere,  ap
peared  in  1856  in  his  work  ''The  Physical  Geography
of  the  Sea,"  which,  translated  into  the  languages  of
France,  Germany,  Holland.  Norway,  Spain,  and
Italy,  made  its  author  well  known  throughout  Eu
rope.  By  Plumboldt,  Maury  was  declared  to  be
the  founder  of  a  new  and  important  science,  and
France,  Austria.  Prussia.  Russia.  Denmark.  Belgi
um.  Portugal,  Sweden.  Sardinia,  Holland,  Bremen,
and  the  Papal  States  bestowed  orders  of  knight
hood  and  other  honors  upon  him.  •  The  academies
of  science  of  Paris,  Berlin,  Brussels,  St.  Peters
burg,  and  Mexico  received  him  into  membership.
In  his  works  he  was  the  first  to  give  a  complete
description  of  the  Gulf  stream,  and  to  mark  out
specific  routes  to  be  followed  in  crossing  the  At
lantic.  Maury  also  instituted  the  system  of  deep-
sea  sounding,  and  was  the  first  to  suggest  the  es
tablishment  of  telegraphic  communication  between
the  continents  by  cable  on  the  bed  of  the  ocean,  and
the  existing  cable  was  laid  along  the  line  indicated
by  him.  There  are  letters  from  him  to  Cyrus  W.
Field  on  this  subject  in  the  observatory  at  Wash
ington,  D.  C.  In  1855  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank
of  commander.  When  Virginia  seceded.  Maury  re
signed  his  commission  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  and  was
selected  as  one  of  a  council  of  three  to  assist  the
governor,  so  serving  until  the  army  and  navy  of
Virginia  were  incorporated  with  those  of  the  Con
federacy.  When  it  became  known  in  Europe  that
he  had  resigned  from  the  U.  S.  service,  he  was  in
vited  to  Russia  and  to  France,  to  continue  in  either
of  those  countries  the  work  to  which  his  life  had
been  devoted.  These  offers,  from  a  sense  of  duty,
he  declined.  He  entered  the  Confederate  navy  on
10  June.  1861,  served  on  the  court-martial  of  Capt.
Josiah  Tatnall.  of  the  "  Merrimac,"  and  in  October,
1862,  established  at  Richmond  the  naval  submarine
battery  service.  Before  the  torpedo  bureau  was  far
advanced,  Commander  Maury  was  sent  to  Europe
to  continue  his  experiments.  While  abroad  he  in
vented  an  ingenious  method  of  arranging  and
testing  torpedo  mines,  which  he  was  about  to  put
into  use  at  Galveston,  Tex.,  against  blockading
vessels,  when  Gen.  Lee  surrendered.  He  had  been
appointed  one  of  the  Confederate  navy  agents
in  Europe,  and  while  serving  in  this  capacity  pur
chased  and  fitted  out  armed  cruisers  abroad.  At
the  close  of  the  war,  in  anticipation  of  a  large  emi
gration  from  the  southern  states  to  Mexico,  with
the  view  of  aiding  his  countrymen,  he  went  to  that
country,  and  was  cordially  received  by  the  Em
peror  Maximilian,  who  appointed  him  to  a  place
in  his  cabinet.  Thence  he  was  sent  on  a  special
mission  to  Europe.  The  revolution  terminating
his  relations  with  Mexico,  he  resumed,  as  a  means
of  support,  his  scientific  and  literary  labors.  Dur
ing  this  period  the  University  of  Cambridge  gave


266


MAVERICK


him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.,  and  the  emperor  of  the
French  invited  him  to  the  superintendency  of  the
imperial  observatory  at  Paris.  He  finally  accept
ed  the  chair  of  physics  in  the  Virginia  military
institute.  While  connected  with  the  institute  he
prepared  and  published  '•  The  Physical  Survey  of
Virginia"  (Richmond,  1868)  in  connection  with  the
establishment  of  through  routes  by  rail,  and  of  a
great  and  free  water-line  uniting  the  east  and  west,
and  this  again  in  connection  with  foreign  com
merce  by  his  familiar  pathways  on  the  sea,  the  per
fecting  of  a  system  of  observations  and  reports  of
the  crops  of  the  world,  tending  to  reduce  the  fluc
tuations  and  to  destroy  the  oppositions  of  trade  in
the  staple  productions  of  agriculture.  Subsequent
ly,  with  William  M.  Fontaine,  he  published  "  Re
sources  of  West  Virginia"  (Wheeling,  1876).  In
September,  1872,  he  addressed  the  Agricultural  so
ciety  of  Norfolk,  Mass.,  and  in  October  the  State
agricultural  society  of  Missouri,  at  its  annual  fair
at  St.  Louis.  He  reached  the  Virginia  military  in
stitute  on  23  Oct.  quite  ill,  and  lingered  until  1
Feb.,  1873,  when  lie  died.  Besides  the  works  men
tioned,  he  published  "  Letters  on  t  he  Amazon  and
the  Atlantic  Slopes  of  South  America"  (Washing
ton,  1853);  "Relation  between  Magnetism  and  the
Circulation  of  the  Atmosphere,"  in  the  appendix
to  "  Washington  Astronomical  Observations  for
1846"  (1851):  "Lanes  for  Steamers  Crossing  the
Atlantic"  (1854);  and  a  series  of  geographies;
"  Manual  of  Geography :  Mathematical,  Civil,  and
Physical  Geography  "  (1870);  a  "Physical  Geogra
phy  of  the  Sea  and  its  Meteorology  "  (New  York,
1853):  and  smaller  works  on  geography.  His  life
has  been  written  by  his  daughter  (London,  1888). —
John  Minor's  son,  Dabney  Herndon,  soldier,  b.  in
Fredericksburg,  Va.,  21  May,  1822,  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1841.  and  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1846,  assigned  to  the
mounted  rifles,  and  brevetted  1st  lieutenant  for
Cerro  Gordo,  Mexico,  where  he  was  severely  wound
ed.  For  his  services  there  he  was  also  presented
with  a  sword  by  the  citizens  of  Fredericksburg
and  the  legislature  of  Virginia.  He  was  assistant
professor  of  geography,  history,  and  ethics  at  West
Point  from  1847  till  1850.  assistant  instructor  of
infantry  tactics  in  1850-'2,  and  then  served  on
frontier  duty  in  Texas.  In  1858  he  was  made  su
perintendent  of  the  Cavalry-school  for  practice,
Carlisle,  Pa.  He  was  assistant  adjutant-general
in  New  Mexico  from  1  June,  1860,  till  24  May,
1861,  then  became  adjutant-general  in  the  Confed
erate  army,  and  was  sent  to  the  Trans-Missis
sippi  department  in  February,  1862,  as  chief  of
staff  to  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn,  and  promoted  to
brigadier-general  after  the  battle  of  Pea  Ridge.
He  led  a  division  at  Corinth,  where  he  was  made
major-general,  served  in  the  operations  around
Vicksburg,  and  participated  in  the  defence  of  Mo
bile,  commanding  the  Department  of  the  Gulf.
On  12  May,  1865,  Gen.  Maury  and  the  Army  of
Mobile  were  paroled  prisoners  of  war  under  the
terms  of  surrender  made  by  Gen.  Richard  Taylor
and  Gen.  Edward  S.  Canby.  He  organized  the
Southern  historical  society  in  1868,  and  originated
the  movement  for  the  reorganization  of  militia  of
the  nation  in  1878.  In  1886  he  was  appointed  U.  S.
minister  to  Colombia.  He  has  published  "Skir
mish  Drill  for  Mounted  Troops"  (Washington,
1859). — Matthew  Fontaine's  cousin,  Ann,  author,
b.  in  Liverpool,  England,  in  September,  1803:  d.
in  New  York  city  in  January,  1876,  was  the  daugh
ter  of  James  Maury,  U.  S.  consul  to  Liverpool,  in
1789-1837.  She  was  a  descendant  of  Rev.  James
Fontaine,  whose  autobiography,  with  other  family


manuscripts  and  an  original  journal  of  travels  in
Virginia  and  New  York  in  1715-'16,  she  published
under  the  title  of  "  Memoirs  of  a  Huguenot  Fam
ily"  (New  York,  1853).  The  appendix  of  this
book  contains  a  translation  of  the  edict  of  Nantes
and  other  historical  documents. — Her  sister-in-law,
Sarali  Mytton,  author,  b.  in  Liverpool,  England,
1  Nov.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Virginia  in  October,  1849,  was
graduated  at  a  school  in  Liverpool  in  1821.  Her
maiden  name  was  Hughes  and  she  married  Will
iam',  the  eldest  son  of  James  Maury.  She  came  to
the  United  States  in  1846  on  a  packet-ship  that  was
crowded  with  steerage  passengers,  among  whom  the
small-pox  had  broken  out  on  the  third  day  from
Liverpool.  Upon  her  arrival  she  labored  success
fully  for  the  passage  of  an  act  of  congress  requir
ing  "that  sanitary  provision  should  be  made  on
emigrant  vessels,  and  on  her  return  to  England
she  procured  the  passage  of  a  similar  act  of  par
liament.  She  was  the  author  of  "  Etchings  from
theCaracci"  (Liverpool,  1842);  "The  P]nglishwo-
man  in  America  "  (1846) ;  "  The  Statesmen  of  Amer
ica  in  1846"  (Philadelphia,  1847);  and  "Prog
ress  of  the  Catholic  Church  in  America  "  (1847). —
Dabney  Ilerndon's  third  cousin,  Francis  Fon
taine,  surgeon,  b.  in  Danville,  Ky.,  9  Aug.,  1840;
d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  4  June,  1879.  He  was
graduated  at  Centre  college,  Ky.,  in  1859,  and  at
tended  lectures  at  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Virginia,  and  Jefferson  medical  col
lege,  Philadelphia,  from  which  he  received  his
degree  in  1862.  He  practised  in  Philadelphia,  de
voting  his  attention  to  surgery.  Among  his  op
erations  were  a  successful  amputation  at  the  hip-
joint,  the  first  operation  for  gastrotomy  in  this
country,  for  stricture  of  the  oesophagus,  excision
of  the  brachial  plexus  of  nerves  for  painful  neu
roma  of  the  skin,  for  exstrophy  of  the  bladder,
and  two  extirpations  of  the  thyroid  gland.  For
two  years  he  edited  the  "  Photographic  Review  of
Medicine  and  Surgery,"  and  he  published  numer
ous  reports  of  medical  and  surgical  cases.  He
was  a  surgeon  to  Jefferson  medical  college  hos
pital,  and  the  Philadelphia  hospital,  and  during
the  civil  war  had  charge  for  a  time  of  an  army
hospital.  For  many  years  he  was  a  lecturer  on
venereal  and  cutaneous  diseases  in  Jefferson  medi
cal  college,  and  was  a  fellow  of  the  College  of  physi
cians,  and  a  member  of  other  medical  societies.

MAVERICK,  Peter,  engraver,  b.  in  New  York
city,  22  Oct.,  1780;  d.  there,  7  June,  1831.  Ilis
father,  Peter  R.  Maverick,  was  originally  a  silver
smith,  but  became  an  etcher  and  engraver,  and  did
much  to  aid  the  early  progress  of  his  art  in  this
country.  The  son  studied  under  his  father  and
also  became  eminent  as  an  engraver,  working
chiefly  for  book-publishers  and  bank-note  com
panies.  He  instructed  many  pupils,  among  whom
was  Asher  B.  Durand,  and  in  1817  he  formed  a
partnership  with  Mr.  Durand,  but  it  continued
only  a  few  years.  Mr.  Maverick  was  a  National
academician,  having  been  one  of  the  founders  of
the  academy  in  1826.  Among  his  line-engravings
are  portraits  of  Henry  Clay,  from  the  painting  by
Charles  King  (Washington,  1822);  Bishop  Benjamin
Moore,  from  that  by  William  Dunlap  (New  York,
1823) ;  and  Andrew  Jackson,  from  the  fine  portrait
by  Samuel  L.  Waldo.

MAVERICK,  Samuel,  colonist,  b.  in  England
about  1602;  d.  about  1670.  His  father,  John,
known  as  the  "  godly  Mr.  Maverick,"  came  to  this
country  in  1630,  and  was  one  of  the  original  pastors
of  the  first  church  in  Dorchester,  Mass.  Samuel
arrived  in  New  England  several  years  before  his
father,  settling  as  early  as  1629  at' Noddle's  island


MA  WE


MAXEY


267


(now  East  Boston),  of  which  he  received  a  grant
from  the  general  court,  1  April,  1033.  Thomas
Prince's  "  Chronology"  (1030)  says  :  "  On  Noddle's
island  lives  Mr.  Samuel  Maverick,  a  man  of  very
loving  and  courteous  behavior,  very  ready  to  enter
tain  strangers  ;  on  this  island,  with  the  help  of  Mr.
David  Thompson,  he  had  built  a  small  fort  with
four  great  guns  to  protect  him  from  the  Indians."
In  1681  with  others  he  held  a  patent  for  land  in
Maine  under  the  president  and  council  of  New
England,  which  was  deeded  to  him  in  1038  by  the
council  and  Ferdinando  Gorges.  In  1035  he  went
to  Virginia  to  purchase  corn  and  stock,  and  re
mained  there  nearly  a  year,  returning,  as  Gov.
John  Winthrop  says  in  his  journal,  "  with  two
pinnaces,  and  brought  some  fourteen  heifers  and
about  eighty  goats  (having  lost  about  twenty  goats
by  the  way).  .  One  of  his  pinnaces  was  about  forty
tons,  of  cedar,  built  at  Barbathes,  and  brought  to
Virginia  by  Capt.  Powell,  who  there  dying  she  was
sold  for  a  small  matter."  Maverick  was  one  of  the
earliest  slave-holders  in  Massachusetts,  having
purchased  negroes  in  1038.  In  1040  he  received  a
grant  of  GOO  acres  from  Boston  and  an  additional
grant  of  400  acres  in  Braintree.  lie  was  a  stanch
Episcopalian  and  royalist,  and  having  suffered  much
persecution  on  this  account  went  to  England  to
complain  to  the  king.  On  23  April,  1004,  he  was
appointed  by  Charles  II.  one  of  four  commissioners
to  settle  the  difficulties  with  the  New  England
colonies,  and  also  to  "  reduce  the  Dutch  at  the
Manhadoes,"  the  other  commissioners  being  Col.
Richard  Nichols,  Sir  Robert  Carr,  and  George
Cartwright.  They  were  intrusted  with  full  power
in  all  matters  military  and  civil,  but  they  were  un
successful  in  Massachusetts,  and  Maverick  relin
quished  his  possession  of  Noddle's  island  and
removed  to  New  York.  The  exact  date  of  his
death  is  not  known.  The  last  trace  of  him  is  a
letter  from  his  hand  dated  15  Oct.,  1009,  thanking
Col.  Nichols  for  procuring  for  him  "  the  gift  of  a
house  in  the  Broadway "  for  his  fidelity  to  the
king.  In  his  autograph  his  name  appears  as
Mavericke.  See  William  II.  Sumner's  "  History  of
East  Boston  "  (Boston,  1858).

MAWE,  John,  English  mineralogist,  b.  in
Derbyshire  in  1704 ;  d.  in  London,  20  Oct.,  1829.
He  opened  a  curiosity-shop  in  Piccadilly,  and  in
1804  went  to  South  America  on  a  business  trip,  but
on  his  arrival  at  Montevideo  was  imprisoned  as  an
English  spy.  He  obtained  his  liberty  soon  after
ward,  but  was  sent  to  the  interior  of  the  country,
where  he  remained  several  months.  When  the
English  under  Beresford  occupied  Montevideo  (in
1800),  Mawe  returned  to  the  latter  city  and  was
attached  to  the  staff  of  Gen.  Whitelocke,  accom
panying  the  latter  in  his  unsuccessful  expedition
against  Buenos  Ayres.  On  his  return  to  Monte
video  he  bought  a  schooner  and  sailed  to  Brazil,  11
Sept.,  1807,  making  various  explorations  on  his
way.  He  was  well  received  by  the  prince  regent,
who  gave  him  permission  to  visit  the  diamond-
mines  of  Minas  Geraes,  and  also  gave  him  access  to
the  government  archives,  permitting  him  to  take
copies  of  charts  and  documents.  Mawe  returned
to  London  in  1811  and  became  a  well-known  prac
tical  mineralogist  there.  He  published  "  Travels
in  the  Interior  of  Brazil,  including  a  Voyage  to  the
Rio  de  la  Plata,  and  an  Historical  Essay  upon  the
Revolutions  in  Buenos  Ayres"  (London,  1812);
"  Treatise  on  Diamonds  and  Precious  Stones,  and
particularly  those  of  South  America"  (1813 ;  2d  ed.,
revised,  1823) ;  and  several  less  important  works.

MAXCY,  Jonathan,  educator,  b.  in  Attle-
borough,  Mass.,  2  Sept.,  1768 ;  d.  in  Columbia,  S.


C.,  4  June,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1787  with  the  highest  honor  in  his  class,  and  was
at  once  appointed  a  tutor,  remaining  in  this  office
for  four  years.  In  September,  1791,  he  was  ordained
to  the  ministry  after  accepting  a  call  from  the
first  Baptist  church  in  Providence.  On  the  same
day  he  was  elected  both  a  trustee  and  professor  of
divinity  in  the  college.  Though  his  pastoral  rela
tion  was  brief,  it  was  long  enough  for  him  to  estab
lish  a  reputation  for  ability  and  eloquence  as  a
preacher.  Dr.  James  Manning,  president  of  the
college,  having  died  suddenly  in  1791,  Mr.  Maxcy
was  appointed  in  1792  to  succeed  him.  He  at  once
resigned  his  pastoral  charge  and  accepted  the
appointment,  though  but  twenty-four  years  of  age.
The  college  under  his  administration  grew  rapidly
in  popular  favor.  When  he  was  only  thirty-three
years  of  age  the  degree  of  I).  D.  was  conferred  upon
him  by  Harvard.  In  1802  he  was  elected  to  the
presidency  of  Union  college.  In  1804  he  was  chosen
first  president  of  South  Carolina  college,  which  had
been  just  established  at  Columbia.  In  the  hope
that  a  southern  climate  might  benefit  his  health,
he  accepted,  and  over  this  institution  he  continued
to  preside  until  his  death,  a  period  of  sixteen  years.
His  service  in  this  office  was  marked  by  great
popularity  and  success.  His  brilliant  and  attractive
powers  gave  him  distinction  and  influence,  not  only
in  South  Carolina,  but  throughout  the  southern
states.  Many  competent  witnesses  testify  that  as  a
pulpit  orator  he  had  few  equals  in  his  generation.
Dr.  Maxcy's  publications  comprised  numerous
occasional  sermons,  orations,  and  baccalaureate
addresses.  See  "  The  Literary  Remains  of  the  Rev.
Jonathan  Maxcy.  D.  D. ;  with  a  Memoir  of  his
Life,"  by  Romeo  Elton,  D.  D.  (New  York,  1844).—
His  brother,  Virgil,  lawyer,  b.  in  Attleborough,
Mass.,  about  1785;  d.  on  Potomac  river,  28  Feb.,
1844,  studied  law  with  Robert  Goodloe  Harper,  of
Maryland,  and  settled  in  the  practice  of  his  profes
sion  in  that  state,  where  he  soon  became  eminent
as  an  advocate.  He  also  took  an  interest  in  politics,
was  a  member  of  the  Maryland  legislature,  serving
at  different  times  in  both  houses,  became  solicitor
to  the  U.  S.  treasury,  and  afterward  was  charge
d'affaires  in  Belgium  from  1837  till  1842.  lie  was
one  of  the  victims  of  the  explosion  of  a  heavy  gun
on  board  the  steamer  "  Princeton  "  during  a  visit
to  the  ship  of  President  John  Tyler  and  his  party.
(See  TYLER.)  Mr.  Maxcy's  publications  include  a
valuable ''Compilation  of  the  Laws  of  Maryland
from  1092  to  1809  "  (4  vols.,  Annapolis,  1809),  and  an
"  Oration"  before  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  (1833).
MAXEY,  Samuel  Bell,  soldier,  b.  in  Tomp-
kinsville,  Monroe  co.,  Ky.,  30  March,  1825.  His
family  was  of  Huguenot  descent,  and  came  to  Ken
tucky  from  Virginia,  and  his  father,  Rice  Maxey,
was  clerk  of  the  circuit  court  and  county  court  of
Clinton  county.  Samuel  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1846,  and  assigned  to
the  7th  infantry.  During  the  Mexican  war  he
served  at  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz  and  the  battle  of
Cerro  Gordo,  was  brevetted  1st  lieutenant  for  gal
lant  conduct  at  Contreras  and  Churubusco,  and
was  also  at  Molino  del  Rey  and  the  capture  of  the
city  of  Mexico.  He  was  made  commander  of  a
picked  company  in  the  city  guard  by  Gen.  Win-
field  Scott.  After  the  war  lie  was  stationed  at
Jefferson  barracks,  but  resigned  on  17  Sept.,  1849,
and  in  1850  began  the  practice  of  law  at  Albany,
Clinton  co.,  Ky.  He  married  in  1853,  and  in  1857
removed  to  Paris,  Tex.,  where  he  practised  until
1861.  He  had  been  brought  up  a  Whig,  but  voted
for  John  C.  Breckinridge,  and  afterward  for  the
secession  of  the  state.  He  was  elected  to  the  state


268


MAXIMILIAN


MAXIMILIAN


senate,  but  never  took  his  seat.  He  raised  the!
9th  Texas  infantry,  and  joined  Gen.  Albert  Sid
ney  Johnston  in  March,  1862,  at  Pecatur,  Ala.,
whence  he  was  sent  to  Chattanooga  to  collect  and
reorganize  troops.  In  the  mean  time  he  had  been
made  a  brigadier-general.  Maxey  now  served
under  Bragg,  and  assailed  the  rear  of  Buell's  army
on  its  retreat,  driving  it  from  Bridgeport,  Battle
Creek,  and  Stevenson,  and  making  valuable  cap
tures.  He  was  in  the  first  siege  of  Port  Hudson,
when  the  National  troops  were  repulsed,  and  was
under  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston  in  the  defence  of  i
Jackson,  Miss.  In  18G3  he  was  assigned  to  the  '
command  of  Indian  territory.  lie  organized  this
military  district,  and  put  8,000  or  more  men  under
arms,  'in  1864,  with  these  troops,  he  assisted  Gen.
Sterling  Price  at  Prairie  Panne,  and  at  Poison
Springs,  18  April,  1864,  he  fought  Gen.  Frederick
Steele,  and  captured  his  entire  train  of  227  wag
ons,  thus  compelling  him  to  retreat.  For  these
services  he  was  made  a  major-general.  He  also
acted  as  Indian  agent  during  this  period,  and
directed  important  military  movements.  After
the  war  Gen.  Maxey  resumed  the  practice  of  law
at  his  home,  arid  was  appointed  a  judge,  but  de
clined.  In  1874  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,
took  his  seat,  5  March,  1875,  and  was  re-elected  on
25  Jan..  1881.  He  has  served  on  the  committee
on  territories,  military  affairs,  and  on  labor  and
education,  and  as  chairman  of  that  on  post-offices.
He  has  endeavored  to  protect  the  frontier  and  se
cure  its  peace  and  safety,  to  grant  liberal  appro
priations  for  rivers  and  harbors  and  other  internal
improvements,  to  procure  greater  postal  facilities,
and  to  increase  our  foreign  trade  by  generous  sub
sidies  to  steamship-lines.  His  bills  first  asserted
the  right  of  way  through  the  Indian  territory,
which  was  afterward  obtained  for  the  railroads
through  that  region.  Gen.  Maxey  has  favored
revenue  reform,  and  regards  a  protective  tariff  as
unconstitutional  and  oppressive.

MAXIMILIAN  (Ferdinand  Maximilian  Jo
seph),  archduke  of  Austria  and  emperor  of  Mexi
co,  b.  in  Schonbrunn,  6  July,  1832;  d.  in  Quere-
taro,  Mexico,  19  June,  1867".  He  was  the  second
son  of  the  archduke  Francis  Charles  and  Sophia
Frederica  Dorothea,  princess  of  Bavaria,  and  a
brother  of  the  emperor  Francis  Joseph.  He  was
educated  for  the  navy,  which  he  entered  at  an

early  age.  In
1854,  while  he
was  exploring  the
coast  of  Albania
and  Dalmatia  on
the  corvette  "  Mi
nerva,"  he  was
called  to  Vienna
to  assume  the
chief  command
of  the  navy.  In
this  office  lie  vis
ited  the  ports  of
Candia,  Palestine,
and  Egypt,  mak
ing  excursions  in
to  the  interior,  be
gan  the  construc
tion  of  the  arsenal
at  Pola  and  the

rebuilding  of  that  city,  and  sent  the  frigate  "  No-
vara "  on  a  voyage  round  the  world,  and  the  cor
vette  "  Caroline. "  to  visit  the  ports  of  South  Amer
ica.  In  1857  he  was  appointed  governor-general
of  the  Lombardo- Venetian  kingdom,  which  he
ruled  wisely  during  a  period  of  great  political  ex


citement,  and  in  the  same  year  he  married  in  Brus
sels  the  Princess  Charlotte,  daughter  of  King  Leo
pold  I.,  of  Belgium.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war
of  1859  he  retired  to  Venice,  and  later  to  his  castle
of  Miramar,  near  Trieste,  where  he  led  the  life  of
a  patron  of  art  and  literature,  and  wrote  several
works  of  merit.  He  also  made  a  voyage  of  dis
covery  to  Brazil.  In  consequence  of  the  French
intervention  in  Mexico,  and  Napoleon  III.'s  reso
lution  to  put  a  European  prince  on  the  throne  of
the  monarchy  that  he  proposed  to  erect  there,
Maximilian's  name  was  proposed  by  Gutierrez-
Estrada  (q.  ?•.),  and  the  archduke  began  early  in
1863  assiduously  to  study  the  Spanish  language.
The  assembly  of  notables  of  Mexico  voted,  on  8
July,  1863,  for  an  empire  under  the  rule  of  Maxi
milian,  and  a  commission  of  that  body  appeared
on  3  Oct.  in  Miramar  to  offer  the  throne  to  the
archduke,  who  accepted  privately,  on  condition
that  his  election  should  be  confirmed  by  popular
vote.  After  obtaining  the  consent  of  his  brother,
renouncing  his  claim  to  the  succession  in  Austria,
and  receiving  the  acts  of  adherence  by  many  Mexi
can  towns,  he  concluded  a  secret  convention  with
Napoleon  III.  regarding  the  assistance  of  French
troops  till  the  consolidation  of  the  empire,  and
officially  announced  on  10  April,  1S64,  his  accept
ance  of  the  Mexican  crown  under  the  name  of
Maximilian  I.  He  paid  farewell  visits  to  the  Eng
lish,  Belgian,  and  French  courts,  went  to  Rome  to
receive  the  pope's  blessing,  and  on  14  April  sailed
with  his  wife  on  the  "  Novara  "  for  Mexico,  land
ing  on  28  May  in  Vera  Cruz.  The  authorities  had
prepared  great  festivities  for  his  reception,  his
journey  toward  the  capital  seemed  a  triumph.
The  new  monarch  received  many  deputations  from
the  Indians  of  the  interior,  and  naturally  believed
in  the  sincere  acceptance  of  his  rule  by  the
people.  On  12  June  he  made  his  solemn  entry
into  the  capital,  and  one  of  his  measures,  as  he
was  childless,  was  to  adopt  a  grandson  of  the  em
peror,  Iturbide.  as  presumptive  successor  to  the
throne.  The  French  courts-martial  had  condemned
thousands  of  patriots  to  death  as  bandits,  and
Maximilian  published  a  decree  of  amnesty  for  po
litical  crimes,  thereby  incurring  the  enmity  of  the
French  military  authorities.  To  strengthen  his
position  he  gave  orders  for  the  organization  in
Austria  and  Belgium  of  an  auxiliary  corps,  but
financial  straits  forced  him  to  raise  a  loan  in  Paris
under  ruinous  conditions.  He  established  com
mittees  for  the  regulation  of  public  affairs,  and
showed  the  best  intentions  for  the  faithful  admin
istration  of  the  government.  He  instituted  public
audiences,  in  which  every  Sunday  he  received  all
persons  without  distinction,  who  wished  to  make
complaints  or  to  present  projects  of  public  utility,
and  by  his  affable  manners  soon  gained  the  co-opera
tion  of  the  former  moderate  party  and  the  submis
sion  of  some  of  the  Juarist  chiefs.  His  favorite  resi
dence  while  at  the  capital  was  the  castle  of  Chapul-
tepec,  represented  in  the  accompanying  engraving.
He  made  a  tour  of  inspection  of  the  provinces  that
had  fully  submitted  to  the  empire,  and  appointed
the  empress  regent  during  his  absence  and  in  case
of  his  death.  On  his  return  he  recommended  the
obligatory  public  instruction,  issued  a  decree  rec
ognizing  the  Roman  Catholic  religion  as  that  of
the  state,  while  granting  full  toleration  to  all
other  creeds,  and  by  these  and  other  liberal  meas
ures,  but  principally  by  his  failure  to  restore  the
sequestered  church  property,  alienated  the  sup
port  of  the  clergy  and  the  conservative  party,  who
had  been  hitherto  his  most  zealous  partisans.
Meanwhile  the  progress  of  the  empire  in  the  inte-


MAXIMILIAN


MAXIMILIAN


269


rior  was  slow,  and  the  difficulties  increased,  owing
to  the  determined  resistance  of  Juarez  (q.  v.)  and
all  the  liberal  chiefs  of  the  country,  who,  although
fighting  independently,  joined  hi  their  resistance


to  the  empire  and  in  recognition  of  the  Republican
government  of  Juarez,  and  were  encouraged  by
dissatisfaction  in  the  United  States  with  European
encroachments  on  the  American  continent.  In

1865.  after  the  close  of  the  civil  war  in  the  United
States,  the  attitude  of  the  latter  government  be
came more  determined,  but  when,  owing  to  the
advance  of  the  French  Gen.  Briancourt  to  Chihua
hua.  Juarez  was  forced  to  retire  to  Paso  del  Norte.
Maximilian,  deceived  by  the  French  bulletins,  de
clared  that  the  Republican  government  had  aban
doned  the  country,  and  therefore  under  pressure
from  Gen.  Bazaine  issued  the  decree  of  3  Oct.,  which
was  afterward  fatal  to  him,  declaring  all  Mexicans
that  should  be  taken  in  arms  against  the  empire,
bandits,  and  subject  to  immediate  execution  with
out  trial. Henceforth  the  strife  became  more  san-
guinary. The  executions  that  followed,  and  sev
eral  cruelties  that  were  committed  by  the  Austro-
Belgian  forces,  caused  a  protest  from  the  Republi
can  minister  at  Washington.  Senor  Romero,  and
the objections of  the United States  to  foreign
armed  intervention  on  American  soil  became  so
urgent  that  at  last  Xapoieon,  after  vainly  trying
to  obtain  from  the  U.  S.  government  a  recogni
tion  of  the  Mexican  empire  conditioned  on  his
withdrawal  of  the  troops,  was  forced  by public
opinion  in  France  to  evacuate  Mexico. In  March.

1866.  Napoleon's  envoy.  Baron  Saillard.  arrived  in
Cuernavaca,  where  the  emperor  had  gone  for  a
short  visit  to  announce  that  the  first  French  troops
were  to  leave  Mexico  in  November  of  that  year.
Maximilian  then  sent  Gen. Almonte  to  France,
and.  after  he  had  vainly  tried  to  change  Napoleon's
resolution,  the  Empress  Charlotte  left  in  July  for
Europe,  where,  in  interviews  with  the  French  em
peror  and  the  pope,  she  pleaded  in  vain  to  change
the  current  of  events. In  Rome  her  mind  gave
way  in  consequence  of  her  mental  anxiety  for  the
fate  of  her  husband. Maximilian  tried  unsuccess
fully to propitiate the French by appointing
Frenchmen  to  the  portfolios  of  war  and  the  treas
ury,  but  they  were  refused  permission  from  France
to  enter  the  ministry,  and  then,  as  a  last  resource,
he  abandoned  the  Liberal  party,  and  threw  himself
again  into  the  arms  of  his  former  partisans,  the
Conservatives. But  even  this  remedy  could  not
save  the  tottering  empire  before  the increasing
success  of  the  Republican  arms,  and  in  October
Gen.  Castelnau  arrived  to  communicate  to  Maxi
milian  the  firm  resolve  of  Napoleon  to  evacuate
Mexico,  and  advised  him  to  return  to  Europe. The
emperor  had  gone  to  Orizaba  for  his  health,  and


there  he  assembled  on  25  Nov.  his  ministers  and
council  of  state,  who  were  nearly  all  opposed  to
his  abdication.  On  5  Dec.  he  issued  a  decree  call
ing  a  national  congress,  to  be  freely  elected  by
both  belligerent  parties,  promising  to  abide  by  its
decision.  Such  an  assembly  could  not  be  brought
together,  owing  to  the  opposition  of  the  great  ma
jority  of  the  Republicans,  who  by  this  time  had
occupied  nearly  the  whole  of  the  country  as  it
was  abandoned  by  the  retiring  French  troops.
After  the  emperor's  return  to  the  capital,  an  as
sembly  of  only  35  notables  met  on  14  Jan.,
1867,  and  with  but  10  dissenting  A-otes  decided
against  Maximilian's  abdication.  But  the  impe
rial  exchequer  was  empty,  and  when  on  1  Feb.
the  last  French  troops  left  Mexico,  including  even
those  Frenchmen  that  had  enlisted  in  the  imperial
army,  the  position  of  affairs  became  critical.  In
the  capital,  with  more  adequate  means  of  resist
ance,  Maximilian  might  have  held  out  for  a  long
time,  but,  after  refusing  a  renewed  invitation  from
Bazaine  to  depart  with  him,  the  emperor  resolved
to  stand  or  fall  with  his  friends  in  Queretaro,  and
on  13  Feb.,  with  a  single  corps,  accompanied  by
Gen.  Marquez.  he  left  the  capital  for  that  city,
which  speedily  was  surrounded  and  besieged  by
the  Republican  forces.  After  many  partial  en
counters,  several  gallant  but  unavailing  sorties,
and  seventy-two  days  of  close  siege,  his  army  hav
ing  suffered  greatly  and  being  reduced  to  the  last
extremities  by  the  total  exhaustion  of  provisions,
the  emperor  decided,  after  consultation  with  his
council  of  war,  to  break  through  the  enemy's  lines
on  15  May.  But  in  the  preceding  night  the  Re
publican  troops  gained  access  to  the  strong  post
of  La  Cruz,  through  the  treachery,  as  is  generally
asserted,  of  the  commander  of  Maximilian's  body
guard,  Col.  Miguel  Lopez,  and  surprised  the  city.
After  a  short  resistance  by  Miramon,  the  imperial
army  surrendered  the  city,  and  Maximilian,  Mejia,
and  Miramon  were  made  prisoners.  For  nearly  a
month  Maximilian  was  kept  in  prison  in  the  con
vents  of  La  Cruz  and  Capuchinas,  and  after  vain
efforts  of  the  European  governments  in  his  favor,
and  a  fruitless  attempt  to  obtain  the  intervention
of  the  United  States  with  Juarez  in  his  behalf,  a
court-martial  met  on  13  June.  Notwithstanding
the  able  defence  of  his  attorneys  Gen.  Mariano
Riva  Palacio,  Martinez  de  la  Torre,  and  Eulalio
Ortega,  Maximilian  was  condemned  to  death  next
day,  and  the  attempt  of  his  defenders  to  obtain
his  pardon  failed  in  view  of  his  fatal  decree  of  3
Oct.,  1865.  After  his  condemnation,  it  is  said  that
he  was  offered  facilities  to  escape  from  prison  and
reach  the  coast,  but  that  he  refused  to  avail  him
self  of  them  unless  his  companions  Miramon  and
Mejia  should  be  saved  at  the  same  time.  On  the
morning  of  the  19th,  on  the  Cerro  de  las  Cam-
panas,  near  Queretaro,  the  three  prisoners  were
shot.  The  emperor's  body  was  carried  to  the
Church  of  the  Capuchinas,  embalmed,  taken  to  the
capital,  and  deposited  in  the  Church  of  San  An
dres.  In  August  the  Austrian  frigate  "  Elisabeth  "
arrived  in  Vera  Cruz,  and  Vice- Admiral  Tegethoff,
by  order  of  the  emperor  of  Austria,  claimed  the
remains  of  the  unfortunate  prince.  After  many
delays  they  wei'e  delivered  in  November,  and  con
veyed  to  Europe  in  the  same  frigate  that  had  car
ried  the  imperial  pair  to  Mexico  in  1864.  On  18
Jan..  1868,  they  were  interred  in  the  imperial  vault
in  Vienna.  During  August  and  September,  1887,
an  attempt  was  made  by  some  partisan  journals  of
Mexico  to  remove,  after  the  twenty  years'  silence
of  Col.  Lopez,  the  stain  of  traitor  from  his  name
by  means  of  supposed  autograph  letters  of  Maxi-


270


MAXIMILIAN


MAXWELL


inilian.  authorizing  Lopez  to  treat  secretly  for
surrender,  which  would  brand  the  emperor  as  a
coward,  but  so  far  these  attempts  seem  to  have
failed  signally,  as  contemporaneous  trustworthy
witnesses  have  shown  that  it  was  an  impossibility
that  Maximilian  could  have  written  the  letters,
and  even  the  unfortunate  prince's  most  violent
political  opponents  in  Mexico  never  questioned
his  undoubted  courage  and  singularly  high  char
acter.  Maximilian's  writings  have  been  collected
and  published  under  the  title  "Aus  meinem  Le-
ben ;  Keiseskizzen,  Aphorismen,  Marinebilder "
(7  vols.,  Leipsic.  1867).  See  also  Emile  de  Kera-
try's  "  L'Empereur  Maximilien,  son  elevation  et  sa
chute"  (Paris,  1867);  Hellwald's  "Maximilian  I..
Kaiser  von  Mexico,  nebst  Abriss  der  Geschichte
des  Kaiserreichs "  (Vienna,  1869) ;  and  Kendall's
"Mexico  under  Maximilian"  (London,  1872). —
His  wife.  Charlotte  JIarie  Ainelio,  b.  in  Brus
sels,  7  June,  1840,  is  the  daughter  of  King  Leo
pold  I.,  of  Belgium,  and  his  wife.  Princess  Marie
Clementine,  of  Orleans,  and  married  Maximilian.
27  July,  1857.  She  resided  with  her  husband  at
the  ciistle  of  Miramar,  and  with  him  became  a  pa
tron  of  art  and  litera
ture.  She  exercised
great  moral  influence
on  the  yielding  and
romantic  character  of
her  husband,  which
she  used  in  1863  to
induce  Maximilian  to
accept  the  crown  of
Mexico.  On  their  ar
rival  in  that  country
she  took  an  active
part  in  public  affairs,
and  favored  every  im
provement  that  was
proposed  during  her
short  reign.  She  laid
the  corner-stone  of
a  hospital  in  1865,
founded  many  benev-
olent  societies,  was
foremost  in  charita
ble  work,  and,  being

an  accomplished  amateur  artist,  gave  several  of
her  paintings  to  be  sold  for  the  benefit  of  the  poor.
She  often  urged  the  emperor  to  adopt  a  policy  of
moderation,  in  opposition  to  the  counsel  of  the
French  chiefs  and  his  official  advisers,  and  espe
cially  tried  to  prevent  the  proclamation  of  3  Oct.,
1865,  outlawing  the  Republicans  in  arms,  about
which  she  had  a  serious  difference  with  the  minister
Lacunza  and  Archbishop  Labastida.  When  Gen.
O'Horan  in  an  audience,  intending  to  please  the
empress,  said  that  he  was  glad  to  be  the  first  to
tell  her  that  the  Republican  generals  Arteaga  and
Salazar  had  been  shot  in  Uruapam,  in  consequence
of  this  decree,  she  was  so  indignant  that  she  insist
ed  upon  his  immediate  deposition.  In  December  of
that  year  she  prevailed  upon  the  emperor  to  adopt
young  Agustin  Iturbide  as  his  heir,  but  even  at
that  time  she  seems  to  have  had  a  foreboding  of
coming  events,  as,  in  communicating  the  news  of
this  adoption  to  the  empress  of  Austria,  she  wrote  :
"  Now  I  consider  my  being  childless  as  a  blessing
from  heaven,  for  I  already  foresee  an  orphan  in
this  prince."  In  the  beginning  of  1866  a  journal
ist  was  court-martialed  for  having  published  an
insulting  poem  against  the  empress,  but  she  called
him  to  her  presence  and  pardoned  him,  asking
him  what  office  he  had  filled  under  Juarez,  and
reinstating  him  in  it.  When  Almonte  commu


nicated  from  Paris  that  he  had  been  unable  to
shake  Napoleon's  resolution  to  evacuate  Mexico,
Charlotte  offered  to  go  to  France  to  try  to  per
suade  the  emperor  to  change  his  mind.  She  left,
Mexico  on  8  July,  1866,  and  sailed  from  Vera
Cruz  on  the  13th,  arriving  in  Paris  on  9  Aug.,  and
on  the  following  day  she  had  an  interview  with
the  French  emperor,  who  received  her  coldly,  and,
notwithstanding  her  repeated  j (leadings,  refused
to  make  any  change  in  favor  of  Maximilian  in  his
dispositions  regarding  Mexico.  This  disappoint
ment  affected  her  deeply,  and,  in  the  hope  of  ob
taining  something  through  the  influence  of  the
pope,  she  left  on  the  23d  for  Rome  by  way  of  Mi
ramar.  This  visit  to  the  scenes  of  the  first  happy
years  of  her  married  life,  combined  with  mental
anxiety  for  the  fate  of  her  husband,  affected  her
mind,  and  on  the  day  following  her  arrival  at
Rome  she  showed  signs  of  insanity.  Her  sad  con
dition  was  officially  declared  on  4  Oct.,  and  she  was
removed  to  the  chateau  of  Tervucren  in  Belgium,
where  she  has  lived  for  many  years,  apparently
hopelessly  insane,  yet  with  some  lucid  intervals,  in
which  she  is  said  to  busy  herself  writing  recollec
tions  of  the  Mexican  empire.  Since  the  burning
of  the  chateau  in  1879,  she  has  been  confined  in
Houchoute,  and  her  mental  condition  is  not  much
changed,  although  hopes  of  her  recovery  have  been
entertained.  There  is  little  doubt  that  sorrow
for  having  influenced  her  husband's  acceptance  of
the  crown  has  contributed  to  her  insanity.  An
eye-witness  of  the  last  interview  between  Miramon
and  his  wife,  on  16  June,  1865.  relates  that  the
general  said  in  the  presence  of  Maximilian,  "  If  I
had  followed  my  wife's  advice,  I  should  not  be
here";  and  the  emperor  answered,  "I  am  here  for
following  the  advice  of  my  wife."

MAXTLA,  or  MAXTLATON  (mast-lah),  king
of  the  Tepanecs,  b.  in  Atzcapotzalco  late  in  the
14th  century  ;  d.  there  in  1430.  He  was  the  son  of
King  Tetzotzomoc,  who.  gave  him  the  government,
of  Coyoacan,  whence  he  intrigued  against  his
brother-in-law,  Huitzilihuitl  (q.  v.),  king  of  Mexico,
whose  eldest  son,  Acolnahuatl,  Maxtla  ordered  to
be  assassinated,  as  he  feared  that  Tetzotzomoc
might  elect  him  as  his  successor.  At  the  death  of
the  latter,  in  1427,  he  appointed  his  son  Tayatzin
as  his  successor,  but  Maxtla  revolted  against  him,
and  captured  and  assassinated  him,  and  in  revenge
for  the  assistance  given  him  by  Chimalpopoca  (q.  >:),
he  took  that  king  of  Mexico  prisoner  and  put  him
in  an  iron  cage,  where  he  died  of  hunger.  The
same  year  he  sent  assassins  against  Netzahual-
coyotl  (q.  i\),  whose  kingdom  Tetzotzomoc  had
usurped  in  1419,  as  he  feared  that  the  young  prince
might  through  his  popularity  cause  a  rising  of  the
Acolhuas.  Exasperated  by  Maxtla's  arrogance  and
repeated  cruelties,  the  kings  of  Mexico  and  TJalte-
lolco  formed  an  alliance  with  Netzahualcoyotl  and
the  republics  of  Huexotzingo  and  Tlascala  against
him,  and  the  war  began  with  varying  success.  At.
last  a  numerous  army  of  Tepanecs  inarched  against
Mexico,  which  was  occupied  by  the  allied  armies
under  the  chief  command  of  Netzahualcoyotl,  and
made  a  furious  attack  that  was  nearly  successful.
The  allied  forces  had  begun  to  waver,  when  the
young  prince  with  Montezuma,  general  of  the
Mexicans,  made  a  desperate  charge,  and  the  latter
killed  the  Tepanec  general  Mazatl,  and  routed  his
army.  The  allies  pursued  the  enemy  next  day,
entering  Atzcapotzalco,  where  they  found  Maxtla
hidden  in  a  temaxcalli,  but  he  was  dragged  forth
and  sacrificed  by  Netzahualcoyotl.

MAXWELL,  Augustus  Emmet,  jurist,  b.  in
Elberton,  Ga.,  21  Sept.,  1820.  After  his  graduation


MAXWELL


MAXWELL


271


at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1841,  he  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  to  practise
in  Tallahassee,  Fla,  He  was  a  member  of  the
Florida  house  of  representatives  in  1847,  secretary
of  state  in  1848,  and  state  senator  in  1849.  He  was
then  elected  to  congress  from  Florida  as  a  Demo
crat,  serving  from  5  Dec.,  185:5,  till  3  March,  1857,
and  from  that  date  until  1861  he  was  navy  agent
at  Pensacola.  From  22  Feb.,  1862,  till  the 'end  of
the  civil  war  he  was  a  Confederate  senator.  In
1866  he  was  made  president  of  the  Pensacola  and
Montgomery  railroad,  and  in  the  same  year  a  jus
tice  of  the  state  supreme  court,  but  held  "office  only
a  short  time.  He  became  judge  of  the  first  circuit
of  Florida  in  1877,  and  chief  justice  in  1887.

MAXWELL,  George  Troupe,  physician,  b.  in
Bryan  county,  Ga.,  6  Aug.,  1827.  He  studied  at
the  Chatham  academy  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  and  was
graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni
versity  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1848.  Dr.  Max
well  practised  in  Tallahassee,  Fla.,  until  1857,
when  he  was  appointed  surgeon  of  the  marine
hospital  in  Key  West,  Fla.  In  1860  he  removed
to  Savannah,  as  he  had  been  elected  professor  of
obstetrics  and  diseases  of  women  and  children  in
Oglethorpe  medical  college,  but  a  year  later  he
enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  1st  Florida  regiment,
and  served  for  four  months  in  the  Confederate
army.  He  was  then  commissioned  major  of  cavalry,
and  in  1862  promoted  to  colonel.  Late  in  1863  he
organized  the  Florida  brigade  in  the  Army  of  the
Tennessee,  and  led  it,  under  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg,
until  the  battle  of  Missionary  Ridge,  where  he  was
captured.  He  was  imprisoned  on  Johnson's  island
in  Lake  Erie  until  March,  1865.  Meanwhile  he
had  been  recommended  for  promotion  to  brigadier-
general.  On  the  close  of  the  war  he  returned  to
Florida,  and  was  elected  a  delegate  from  Leon
county  to  the  convention  that  was  held  for  the
purpose  of  remodelling  the  constitution  and  reor
ganizing  the  state  government,  and  in  1886  he  was
elected  to  the  legislature.  In  1871  he  removed  to
Delaware,  and  has  since  made  Middletown  his  resi
dence.  Dr.  Maxwell  has  held  various  offices  in  the
Delaware  medical  society,  including  that  of  vice-
president  in  1874.  He  claims  to  have  invented  the
laryngoscope  independently  several  months  before
Prof.  Johann  N.  Czermack  announced  his  discov
ery,  and  he  was  the  first  American  physician  to  see
the  vocal  cords  of  a  living  person.  He  had  con
tributed  professional  papers  to  the  medical  journals,
and  published  "  An  Exposition  of  the  Liability  of
the  Negro  Race  to  Yellow  Fever  "  ;  and  a  history
of  his  invention  of  the  laryngoscope  (1872).

MAXWELL,  Hugh,  soldier,  b.  in  Ireland,  27
April,  1733;  d.  at  sea,  14  Oct.,  1799.  His  father,
Hugh,  brought  him  to  New  England  in  the  year  of
his  birth.  He  served  during  five  campaigns  in  the
old  French  wars,  and  was  taken  prisoner  at  Fort
Edward,  barely  escaping  with  his  life.  In  1773  he
removed  to  Charlemont  (now  Heath),  Mass.  He
was  lieutenant  at  Bunker  Hill,  where  he  was
wounded,  became  major  in  Col.  John  Bailey's
regiment,  7  July,  1777,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war
became  lieutenant-colonel.  His  death  occurred  on
his  return  from  a  visit  to  the  West  Indies. — His
brother,  Thompson,  soldier,  b.  in  Bedford,  Mass.,
in  1742;  d.  in  1825,  was  a  ranger  in  the  French
war  from  1758  till  1763.  He  assisted  in  destroying
the  tea  in  Boston  harbor  in  1773,  and  fought  at
Bunker  Hill  and  Three  Rivers.  He  was  a  member
of  the  Massachusetts  constitutional  convention,
but  in  1800  removed  to  Miami  county,  Ohio.  He
was  taken  prisoner  during  the  war  of  1812-'15,  and
in  1814  was  deputy  barrack-master  in  Missouri.


MAXWELL,  Hugh,  lawyer,  b.  in  Paisley,  Scot
land,  in  1787;  d.  in  New  York  city,  31  "March,

1873.  He  was  brought  to  this  country  in early
childhood,  graduated  at  Columbia  college  in  1808,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar. He  was
made  assistant  judge-advocate-general in  the  U.
S.  army  in 1814,  in  1819  elected  district  attorney
for  New  York county,  serving  by  successive  re-
elections  until  1829. Among  his  best-known  cases
were  the  "  conspiracy  trials/'  when  Jacob  Barker,
the  Quaker  banker.  Henry  Eckford,  the  ship-build
er,  and  others,  were  convicted  of  a  conspiracy  to  de
fraud  certain  insurance  companies. These  trials
were  celebrated  in  several  stanzas  by  Halleck,  who
commented  with  great  severity  on  the  course  of
"  Mac  Surll." The  poem  appears  in  the  poet's  life.
Maxwell  afterward  became  an  active  Whi£.  and
from  1849  till  1852  was  collector  of  the  port  of  New
York,  after  which he  practised  law  again  for  a
short  time,  and  then  retired  from  active  life. He
possessed  a  fine  library,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death
was  the  oldest  member  of  the  St.  Andrew's  society,
of  which  he  was  president  in  1835.

MAXWELL,  Sidney  Denise,  statistician,  b.  in
Centreville,  Montgomery  co.,  Ohio,  23  Dec.,  1831.
He  studied  law,  settled  in  Cincinnati  in  1868,  and
in  1862-'3  was  army  correspondent  of  the  Cincin
nati  "  Commercial,"  also  serving  as  a  private  in
the  131st  Ohio  regiment,  and  rising  to  the  rank  of
colonel.  In  1864-'5  he  was  aide-de-camp  to  the  gov
ernor  of  Ohio.  He  was  assistant  city  editor  of  the
Cincinnati  "  Gazette  "  from  1868  till  1871.  and  agent
of  the  Western  associated  press  from  1870  till

1874.  Since  1871  he  has  been  superintendent  of
the  Cincinnati  chamber  of  commerce,  and  is  now
(1888)  its  statistician. In  addition  to  pamphlets
and  the  annual  reports  of  the  chamber  of  commerce,
he has published  '•  The Suburbs  of Cincinnati "
(Cincinnati,  1870),  and  "  The  Manufactures  of  Cin
cinnati  and  their  Relations  to  the  Future  Progress
of  the  City  "  (1878).

MAXWELL,  William,  soldier,  d.  12  Nov.,
1798.  Little  is  known  of  his  personal  history.  It
is  believed  that  he  was  born  in  Ireland  and  brought
to  New  Jersey  in  his  early  years.  He  entered  the
colonial  service  in  1758,  serving  in  the  French  war
and  until  the  Revolution,  when  he  became  colonel
of  the  2d  New  Jersey  battalion,  with  which  he
served  in  the  disastrous  campaign  of  1776  in
Canada.  On  16  July,  1774,  he  was  appointed  one
of  the  committee  on  the  part  of  Sussex  county.  N.
J.,  to  act  with  committees  from  other  counties  to
appoint  deputies  to  represent  New  Jersey  in  the
general  congress.  In  1775-'6  he  was  a  member  of
the  provincial  congress  of  New  Jersey  from  Sussex
county.  Col.  Maxwell  was  one  of  the  remonstrants
against  the  decision  of  the  council  of  officers  that
was  held  on  7  July,  1776,  to  abandon  Crown  Point.
In  a  memorial  to  congress  dated  28  Aug.,  1776,  he
says  that  he  had  been  in  "  constant  service  in  the
army  fifteen  years,  since  the  spring  of  1758;  had
served  his  country  to  the  utmost  of  his  power  and
hopes  with  some  good  effect,  which  he  can  make
himself  appear  if  requisite ;  notwithstanding,  he
feels  himself  much  aggrieved  by  having  a  younger
officer,  St.  Clair,  promoted  over  him."  Congress
appointed  him  brigadier-general,  23  Oct.,  1776.  He
was  with  Gen.  Schuyler  on  Lake  Champlain,
harassed  the  enemy  after  the  battle  of  Trenton,
and.  during  the  winter  and  spring  of  1777,  was
stationed  near  the  enemy's  lines  in  Elizabethtown.
In  the  autumn  of  that  year  he  commanded  a  New
Jersey  brigade  at  the  battles  of  Brandywine  and
Germantown,  was  with  the  army  at  Valley  Forge,
and  pursued  Sir  Henry  Clinton  across  New  Jersey


272


MAXWELL


the  following  summer,  sustaining  an  important
part  in  the  battle  of  Monmouth,  after  which  he
was  left  to  annoy  the  enemy's  rear  in  their  retreat
toward  Sandy  Hook.  In  August,  1779,  he  was  en
gaged  in  Sullivan's  expedition  against  the  Indians.
Soon  after  the  action  of  Springfield  he  resigned  his
commission,  and  his  resignation  was  accepted  by
congress  on  25  June,  1780.  He  is  spoken  of  as  a
man  of  great  bravery,  and  was  much  esteemed  by
Washington,  who  said :  "  I  believe  him  to  be  an
honest  man,  a  warm  friend  to  his  country,  and
firmly  attached  to  its  interests."

MAXWELL,  William,  author,  b.  in  Norfolk.
Va.,  27  Feb.,  1784 ;  d.  near  Williamsburg,  Va.,  9
June,  1857.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1802,
studied  law  in  Richmond,  Va.,  was  admitted  to  the
Norfolk  bar  in  1808,  and  attained  to  eminence  as  a
constitutional  lawyer.  He  edited  the  literary  de
partment  of  the  "  New  York  Journal  of  Commerce  "
in  1827,  served  in  the  Virginia  legislature  in  1830,
and  in  the  state  senate  in  1832-'8,  and  from  No
vember  of  the  latter  year  till  1844  was  president  of
Hampden  Sidney  college,  Va.  He  then  removed  to
Richmond,  was  engaged  in  reviving  the  Virginia
historical  and  philosophical  society,  and  in  1848
established  the  "  Virginia  Historical  Register,"  of
which  he  edited  six  volumes  (1848-'53).  He  was  a
member  of  the  Bible  and  colonization  societies,
active  in  the  cause  of  education,  and  in  1828
erected  at  his  own  expense  in  Norfolk,  Va..  a  ly-
ceum  for  the  diffusion  of  useful  knowledge  by
means  of  lectures  and  scientific  experiments.
Hampden  Sidney  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
He  published  a  "  Memoir  of  Rev.  John  II.  Rice"
(Philadelphia,  1835).

MAXWELL,  William  Henry,  educator,  b.
near  Stewartstown,  County  Tyrone,  Ireland,  5
March,  1852.  He  was  educated  by  his  father,  who
was  a  Presbyterian  clergyman,  and  was  graduated
in  1872  at  Queen's  university,  Ireland.  In  that  year
he  became  one  of  the  assistant  masters  in  the  Royal
Belfast  academical  institution,  and  professor  of
English  literature  and  history  in  the  Ladies'  col
legiate  institution  in  that,  city.  He  came  to  the
United  States  in  1874,  and  engaged  in  journalism,
at  first  on  the  New  York  "  Tribune  "  and  "  Herald,"
and  then  as  managing  editor  of  the  Brooklyn
"  Times,"  which  place  he  held  for  five  years.  While
so  engaged,  he  took  a  deep  interest  in  the  education
al  welfare  of  the  city,  and  was  appointed  lecturer  on
history  and  civil  government  in  the  evening  high-
schools.  In  1882  he  was  elected  associate  superin
tendent  of  public  instruction  of  the  city  of  Brook
lyn,  and  in  1887  was  advanced  to  the  post  of  super
intendent.  Mr.  Maxwell  has  patented  a  method
of  extinguishing  fires  in  warehouses,  and  has  pub
lished  "  Primary  Lessons  in  Language  and  Compo
sition  "  (New  York,  1887).

MAY,  Caroline,  author,  b.  in  England  about
1820.  Her  father,  Rev.  Edward  Harrison  May,  came
to  this  country  from  England  in  1834,  and  was  for
many  years  pastor  of  one  of  the  Dutch  Reformed
churches  of  New  York  city.  She  first  wrote  poems
under  the  pen-name  of  "  Caromaia,"  and  has  pub
lished  "  American  Female  Poets,  with  Biographical
and  Critical  Notices"  (Philadelphia,  1848);  "Treas
ured  Thoughts  from  Favorite  Authors"  (1850);
"  The  Woodbine,  a  Holiday  Gift "  (1852) ;  "  Poems  "
(New  York,  1864);  and  "Hymns  on  the  Collects"
(1872).  She  is  also  a  painter  and  a  musician,  and
now  (1888)  has  a  collection  of  poems  ready  for
publication.— Her  brother,  Edward  Harrison,
artist,  b.  in  England  in  1824 ;  d.  in  Paris.  France,
17  May,  1887,  was  brought  to  this  country  in  child
hood  and  studied  civil  engineering,  which  he  aban


doned  for  art.  becoming  a  pupil  of  Daniel  Hunt-
ington,  and  later,  in  1851,  of  Couture,  in  Paris,
whose  style  is  suggested  in  his  later  works.  During
the  Franco-Prussian  war  he  was  a  captain  of  the
American  ambulance,  aided  the  surgeons  in  attend
ing  the  wounded,  and  received  a  medal  for  his  ser
vices.  He  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National
academy  in  1876,  and  received  a  medal  of  the  third
class  at  Paris  in  1855.  His  works  include  "The
Dying  Brigand  "(in  the  Philadelphia  academy  of
fine  arts);  "  Christopher  Columbus  signing  his  Will
in  Prison  " ;  "  Lady  Jane  Grey  presenting  her  Tab
lets  to  the  Governor  of  the  Tower":  "Franklin
playing  at  Chess  with  Lady  Howe";  "Moliere
Reading";  "Francis  I.  lamenting  the  Death  of  his
Son":  "Ophelia";  "L'Alsacienne"  ;  "Milton  dic
tating  to  his  Daughters  "  ;  "  Lady  Eliza  Pelharn-
Clinton  as  Marguerite  "  ;  "  Le  Chanson  "  :  "  By  the
Rivers  of  Babylon,  or  the  Captive  Jews"  (in  the
Century  club.  New  York);  portraits  of  Laboulaye
and  Count  Gasparin  (in  Union  club.  New  York);
"  Mary  Magdalene  at  the  Sepulchre  "  (presented  by
Caroline  May  to  the  Metropolitan  museum,  New
York) ;  "  Pursued  "  :  "  Pandora  "  ;  "  Le  lever  de
Mademoiselle  "  ;  and  many  other  tableaux  de  genre
and  portraits.

MAY,  John,  patriot,  b.  in  Pomfret,  Conn.,  24
Nov.,  1748;  d.  there,  16  July,  1812.  He  was  a
wealthy  merchant  of  Boston,  and  was  one  of  the
party  that  threw  the  tea  overboard.  He  was  colonel
of  the  1st  regiment  of  Boston  militia,  and  rendered
important  services  under  the  Count  de  Rocham-
beau  in  Rhode  Island.  He  commanded  his  regi
ment  during  the  Shays  rebellion  in  1780-'7,  made
two  horseback  journeys  to  the  "  Ohio  country  "  in
1788-'9,  bought  large  tracts  of  land  there,  and
built  the  first  frame  house  on  the  present  site  of
Marietta.  He  was  one  of  the  selectmen  of  Boston,
for  many  years  fire-warden,  and  exercised  much  in
fluence  in  municipal  affairs. — His  son,  Frederick,
physician,!),  in  Boston,  Mass.,  16  Nov.,  1773;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C.,  23  Jan.,  1847,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1792,  and  studied  medicine  under  Dr.
John  Warren,  of  Boston.  He  removed  to  Washing
ton,  D.  C.,  in  1795,  and  was  the  family  physician  of
Washington  and  of  many  other  eminent  persons
in  that  neighborhood.  He  was  professor  of  obstet
rics  in  Columbian  college  in  1823-'39,  and  at  the
time  of  his  death  was  president  of  the  medical  so
ciety  of  the  District  of  Columbia  and  of  the  Wash
ington  medical  association. — His  son,  Henry,  con
gressman,  b.  in  Washington,  I).  C.,  13  Feb.,  1816;
d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  25  Sept.,  18G6,  received  a  clas
sical  education,  subsequently  studied  law  under
Gen.  Walter  Jones,  and  rose  to  a  high  rank  at  the
Washington  bar.  Among  the  important  cases  in
which  he  appeared  was  the  trial  of  John,  Charles,
and  George  Gardner  for  forging  Mexican  mine-
claims,  in  which  he  was  employed  for  the  govern
ment  by  Daniel  Webster,  then  secretary  of  state.
Mr.  May  removed  to  Baltimore  in  1850,  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1854,  and  was  re-
elected  in  1860.  Although  he  was  a  Union  man,
he  advocated  compromise  measures  on  the  prospect
of  civil  war,  and  in  1861,  with  the  sanction  of
President  Lincoln,  left  his  seat  in  congress  and
visited  Richmond  to  confer  with  (lie  Confederate
authorities  on  peace  measures.  During  his  absence
an  effort  was  made  to  expel  him  on  the  charge  of
disloyalty,  and  on  his  return  he  was  for  several
weeks  imprisoned  in  Fort  Lafayette.  He  was  sub
sequently  released  on  parole,  and  completed  his
term  in  the  house  of  representatives.- — Another
son,  Charles  Augustus,  soldier,  b.  in  Washington,
D.  C.,  9  Aug.,  1817 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  24  Dec.,


MAY


MAYER


273


1864.  entered  the  army  in  1836  as  2d  lieutenant  in
the  2d  dragoons,  did  efficient  service  in  the  Semi-
nole  war,  and  captured  and  brought  to  the  camp
as  a  prisoner,  King  Philip,  the  principal  chief  of
that  nation.  He  was  promoted  captain  in  1846.
and  served  under  Gen.  Zaehary  Taylor  as  his  chief
of  cavalry  throughout  the  Mexican  war,  command
ing  the  cavalry  at  the  battles  of  Palo  Alto,  Resaca
de  la  Pahna,  Monterey,  and  Buena  Vista.  In  the
second-named  engagement  he  turned  the  fortunes  of
the  day  by  charging  a  battery  that  was  intrenched
and  protected  by  an  earthen  breastwork  that  com
manded  the  only  road  through  the  almost  impene
trable  chaparral  on  either  side,  and  captured  Gen.
La  Vega,  who  commanded  the  battery.  For  his
services  and  for  gallantry,  he  was  brevetted  major
*•  for  Palo  Alto,  lieutenant-colonel  for  Resaca  de  la
Palma.  and  colonel  for  Buena  Vista..  Pie  resigned
in  18(i(),  removed  to  New  York  city,  and  became
vice-president  of  the  Eighth  avenue  "railroad.

MAY,  John  Wilder,  lawyer,  b.  in  Attleborough,
Mass.,  29  Jan..  1819;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  11  Jan.,
1883.  His  father,  Lemuel,  was  a  representative  to
the  general  court  of  Massachusetts,  and  a  member
of  the  executive  council.  The  son  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Vermont  in  1846.  and,  after
spending  several  years  in  farming,  read  law,  and  in
1851  was  admitted  to  the  Norfolk,  Mass.,  bar.  He
was  subsequently  solicitor  for  Roxbury  for  several
years,  served  in  the  legislature  in  1867,  and  was
elected  district  attorney  for  Suffolk  county  in  the
same  year.  After  six  years  he  became  judge  of  the
municipal  court  of  Boston.  He  published  "The
Law  of  Insurance  as  applied  to  Fire,  Life,  Accident,
Guarantee,  and  other  Non-Maritime  Risks  "(Bos
ton.  1874-'82);  "The  Law  of  Crimes"  (1881);  and
edited  Angell  on  "Limitations"  (1876);  Greenleaf
on  "  Evidence  "  (1876) ;  and  Stephens's  "  Digest  of
the  Law  of  Evidence  "  (1877).

MAY,  Samuel  Joseph,  reformer,  b.  in  Boston.
Mass.,  12  Sept.,  1797 ;  d.  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  1  July,
1871.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1817,  stud
ied  divinity  at  Cambridge,  and  in  1822  became
pastor  of  a  Unitarian  church  at  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
He  was  early  interested  in  the  anti-slavery  cause,
wrote  and  preached  on  the  subject,  and  in  1830  was
mobbed  and  burned  in  effigy  at  Syracuse  for  advo
cating  immediate  emancipation.  He  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  first  New  England  anti-slavery  society
in  1832,  and,  when  Prudence  Crandall  (q,  v.)  was
proscribed  and  persecuted  for  admitting  colored
girls  to  her  school  in  Canterbury,  Conn.,  he  was  her
ardent  champion.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the
Philadelphia  convention  of  1833  that  formed  the
American  anti-slavery  society,  and  signed  the  "  Dec
laration  of  Sentiments."  of  which  William  Lloyd
Garrison  was  the  author.  In  1835  he  became  the
general  agent  of  the  Massachusetts  anti-slavery
society,  for  which,  by  a  union  of  gentleness  and
courage,  he  was  peculiarly  fitted,  and  in  this  capaci
ty  he  lectured  and  travelled  extensively.  He  was
pastor  of  the  Unitarian  church  at  South  Scituate,
Mass..  in  183(>-'42,  and  became  at  the  latter  date,
at  the  solicitation  of  Horace  Mann,  principal  of
the  Girls'  normal  school  at  Lexington,  Mass.  He
returned  to  the  pulpit  in  1845,  and  from  that  date
till  three  years  previous  to  his  death  was  pastor  of
the  Unitarian  society  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.  Mr.  May
was  active  in  all  charitable  and  educational  enter
prises,  and  did  much  to  increase  the  efficiency  of
the  public-school  system  in  Syracuse.  He  pub
lished  "Education  of  the  Faculties  "(Boston,  1846);
"Revival  of  Education"  (Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  1855):
and  "  Recollections  of  the  Anti-Slavery  Conflict "
(Boston,  1868).  See  "Memoir  of  Samuel  Joseph
VOL.  iv. — IS


May,"  edited  by  George  B.  Emerson,  Samuel  May,
and  Thomas  J.  Murnford  (Boston,  1873).

MAY,  Samuel  Passmore,  Canadian  educator,
b.  in  Truro,  Cornwall,  England,  in  1828.  He  was
educated  privately,  and  on  arriving  at  Quebec  in
1853  was  engaged  by  the  literary  and  historical
society  of  that  city  to  rearrange  their  museum  and
to  prepare  a  scientific  catalogue.  He  soon  after
ward  became  connected  with  the  education  depart
ment  of  Upper  Canada,  had  charge  of  the  educa
tional  exhibit  at  Kingston  in  1856.  and  in  1857  was
appointed  to  establish  meteorological  observatories
at  senior  county  grammar-schools,  and  to  give  in
structions  in  the  use  of  instruments.  He  was
graduated  as  a  physician  at  Victoria  college  in
1863,  and  was  for  a  time  curator  of  its  museum
and  lecturer  on  pharmacy  and  microscopy.*  He
gave  the  first  of  a  series  of  lectures  on  chemistry
under  the  auspices  of  the  Pharmaceutical  society
of  Toronto  in  1869.  and  in  1876  was  appointed  to
take  charge  of  the  Ontario  educational  exhibit  at
the  Centennial  exhibition  at  Philadelphia.  In  1878
Dr.  May  was  appointed  secretary  for  the  Dominion
at  the  Paris  exposition  of  that  year,  and  was
awarded  the  gold  medal  for  the  food  exhibit,  which
won  the  grand  prize.  He  also  received  the  decora
tion  of  the  Legion  of  honor,  that  of  an  officer  of  the
Academy  of  Paris,  and  subsequently  a  medal  from
the  French  government.  He  received  the  appoint
ment  of  superintendent  of  art-schools  in  connection
with  the  Ontario  department  of  education  in  1880,
and  represented  the  Ontario  government  at  the
colonial  exhibition  in  London  in  1886.  When  Dr.
May  was  put  in  charge  of  the  art  department  there
were  only  two  public  art-schools;  now  (1888)  there
are  five,  with  more  than  seventy  branch  schools
throughout  the  province.

MAYER,  Brantz,  author,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,
27  Sept..  1809;  d.  there,  21  March,  1879.  He  was
educated  at  St.  Mary's  college,  Baltimore,  and
studied  law  during  a  long  voyage  to  the  East  in
1827-'8.  On  his  return  home  he  entered  the  law
department  of  the  University  of  Maryland,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1829.  After  practising
for  several  years  he  visited  Europe  in  1833.  and  in
1843  was  appointed  secretary  of  legation  in  Mexico.
When  he  returned  home  he  published  his  first
work,  "  Mexico  as  it  Was,  and  as  it  Is "  (Philadel
phia,  1844),  which  was  accused  of  unfairness  and
gave  rise  to  animated  controversy.  In  the  win
ter  of  1844  Mr.  Mayer  founded  the  Maryland  his
torical  society,  the  original  object  of  which  was
"  the  collecting  the  scattered  materials  of  the  early
history  of  the  state,  and  for  other  collateral  pur
poses."  From  a  membership  of  twenty  it  has
steadily  increased  to  the  present  membership  of
two  hundred,  including  many  professional  men  as
well  as  merchants.  During  the  civil  war  Mr.  Mayer
was  an  active  Unionist,  and  in  1861  was  appointed
president  of  the  Maryland  Union  state  general
committee,  and  did  much  to  aid  the  National  cause.
In  February,  1863,  he  was  appointed  a  paymaster
in  the  U.  S.  army,  and  was  retained  in  the  service
after  the  close  of  the  war.  He  served  in  Maryland,
Delaware,  and  California  until  his  sixty-second
year,  when  he  was  retired  from  active  service  with
the  rank  of  colonel.  Besides  the  work  mentioned
above,  he  published  "  Mexico,  Aztec,  Spanish,  and
Republican"  (2  vols.,  Hartford,  1851);  "Captain
Canot,  or  Twenty  Years  of  an  African  Slaver."
founded  on  fact  (New  York,  1854) ;  "  Observations
on  Mexican  History  and  Archaeology  "  in  "  Smith
sonian  Contributions  to  Knowledge"  (Washington,
1856);  "Mexican  Antiquities  "(Philadelphia,  1858);
"  Memoir  of  Jared  Sparks  "  (1867) ;  and  "  Baltimore


274


MAYER


MAYER


as  it  Was  and  as  it  Is"  (1871),  and  he  contributed
to  the  papers  of  the  State  historical  society  "The
Journal  of  Charles  Carroll  during  his  Mission  to
Canada"  (1844),  and  "Tah-gah-jute,  or  Logan  and
Captain  Michael  Cresap"  (1851;  Albany,  186?).—
His  nephew,  Frank  Blackwell,  artist,  b.  in  Bal
timore,  Md.,  27  Dec.,  1827.  He  studied  under
Gleyre  and  Brion  at  Paris,  and  his  studio  is  now
(1888)  at  Annapolis,  Md.  He  exhibited  at  the
Paris  salon,  and  was  given  a  medal  at  Philadel
phia  in  187-6  for  his  "Continentals"  and  "Attic
Philosopher."  Mr.  Mayer  has  made  a  special
study  of  Indian  types  and  character  in  the  west.
Among  his  works  are  "  The  Feast  of  Mondawmin  "
(1857);  "Doing  and  Dreaming"  (1858);  "The
Nineteenth  Century  "  (1869) :  "  Annapolis  in  1750  "
(1876);  "Talking  Business,  1750 "(1879);  "Crown
ing  a  Troubadour"  (1885);  and  "Treaty  of  Tra
verse  des  Sioux,  Minnesota  "  (1886).  He  has  also
produced  portraits  in  crayon  and  oil,  including  a
crayon  head  of  Chief- Justice  Taney,  and  has  con
tributed  articles,  with  illustrations,  to  "  Harper's  "
and  the  "Century"  magazines.  —  Frank  Black-
well's  brother.  Alfred  Marshall,  physicist,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  13  Nov.,  1836,  was  educated  at  St.
Mary's  college,  Baltimore,  but  left  in  1853  to  enter

the  workshop  and
draught  ing  -  room
of  a  mechanical
engineer,  where
he  remained  two
years,  acquiring  a
knowledge  of  the
use  of  tools,  me
chanical  drawing,
and  methods  of
constructing  ma
chines.  He  then
spent  two  years  in
obtaining  a  thor
ough  knowledge
of  analytical  chem-
istry  by  labora-
torv  practice.  In

ly5-6  he  was  callcd

to  the  chair  of
physics  and  chemistry  in  the  University  of  Mary
land,  and  in  1859-'61  he  held  a  similar  post  in
Westminster  college,  Mo.  In  1863-?4  he  studied
physics,  mathematics,  and  physiology  in  the  Uni
versity  of  Paris,  and  on  his  return  he  filled  succes
sively  chairs  in  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettysburg,
and  Lehigh  university,  Bethlehem,  during  1805-'70.
At  the  latter  institution  he  had  charge  of  the  de
partment  of  astronomy,  and  superintended  the
erection  of  an  observatory.  He  had  charge  of  the
expedition  that  was  sent  to  Burlington,  Iowa,
under  the  auspices  of  the  U.  S.  nautical  almanac
office  to  photograph  the  solar  eclipse  of  7  Aug.,
1869,  and  made  forty-one  perfect  photographs.  In
1871  he  accepted  the  professorship  of  physics  in
Stevens  institute  of  technology,  Hoboken,  N.  J.,
which  chair  he  still  holds.  His  scientific  researches
since  that  time  have  been  principally  published
in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science "  under
the  title  of  "Researches  in  Acoustics"  (1871-'o).
These  include  experiments  showing  that  the  trans
lation  of  a  vibrating  body  causes  it  to  emit  waves
differing  in  length  from  those  produced  by  the  same
vibrating  body  when  stationary;  a  method  of  de
tecting  the  phases  of  vibration  in  the  air  surround
ing  a  sounding  body,  leading  to  his  invention  of  the
topophone ;  mode  of  measuring  the  wave-lengths
and  velocities  of  sound  in  gases,  resulting  in  the
invention  of  an  acoustic  pyrometer;  the  deter


mination  of  relative  intensities  of  sound  ;  five  new
methods  of  sonorous  analysis  for  the  decomposition
nl'  a  compound  sound  into  its  elementary  tones;
the  discovery  that  the  fibrils  of  the  antennae  of  the
male  mosquito  vibrate  sympathetically  to  notes
which  have  the  range  of  pitch  of  the  sounds  given
out  by  the  female  mosquito;  and  the  determination
of  the  laws  of  vibration  of  tuning-forks,  especially
in  the  direction  of  the  bearing  of  these  laws  on  the
action  of  the  chronoscopes  that  are  used  in  deter
mining  the  velocities  of  projectiles.  He  contributed
to  the  "Scientific  American  Supplement "  during
1876-'8  an  extensive  series  of  papers  "On  the
Minute  Measurements  of  Modern  Science."  His
other  memoirs  include  "  On  the  Effects  of  Magneti
zation  "  in  changing  the  dimensions  of  iron  and
steel  bars  (1873);  "Method  of  Investigating  the
Composite  Nature  of  the  Electric  Discharge  "  (1874) ;
"Experiments  with  Floating  Magnets''  (1878);
"  Acoustic  Repulsions "  (1878) ;  "  A  New  Sphe-
rometer  "  (1886) ;  "  On  the  Coefficient  of  Expansion
and  Diathermancy  of  Ebonite"  (1886):  and  "On
Measures  of  Absolute  Radiation  "  (1886).  Prof.
Mayer  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  Pennsyl
vania  college  in  1866.  He  is  a  member  of  scientific
societies,  and  in  1872  was  elected  to  the  National
academy  of  sciences.  In  1873  he  was  one  of  the
associate  editors  of  the  "American  Journal  of  Sci
ence,"  but  after  a  year's  service  withdrew  on  ac
count  of  failing  eyesight.  Besides  numerous  arti
cles  in  his  special  branches  of  inquiry  contributed
to  cyclopaedias  and  journals,  he  has  published
"Lecture  Notes  on  Physics"  (Philadelphia,  186<S);
"The  Earth  a  Great  Magnet "  (New  Haven,  1872);
"Light"  (New  York,  1877);  "Sound"  (1878):  and
"  Sport  with  Gun  and  Rod  in  American  Woods
and  Waters"  (1883).

MAYER,  Constant,  artist,  b.  in  Besaneon,
France,  4  Oct.,  1832.  He  studied  in  Paris  in  the
Ecole  des  beaux-arts  and  under  Leon  Cogniet,  and
followed  his  profession  in  that  city  till  1857.  when
he  removed  to  New  Y'ork.  Mr.  Mayer  is  best
known  by  his  life-sized  genre  pictures,  many  of
which  have  been  photographed  or  engraved,  lie
has  contributed  frequently  to  the  Paris  salon  since
1865,  and  in  1869  was  made  a  chevalier  of  the
Legion  of  honor.  He  was  elected  an  associate  of
the  National  academy  in  1866,  and  he  is  also  a
member  of  the  American  art  union.  Mr.  Mayer's
works  include  portraits  of  Gen.  Grant  and  Gen.
Sherman  ;  "  Beggar-Girl  "  (1863) ;  "  Consolation  "
(1864) ;  "  Recognition  "  (1865) ;  "  Good  Words  "
(1866);  "  Riches  and  Poverty  ";  "Maud  Muller";
"  Street  Melodies  "  (1867);  "Early  Grief"  (1869);
"Oracle  of  the  Field";  "Song  of  the  Shirt"
(1875);  "Song  of  the  Twilight"  (1879);  "In  the
Woods  "  (1880) ;  "  The  Vagabonds"  (1881) :  "  Lord's
Day"  and  "Lawn  Tennis"  (1883);  "Mandolin
Player  "  (1884) ;  "  First  Grief  "  (1885) ;  and  "  The
First  Communion  "  (1886),  which  has  been  etched
by  Thomas  llovenden.

MAYER,  Philip  Frederick,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  York  city,  1  April,  1781;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  16  April,  1858.  He  was  graduated  at  Colum
bia  in  1799,  studied  theology  in  New  YTork,  was  li
censed  to  preach,  1  Sept.,  1802,  and  ordained  to
the  Lutheran  ministry  in  the  following  year.  In
1803  he  became  pastor  at  Athens,  N.  Y.  In  1806
he  accepted  the  pastorate  of  St.  John's  English
Lutheran  church  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  the  first  ex
clusively  English  Lutheran  congregation  in  this
country,  where  he  remained  until  his  death.  He
received  the  degree  of  1).  I),  from  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1823  and  from  Columbia  in
1837.  In  1804  he  had  refused  to  accept  the  same


MAYES


MAYIIEW


275


honor  from  Harvard  on  the  ground  that  he  was
too  young,  and  he  also  declined  the  provostship  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1823.  Dr.
Mayer  was  active  in  benevolent  enterprises  in
Philadelphia.  In  1808  he  was  associated  in  the
formation  of  the  Pennsylvania  Bible  society,  the
first  institution  of  the  kind  in  the  United  States,
of  which  he  was  for  many  years  an  active  mana
ger  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  its  presiding  offi
cer.  He  was  for  many  years  a  trustee  of  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania.  In  1817  he  did  much  to
establish  the  system  of  public  education  in  Penn
sylvania.  For  many  years  before  his  death  he  was
president  of  the  board  of  managers  of  the  Institu
tion  for  the  deaf  and  dumb.  In  1812  the  minis-
terium  of  Pennsylvania  appointed  a  committee  to
prepare  a  suitable  collection  of  English  hymns  for
public  worship,  to  which  was  to  be  appended  a
liturgy,  and  Dr.  Mayer  was  intrusted  with  this
work.  In  1833  a  new  and  enlarged  edition  was  is
sued,  of  which  he  again  had  charge.  He  pub
lished  the  sermon  that  he  delivered  at  the  fiftieth
anniversary  of  his  pastorate  in  Philadelphia.

MAYES,  Joel  Bryan,  Cherokee  chief,  b.  in  the
Cherokee  reservation,  Ga.,  2  Oct.,  1833.  His  father
was  white,  and  his  mother  was  of  mixed  blood  and
descended  on  the  paternal  side  from  James  Adair,
an  Indian  agent  under  George  III.  Joel  was  re
moved  in  his  youth  to  the  Cherokee  reservation  in
Indian  territory,  was  graduated  at  the  Cherokee
male  seminary  in  1856,  and  taught  until  the  be
ginning  of  the  civil  war,  through  which  he  served
as  quartermaster  in  the  Confederate  army.  He  re
turned  to  his  farm  on  Grande  river  in  1805,  was
county  commissioner  and  chief  clerk  of  the  Chero
kee  court  for  many  years,  and  county  judge  for
two  terms.  While  holding  the  latter  office  he  was
chosen  associate  and  subsequently  chief  justice  of
the  supreme  court.  In  August,  1887,  he  became
chief  of  the  Cherokee  nation.

MAYHEW,  Thomas,  governor  of  Martha's
Vineyard,  b.  in  England  in  March,  1592 ;  d.  in
Martha's  Vineyard  in  March,  1G82.  He  was  a
merchant  in  Southampton,  England,  but,  having
obtained  a  grant  of  Martha's  Vineyard  and  the
neighboring  islands  from  Lord  Stirling  in  1641,
he  emigrated  with  his  son  Thomas  to  Massachu
setts  and  settled  at  Edgartown  the  following  year.
Together  they  organized  a  mission  to  convert  the
Indians,  and  induced  them  to  adopt  the  English
code  of  justice  and  finally  to  submit  to  the  crown.
After  his  son's  death  Mayhew  began  at  the  age  of
seventy  to  preach  to  them  as  well  as  to  the  Eng
lish,  and  organized  an  Indian  church.  At  the  be
ginning  of  King  Philip's  war  the  English  on  Mar
tha's  Vineyard  numbered  about  one  twentieth  of
the  Indian  population ;  but  through  his  influence
the  latter  took  no  part  in  the  conflict,  and  even  in
some  instances  served  as  his  guard. — His  son,
Thomas,  missionary,  b.  in  Southampton,  England,
in  1621 ;  d.  at  sea  in  November,  1657,  accompanied
his  father  to  Martha's  Vineyard  in  1641,  and,  hav
ing  acquired  the  language,  began  his  labors  among
the  Indians  in  1646.  By  1650, 100  Indians  had  be
come  converts,  and  after  his  death,  in  1662,  282,
including  eight  pawaws  or  priests,  had  embraced
Christianity.  He  sailed  for  England  in  1657  to
obtain  aid  from  the  Society  for  propagating  the
gospel,  but  the  vessel  was  lost.  Cotton  Mather
said  of  him  that  "  he  was  so  affectionately  es
teemed  by  the  Indians  that  many  years  afterward
he  was  seldom  named  without  tears."  He  wrote,
in  connection  with  John  Eliot,  "  Tears  of  Repent
ance,  or  a  Narrative  of  the  Progress  of  the  Gospel
among  the  Indians  in  New  England"  (London,


1654). — The  second  Thomas's  son,  Mathew,  suc
ceeded  the  elder  Thomas  as  governor  of  Martha's
Vineyard,  occasionally  preached  to  the  Indians,
and  died  there  in  1710. — Another  son,  Thomas,
was  a  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  for  the
county;  and  a  third,  John,  was  a  missionary  to
the  Indians  on  Martha's  Vineyard,  and  left  at  his
death,  in  February,  1689,  a  native  church  of  100
members  and  several  well-instructed  teachers. —
John's  son.  Experience,  missionary,  b.  in  Mar
tha's  Vineyard.  27  Jan.,  1673 :  d.  there,  29  Nov.,
1758,  succeeded  his  father  in  the  charge  of  five  or
six  Indian  congregations.  Having  acquired  the
Indian  language  in  childhood,  he  was  employed  by
the  Society  for  the  propagation  of  the  gospel  in
New  England  to  translate  into  that  tongue  a  new
version  of  the  Psalms  and  of  the  Gospel  of  St.
John,  which  he  executed  in  1709.  He  wrote  stric
tures  on  the  conduct  of  George  Whitefield  in  1743,
numerous  sermons  of  a  controversial  character,
and  "  Indian  Converts  "  (1727),  in  which  he  gave
an  account  of  the  lives  of  thirty  Indian  ministers
and  eighty  Indian  men,  women,  and  children  who
were  converts  to  Christianity.  Harvard  gave  him
the  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1720.  Dr.  Charles  Chauncy
said  of  him :  "  Had  he  been  favored  with  the  ad
vantages  of  education  he  would  have  ranked
among  the  first  worthies  of  New  England." — Expe
rience's  son,  /echaria,  missionary,  b.  in  Martha's
Vineyard  in  1717;  d.  there,  6  March,  1806,  was
from  1767  until  his  death  a  missionary  under  the
Massachusetts  society  for  propagating  the  gospel
among  the  Indians.  He  received  literary  honors
from  Harvard  in  1820. — Another  son,  Jonathan,
clergyman,  b.  in  Martha's  Vineyard,  8  Oct.,  1720;
d.  in  Boston.  Mass.,  9  July,  1766,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1744,  and  three  years  later  ordained
pastor  of  the  West  church  in  Boston,  in  which
he  continued  until  his
death.  Dr.  Mayhew
was  distinguished  as  a
preacher  and  a  con
troversialist.  His  re
ligious  opinions  ap
proached  rationalism
to  such  an  extent  that
he  was  excluded  from
the  Boston  association
of  Congregational  min
isters.  His  opposition
to  the  proceedings  of
the  ^British  society  for
the  propagation  of  the
gospel  in  foreign  parts,
and  the  introduction  of
bishops  into  the  colo
nies,  involved  him  in  a
controversy  with  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,
Dr.  Seeker,  and  the  Rev.  East  Apthorne,  Epis
copal  missionary  to  Boston.  lie  was  an  ardent
patriot,  co-operating  with  James  Otis  and  other
early  opponents  of  English  oppression,  and  in
the  pulpit  and  through  the  press  taught  resist
ance  to  the  ''first  small  beginnings  of  civil  tyran
ny."  In  January,  1750,  he  delivered  a  sermon
on  the  execution  of  Charles  I.,  in  which  he  advo
cated  setting  limits  to  allegiance.  In  his  Thanks
giving  sermon  for  the  repeal  of  the  stamp-act  in
May,  1766,  he  pleaded  fervently  in  behalf  of  civil
and  religious  liberty.  On  his  death-bed  he  wrote
to  Otis,  urging  the  union  of  the  colonies  as  the
only  means  of  perpetuating  their  liberties.  Ban
croft  says  of  him :  "  From  his  youth  he  had  con
secrated  himself  to  the  service  of  colonial  free
dom  in  church  and  state.  He  died,  overtaxed,  in


276


MAYNADIER


MAYO


the  beauty  of  unblemished  manhood,  consumed  by
his  fiery  zeal."  The  University  of  Aberdeen  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1749.  He  published,
among  numerous  sermons  and  addresses,  "  Seven
Sermons  "  (Boston,  1749) ;  "  Discourse  concerning
Unlimited  Submission  and  Non-Resistance  to  the
Higher  Powers"  (1750);  "Sermons"  (1750);  and
"Sermons  to  Young  Men''  (1707).  See  "A  Me
moir  of  the  Life  and  Writings  of  the  Rev.  Jona
than  Mayhew,"  by  Alclen  Bradford  (Boston,  1838).

MAYNADIER,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Mary
land  in  1806;  d.  in  Washington,  I).  C.,  3  July.
1871.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1827.  became  1st  lieutenant  in  1832.
captain  in  1838,  major  and  lieutenant-colonel  in
1801,  colonel  in  1863,  and  brevet  brigadier-general
in  1865.  He  was  aide  to  Gen.  Winfield  Scott  in
the  Black  Hawk  war,  and  on  similar  duty  under
Gen.  Alexander  Macomb  during  the  early  part  of
the  Florida  war.  He  was  frequently  assigned  to  ord
nance  duty  while  in  the  artillery,  and  in  1838,  on
the  increase  of  that  corps,  became  captain  of  ord
nance,  and  was  assigned  to  the  Pikeville,  Md.,
arsenal,  where  he  was  in  command,  acting  also  as
chief  cf  ordnance  till  1842,  when  lie  became  prin
cipal  assistant  to  the  chief  of  ordnance.  From
this  date  he  was  closely  associated  in  official  con
nection  with  the  successive  chiefs  of  the  ordnance
bureau,  by  whom  he  was  greatly  valued  for  his
ability  and  long  experience.  He  was  charged  and
acquitted  in  1802  of  disloyalty,  as  accessory  to  the
alleged  attempt  of  Sec.  John  B.  Floyd  to  transfer
U.  S.  cannon,  munition,  and  arms  to  the  south,
lu  1804  he  was  inspector  of  arsenals  and  depots.

MAYNARI),  Edward,  inventor,  b.  in  Madison,
N.  Y.,  26  April,  1813.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1831,  but  resigned  in  the  same  year,
and  in  1835  became  a  dentist,  which  profession  he
has  since  followed.  In  1857  he  became  professor
of  theory  and  practice  in  Baltimore  college  of
dental  surgery,  and  he  now  (1888)  holds  that  chair
in  the  dental  department  of  the  National  uni
versity  at  Washington.  He  has  devised  many
methods  and  instruments  in  connection  with  his
profession,  but  is  best  known  by  his  improvements
in  fire-arms.  These  include  a  system  of  priming
to  take  the  place  of  the  percussion  -  cap  (1845),
which  has  been  applied  to  rifles  and  muskets  by
the  U.  S.  government  and  abroad;  the  Maynard
breech-loading  rifle  (1851-'9),  which  is  now  in  use
by  nearly  all  civilized  nations ;  a  method  of  con
verting  muzzle-loading  arms  into  breech-loaders,
which  has  also  been  adopted  here  and  abroad
(1860);  a  device  for  joining  two  gun-barrels  so
that  they  may  expand  or  contract  endwise  inde
pendently:  an  indicator  for  showing  the  number
of  cartridges  in  the  magazine  of  a  repeating  fire
arm  at  any  time  ;  and  numerous  minor  inventions,
all  of  which  have  been  patented.  Dr.  Maynard
has  received  many  honors,  both  in  the  United
States  and  from  foreign  governments. — His  son,
(reorge  Willoiighby,  artist,  b.  in  Washington,
D.  C.,  5  March,  1843,  studied  at  the  Royal  acad
emy  of  fine  arts  of  Antwerp  in  1869-'73,  and  in
1878  had  a  studio  in  Paris,  but  returned  to  this
country  and  has  resided  in  New  York  city.  He  is
a  member  of  the  Society  of  American  artists  and
the  American  water-color  society,  and  has  been
president  of  the  Salmagundi  sketch-club  and  the
American  black  and  white  society,  and  in  1885  was
elected  a  National  academician.  In  1884  he  was
awarded  a  medal  at  the  Pennsylvania  academy  of
fine  arts.  Besides  numerous  portraits,  his  works
include  "Vespers  at  Antwerp"  and  "1776."  sent
to  the  Centennial  exhibition  of  1876 ;  "  Water  Car


riers  of  Venice  "  (1878) ;  "  Musical  Memories  " ;  and
"  Venetian  Court."  He  has  exhibited  at  the  Na
tional  academy  "An  Ancient  Mariner  "  (1883) ;  "Au
rora"  (1884).;  "Strange  Gods"  (1885);  "Portrait
of  a  Child  "  (1886) ;  and  "  Old  and  Rare  "  (1887).

MAYNARI),  Horace,  statesman,  b.  in  WTest-
borough,  Mass.,  13  Aug.,  1814 ;  d.  in  Knoxville.
Tenn.,  3  May,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst
in  1838,  and  removed  to  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  where
he  was  instructor  in  East  Tennessee  college  in
1839-'43,  and  the  next  year  was  appointed  professor
there  of  mathematics  and  natural  history.  He  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1845,  and  practised  with
success  till  1857,  when  he  took  his  seat  in  congress,
having  been  elected  as  an  American,  and  served
till  1863.  He  returned  to  Knoxville  after  its  oc
cupation  by  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside  in  the
autumn  of  that  year,  but  his  property  had  been
confiscated  and  his  family  driven  from  east  Ten
nessee.  He  was  state  attorney-general  in  1864,  a
delegate  to  the  Baltimore  Republican  convention,
and  a  presidential  elector.  He  was  returned  to
the  39th  congress  as  a  Republican,  but  did  not  take
his  seat  till  29  July,  1866,  after  which  he  served  till
1875.  In  1867  he  was  president  of  the  Border
state  convention.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  minister
to  Turkey  in  1875,  resigned  in  1880,  and  in  August
of  that  year  became  postmaster-general  in  Presi
dent  Hayes's  cabinet,  serving  till  March,  1881.

MAYO,  Amory  1) wight,  clergyman,  b.  in  War
wick,  Mass.,  31  Jan.,  1823.  He  was  in  Amherst
college  in  1843-'4,  but  was  obliged  to  leave  on  ac
count  of  failing  health,  and,  after  studying  theology
under  Hosea  Ballon,  was  pastor  of  the  Independent
Christian  church  at  Gloucester,  Mass.,  in  1846-'54,
of  a  church  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  in  1854-'6,  and
then  of  Unitarian  churches  in  Albany.  N.  Y.,
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  and  Springfield,  Mass.,  till  1879,
since  which  time  he  has  been  engaged  in  educa
tional  work  in  the  southern  states.  He  served  for
fifteen  years  as  a  member  of  the  boards  of  educa
tion  in  Cincinnati  and  Springfield,  and  has  been  a
strong  advocate  of  the  use  of  the  Bible  in  the  pub
lic  schools,  and  of  the  proposed  "  Christian  amend
ment  "  to  the  U.  S.  constitution.  He  has  for  many
years  delivered  an  annual  course  of  lectures  in  the
Meadville,  Pa.,  theological  school,  in  which  he  held
the  chair  of  ecclesiastical  polity.  Mr.  Mayo  was
for  six  years  associate  editor  of  the  "National
Journal  of  Education "  in  Boston.  He  has  con
tributed  largely  to  periodicals,  and  published  "  The
Balance  "  (Boston,  1847) ;  "  Graces  and  Powers  of
the  Christian  Life"  (1850);  "  Symbols  of  the  Capi
tal,"  discourses  on  Christian  civilization  (New
York,  1859)  ;  "  Religion  in  Common  Schools  "
(Cincinnati,  1809);  and  "Talks  with  Teachers"
(1878).  He  also  edited  a  volume  of  selections  from
his  wife's  writings,  with  a  memoir  (Boston,  1849).
—His  wife,  Sarah  Carter  Edgarton,  author,  b.
in  Shirley,  Mass.,  17  March,  1819  ;  d.  in  Gloucester,
Mass.,  9  July,  1848,  began  to  contribute  to  journals
at  the  age  of  seventeen.  She  edited  "  The  Rose  of
Sharon,"  an  annual,  from  1840  till  her  death,  and
for  several  years  conducted  "  The  Ladies'  Reposi
tory,"  a  monthly  magazine  in  Boston.  She  married
Mr.  Mayo  in  1846.  Mrs.  Mayo  published  between
1836  and  1844  "  The  Palfreys,"  "  Ellen  Clifford,"
and  "Memoirs  of  Mrs.  Julia  W.  Scott,"  and  com
piled  "  The  Poetry  of  Women,"  "  The  Flower
Vase,"  "  Spring  Flowers."  "  The  Floral  Fortune-
Teller,"  and  "  Fables  of  Flora."

MAYO,  William,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  England
about  1685;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  20  Oct.,  1744.
In  1716  he  emigrated  to  the  island  of  Barbadoes,
of  which  he  made  an  excellent  survev  between


MAYO


MAYORGA


277


1717  and  1721.  His  map  is  now  on  file  in  King's
college  library  at  Oxford.  He  went  to  Virginia  in
1723,  and  in  1728,  with  Prof.  Alexander  Irvin,  he
ran  the  dividing-line  between  Virginia  and  North
Carolina.  Col.  William  Byrd,  in  his  manuscript
on  this  subject,  says  that  a  chaplain,  the  Rev.
Peter  Fountain,  accompanied  the  surveying  party,
••  that  the  people  on  the  frontier  of  North  Carolina
might  have  an  opportunity  to  have  themselves
and  their  children  baptized."  One  of  the  rivers
intersecting  the  line  was  named  in  honor  of  Maj.
Mayo,  and  still  retains  the  name,  while  the  North
Carolina  commissioners  presented  him  with  a  large
tract  of  land.  In  17-37  he  was  appointed  one  of
the  surveyors  to  lay  off  the  northern  neck  of  Vir
ginia  in  order  to  settle  disputed  boundaries  be
tween  Lord  Fairfax  and  the  crown.  The  same  year
he  laid  out  the  city  of  Richmond.  At  the  time
of  his  death  he  was  the  chief  civil  engineer  in  Vir
ginia. — His  son,  John,  legislator,  b.  in  Virginia.
17  July,  1737  ;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  15  Feb.,  1780,
was  a  member  of  the  house  of  burgesses  from
Chesterfield  county,  Va.,  in  1709,  1770^  and  1771,
and  from  Henrico  county  in  1775.  In  1775-'6  he
was  a  member  of  the  Virginia  state  convention.
— John's  son.  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Richmond,  Va..
21  Oct.,  17GO ;  d.  in  Belleville,  near  Richmond,  28
May,  1818,  was  colonel  of  Virginia  state  troops
during  the  war  of  1812,  and  represented  Henrico
county  in  the  legislature.  In  1785  he  obtained  a
charter  for  the  Mayo  bridge,  which  is  situated  just
below  the  falls  of  James  river  at  Richmond.  The
bridge  is  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  length,
and  was  built  by  Col.  Mayo  from  his  own  design
and  at  his  individual  expense.  From  frequent  de
struction  of  the  bridge  by  floods,  once  within
twenty-four  hours  after  its  complete  restoration,
Col.  Mayo's  patrimony  was  exhausted,  and  he  was
twice  imprisoned  within  bounds  for  debt,  but  his
indefatigable  resolution  overcame  all  obstacles,  and
success  at  last  proved  the  practicability  of  his
efforts.  In  the  midst  of  his  difficulties,  Patrick
Henry  voluntarily  submitted  an  unsuccessful  propo
sition  to  the  Virginia  legislature  to  make  a  loan
of  public  money  to  the  "spirited  proprietor."  Col.
Mayo  married  Abigail  De  Hart,  daughter  of  John
I)e  Hart,  of  Elizabethtown,  who  was  a  member  of
the  first  Continental  congress  that  assembled  at
Philadelphia  in  1774.  Their  eldest  daughter,  Maria,
married  Gen.  Winfield  Scott. —  William's  grandson,
Robert,  author,  b.  in  Powhatan  county,  Va.,  25
April,  1784  ;  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C.,  31  Oct.,  1864.
was  graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1808.  and  practised
in  Richmond,  Va.  During  the  presidential  canvass
of  1828  he  edited  at  Richmond  the  "  Jackson  Demo
crat."  In  1830  he  entered  the  civil  service  of  the
government  in  Washington,  where  he  remained  till
his  death.  He  published  "View  of  Ancient  Geog
raphy  and  History"  (Philadelphia,  1813);  "New
System  of  Mythology  "  (4  vols.,  1815-'19) ;  "  Pension
Laws  of  the"  United  States,  1776-1833"  (Washing
ton,  1833  ;  2d  ed.,  with  F.  Moulton,  1852) ;  "  Synop
sis  of  the  Commercial  and  Revenue  System  of  the
I'nited  States"  (2  vols.,  1847);  and  "The  Treasury
Department,  its  Origin,  Organization,  and  Opera
tions  "  (1847).  He  left  uncompleted  a  genealogical
history  of  the  Mayo  family  of  Virginia. — William's
great-grandson,  Joseph,  lawyer,  b.  in  Fine  Creek
Mills,  Powhatan  co.,  Va.,  16  Nov.,  1795;  d.  in  Rich
mond,  Va.,  9  Aug.,  1872,  studied  medicine  in  Phila
delphia,  but  left  it  for  law,  attaining  high  rank
in  his  profession.  He  was  commonwealth  attorney
in  Richmond  from  1823  till  1853,  a  member  of  the
legislature,  and  mayor  of  Richmond  from  1853  till


the  occupation  of  the  city  by  the  U.  S.  forces  in
April,  1805.  Mr.  Mayo  was  the  author  of  a  "  Guide
to  Magistrates,"  a  standard  authority  (Richmond  ;
2d  ed.,  revised,  1860).

MAYO,  William  Starlwck,  author,  b.  in  Og-
densburg,  N.  Y.,  20  April,  1812.  His  parents  had
removed  to  Ogdensburg  in  the  year  of  his  birth.
He  studied  in  his  native  place  and  in  Potsdam
academy,  and  in  1833  was  graduated  at  the  College
of  physicians  and  surgeons,  New  York  city.  After
practising  his  profession  for  several  years  he  made
a  tour  in  the  Barbary  states  and  Spain  and  then
took  up  his  residence  in  New  York  city,  where  he
has  devoted  himself  to  literature.  He  has  pub
lished  '•  Flood  and  Field,  or  Tales  of  Battles  on
Sea  and  Land  "  (New  York,  1844) ;  "  Kaloolah,  or
Journeyings  to  the  Djebel  Kumri,"  purporting  to
be  the  autobiography  of  Jonathan  Romer,  and
describing  his  marvellous  adventures  in  Africa
(1849) ;  "  The  Berber,  or  the  Mountaineer  of  the
Atlas,"  similar  to  the  preceding  (1850) ;  "  Romance
Dust  from  the  Historic  Placer,"  a  collection  of
short  tales,  founded  on  historical  incidents  (1851) ;
and  "  Never  Again,"  a  novel  (1873).

MAYOBANEX  (mah-yo-ban-ex'),  cacique  of  the
Ciguaneyes  of  Hayti;  d.  in  1498.  In  1493  a  party
of  Columbus's  men  tried  to  make  a  landing  in  the
dominions  of  Mayooanex,  but  were  attacked  by  the
Indians.  The  natives  were  put  to  flight  and  several
were  wounded.  "  This  was,"  says  Washington
Irving,  "  the  first  contest  and  the  first  time  that
native  blood  was  shed  by  the  white  men  in  this
New  World."  In  1498  Mayobanex  received  with
open  arms  the  fugitive  cacique  Guarionex  (q.  r.),
and  engaged  to  stand  by  him,  to  defend  his  cause
and  share  his  desperate  fortunes.  He  began  a  war
fare  against  the  Spaniards,  destroying  the  villages
of  the  natives  that  had  remained  loyal  to  the  in
vaders  of  their  country.  Bartholomew  Columbus,
the  adelantado,  demanded  the  surrender  of  Gua
rionex,  but  Mayobanex  refused  to  deliver  his  guest.
His  village  and  several  others  were  set  on  fire  by
the  Spanish  soldiery.  At  their  approach  his  sub
jects  fled,  and,  finding  himself  deserted,  Mayobanex
took  refuge  with  his  family  in  the  mountains,
where  at  last  he  was  surprised,  taken  in  chains  to
Fort  Concepcion,  and  executed.

MAYORGA,  Martin  de  (mah-yor'-gah),  viceroy
of  Mexico,  b.  in  Catalonia  early  in  the  18th  cen
tury  ;  d.  at  sea  in  1783.  In  1773  he  was  appointed
governor  and  captain-general  of  Central  America,
and  after  the  earthquakes  of  that  year  removed
the  capital  from  La  Antigua  to  the  present  site  of
Guatemala,  notwithstanding  the  strenuous  oppo
sition  of  the  bishop  and  clergy.  After  the  death
of  Bucareli,  viceroy  of  Mexico,  in  1779,  the  sealed
royal  order,  always  provided  for  such  a  case,  ap
pointed  the  captain-general  of  Guatemala  as  pro
visional  viceroy.  The  appointment  was  intended
for  Matias  de  Galvez  (q.  v.),  who  was  on  his  way  to
Guatemala,  by  his  brother,  the  prime  minister,  but
the  notice  arrived  before  Galvez  had  made  his  ap
pearance,  and  Mayorga  was  installed  viceroy  on  23
Aug.,  1779.  After  the  declaration  of  war  against
England  in  June  of  that  year,  he  became  permanent
viceroy,  and  took  active  measures  to  protect  the
Spanish  colonies  in  the  Atlantic  against  an  Eng
lish  attack.  He  strengthened  the  fortifications
of  Vera  Cruz,  sent  money,  ammunition,  and  pro
visions  to  Cuba,  Yucatan',  and  Louisiana,  and  an
auxiliary  force  to  Bernardo  de  Galvez  (q.  r.)  for  his
attack  on  Mobile  and  Pensacola.  He  also  assisted
the  captain-general  of  Guatemala  to  recover  the
port  of  Omoa  from  the  British,  and,  when  they
threatened  Cuba,  sent  two  Mexican  regiments  to


278


MAZELLA


MEAD


re-enforce  the  garrison  of  Havana.  At  the  end  of
1 779  there  was  an  epidemic  of  small-pox  in  Mexico
and  Puebla,  and  Mayorga  took  active  measures  to
establish  hospitals,  assist  the  sufferers,  and  arrest
the  disease  as  far  as  possible.  In  1780  he  obtained
from  the  widow  of  the  historian  Veytia  all  the  docu
ments  and  manuscripts  of  her  husband  about  the
ancient  history  of  Mexico,  and  sent  copies  to  the
royal  archives  in  Spain  for  publication.  Feeling
that  his  health  was  failing,  he  requested  to  be  re
lieved,  and  sailed  for  Spain  in  178!),  but  died  in
sight  of  the  port  of  Cadiz.

MAZELLA,  Camillas,  cardinal,  b.  in  Bene-
vento,  Italy,  10  Feb..  1833.  He  studied  in  the  Col
lege  of  Berievento,  became  a  member  of  the  Society
of  Jesus  on  4  Sept.,  1857,  and  about  ten  years  later
was  sent  to  the  United  States,  where  he  1  aught
dogmatic  theology  in  Georgetown  college  in  the
years  1867-'8.  In  1807  he  was  naturalized  as  an
American  citizen.  In  18(59,  on  the  opening  of  the
Jesuit  scholasticate  at  Woodstock,  he  was  ap
pointed  prefect  of  studies  and  professor  of  dog
matic  theology.  During  his  stay  in  this  institution
he  published  several  theological  works,  including
"  De  Deo  Creante,"  "  De  Gratia  Christi,"  and  "  De
Keligione  et  Kcclesia."  He  was  summoned  to
Rome  in  October  by  the  provincial-general,  and
made  professor  of  dogmatic  theology  in  the  Roman
college.  He  was  afterward  created  a  cardinal.

MA/IEL.  Juan  Baltasar (mah-the-el'),  Argen
tine  author,  b.  in  Santa  Fe  in  1727:  d.  in  Monte
video.  2  Jan.,  1788.  He  studied  in  the  Jesuit  col
lege  of  Cordova,  and  afterward  in  the  University
of  Santiago,  Chili,  where  he  was  graduated  and  or
dained  priest  in  1752.  He  afterward  became  pro
fessor  of  law  in  the  University  of  San  Felipe,  coun
sellor  of  the  audiencias  of  Santiago  and  Charcas,
commissary  of  the  inquisition  of  Buenos  Ayres,
canon  of  the  cathedral  in  that  city,  vicar-general
and  governor  of  the  episcopal  see, 'and  first  chan
cellor  of  the  university.  In  January,  1787,  being
suspected  by  the  authorities  in  consequence  of  un
just  accusations,  he  was  suddenly  arrested  in  his
residence  and  banished  to  Montevideo.  His  prin
cipal  works  are  :  "  Reflexiones  sobre  la  famosa  aren-
ga  que  hizo  en  Lima  un  individuo  de  la  Universi-
dad  de  San  Marcos  en  el  recibimiento  del  virey
Jauregui  Aldecoa,"  "  Panegirico  y  poesias  de  los
truinfos  del  virey  Ceballos,"  "  Defensa  legal  y  eco-
nomica  de  los  procedimientos  del  obispo  de  Buenos
Ayres  Manuel  A.  de  la  Torre,"  and  "  Recurso  al  rev
con  motivo  de  mi  destierro  a  Montevideo/'  He  left
in  manuscript  several  works  on  ecclesiastical  law.

MA//EI,  Philip  (mah'-tzay-ee),  Italian  physi
cian,  b.  in  Tuscany  in  1730;  d.' in  Pisa,  19  March,
1816.  He  studied  medicine,  practised  for  several
years  in  Smyrna,  and  from  1755  till  1773  engaged
in  commerce  in  London.  In  December,  1773,  he
came  to  Virginia  with  several  other  Italians  to  in
troduce  the  cultivation  of  the  grape,  the  olive,  and
other  fruits  of  Italy,  lie  took  an  active  part  in
supporting  the  movement  for  independence,  and
was  the  friend  and  correspondent  of  Thomas  Jef
ferson.  In  1779-!83  he  was  an  agent  in  Italy  to
obtain  army  stores  for  Virginia.  He  revisited'the
United  States  in  1785.  Subsequently  he  was  privy
councillor  of  the  king  of  Poland,  aiid  in  1802  re'-
ceived  a  pension  from  the  Emperor  Alexander  of
Russia.  He  was  a  zealous  republican  and  an  ene
my  to  intolerance.  He  published  "Recherches  his-
toriques  et  politiques  sur  les  Etats-Unis  de  1'Ame-
rique  septentrionale  "  (Paris,  1788).

MEACHAM,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rutland,
Vt.,  in  1810;  d.  in  Middle-bury,  Vt.,  22  Aug.,  1856.
He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in  1832,  and


while  tutor  there  studied  theology,  was  ordained,
and  made  pastor  of  a  church  in  New  Haven.  Vt.
In  1846  he  became  professor  of  rhetoric  and  Eng
lish  literature  at  Middlebury,  holding  this  post
until  1850.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig
in  place  of  George  P.  Marsh,  resigned,  and  twice
re-elected,  serving  from  3  Dec.,  1849,  till  his  death,
lie  was  a  regent  of  the  Smithsonian  institution.

MEAD,  Charles  Marsh,  clergyman,  b.  in  Corn
wall.  Vt.,  28  Jan.,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at
Middlebury,  Vt.,  in  1856,  and  at  Andover  theologi
cal  seminary  in  1862.  From  1S63  till  1866  he
studied  in  Berlin  and  Halle,  and  from  i860  till
1882  he  was  professor  of  Hebrew  at  Andover,
Since  1882  he  lias  resided  in  Germany.  Dr.  Mead
was  a  member  of  the  Old  Testament  revision  com
pany,  and  received  the  degree  of  I'll.  I),  from  Tu
bingen  in  1866,  and  that  of  I).  I),  from  Middlebury
in  1881.  His  publications  include  a  translation  of
"Exodus"  in  the  American  Lange  series  (New
York,  1876),  and  "The  Soul  Here  and  Hereafter,,
a  Biblical  Study"  (Boston,  1879).

MEAD.  I. ;irkiii  Goldsmith,  sculptor,  b.  in
Chesterfield,  N.  II.,  3  Jan.,  1835.  At  an  early  age
he  removed  to  Brattleboro',  Vt.,  where  he  was  edu
cated  and  first  displayed  his  artistic  talent  by  mod
elling  in  snow  a  colossal  figure  of  an  angel,  which
excited  much  admiration.  An  account  of  this,
published  in  various  newspapers,  attracted  the  at
tention  of  Nicholas  Longworth,  of  Cincinnati,  who
provided  for  the  boy's  artistic  education.  From
1853  till  1855  he  studied  with  Henry  Kirke  Brown
in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  In  1855  he  produced  the  "Re
cording  Angel  "  and  in  1857  a  colossal  statue  of
"  Vermont,"  which  crowns  the  dome  of  the  state-
house  in  Montpelier,  and  in  1861  he  executed  the
statue  of  Ethan  Allen  that  stands  in  the  portico.
From  the  encampment  of  the  Army  of  tl>e  Potomac
he  sent  to  a  New  York  illustrated  paper,  early  in
the  civil  war,  numerous  spirited  sketches  of  camp
and  battle  scenes.  In  1862  he  went  to  Florence,
where  he  has  since  resided,  and  has  produced  there
statuettes  of  "Echo,"  "Sappho,"  "Joseph  the
Shepherd,"  and  "The  Mountain  Boy."  His  first
elaborate  work  in  Italy  was  a  group.  "  The  Re
turned  Soldier"  (1866).  Between  1868  and  1874
he  produced  the  groups  "  Coluinbus's  Last  Appeal
to  Queen  Isabella"  and  "America."  for  the  sol
diers'  monument  at  St.  Johnsbury,  Vt.  Besides
portrait  busts  he  has  modelled  "Venice,  the  Bride
of  the  Sea,"  and  "The  Discovery  of  America."  In
1874  he  completed  for  Vermont  a  statue  of  Ethan
Allen  to  be  placed  in  the  old  hall  of  representatives
in  Washington,  now  called  the  National  statuary
hall.  His  statue  of  Lincoln  for  the  president's
monument  in  Springfield,  111.,  was  placed  there  on
15  Oct..  1874.  (See  LINCOLN,  ABRAHAM.)  It  repre
sents  Mr.  Lincoln  as  having  just  signed  the  proc
lamation  of  emancipation.  He  has  executed  four
colossal  groups,  entitled  '•Cavalry."  "Infantry,"
"Artillery,"  and  "Navy,"  and  his  latest  work  is  a
colossal  statue  in  marble  of  the  Mississippi  river
represented  as  a  river-god. — His  brother,  William
Rutherford,  architect,  b.  in  Brattleboro',  Vt.,  20
Aug.,  1846,  was  graduated  at  Aniherst  in  1867.  and
studied  architecture  for  two  years  with  Russell
Sturgis,  Jr.,  in  New  York.  Subsequently  he  spent
two  years  abroad  in  the  study  of  his  profession,  and
on  his  return  became  associated  with  Charles  F.
McKim  and  Stanford  White  as  a  professional  archi
tect.  In  this  capacity  he  has  designed  a  great  num
ber  of  private  and  public  buildings,  for  a  descrip
tion  of  the  more  important  of  which  see  MrKui,
CHARLES  F. —  His  cousin,  Edwin  Doak,  lecturer,  b.
in  Chesterfield,  N.  II.,  29  Sept..  1849,  was  educated


MEADE


MEADE


279


in  his  native  town,  and  in  1874  became  a  candidate
for  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  but
never  entered  the  ministry.  From  1875  till  1879
he  studied  in  Europe  at  Cambridge  and  Leipsic.
He  has  been  largely  engaged  in  lecturing  on  phi
losophy,  politics,  and  American  history  and  litera
ture.  Since  1883  he  has  been  engaged  in  the  Old
South  Historical  Work,  which  is  devoted  to  better
citizenship  and  the  promotion  of  historical  and
political  studies,  especially  among  the  young  peo
ple.  In  addition  to  numerous  articles  upon  the
broad  church  movement  and  other  religious  sub
jects,  he  has  edited  "  Faith  and  Freedom,"  by  Stop-
ford  A.  Brooke  (Boston,  1881),  and  is  the  author  of
"The  Philosophy  of  Carlyle  "  (1881).  and  "Martin
Luther:  A  Study  of  the  Reformation"  (1884).

MEADE,  (jeorjre,  merchant,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  29  Feb.,  1741  :  d.  there.  9  Nov..  1808.  He
was  one  of  the  signers  of  the  non-importation
resolutions  of  17(5.5,  and  during  the  Revolution
took  an  active  part  in  all  measures  to  advance  the
patriot  cause,  giving  largely  to  it  on  one  occasion,
in  the  trying  year  of  1780,  subscribing  £2.000
toward  supplying  the  destitute  army  at  Valley
Forge.  After  the  establishment  of  the  independ
ence  of  the  United  States  he  continued  to  be
identified  with  the  progress  of  Philadelphia.  His
views  were  liberal,  he  was  hospitable  and  charita
ble,  and  noted  for  his  strict  integrity,  holding
many  places  of  trust  and  honor.  He  was  a  stanch
Catholic,  and  one  of  the  founders  and  trustees  of
St.  Mary's  church,  in  Fourth  street,  the  oldest
Catholic  church,  save  one.  in  the  city.  In  concert
with  the  Rev.  William  White  (afterward  bishop  of
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church)  he  assisted,  with
Mathew  Carey  and  others,  in  organizing  in  Phila
delphia  a  system  of  First-day-  or  Sunday-schools,
presided  over  respectively  by  a  Catholic,  an  Epis
copalian,  and  a  b  riend.  He  was  one  of  the  origi
nal  members  of  the  Society  of  the  Friendly  Sons
of  St.  Patrick,  and  one  of  the  original  members  of
the  Hibernian  society. — His  son,  Richard  Wor-
sam,  merchant,  b.  in  Chester  county.  Pa.,  23  June.
1778 :  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  25  June.  1828,  was
educated  in  Philadelphia  and  entered  the  count
ing-house  of  his  father.  After  a  tour  through
England  and  France  in  1795-'6  he  engaged  in
business  on  his  own  account  in  Philadelphia.  In
1794  he  served  as  a  private  soldier  in  one  of  the
Philadelphia  companies,  to  aid  in  the  suppression
of  the  whiskey  insurrection  in  the  western  counties
of  Pennsylvania.  He  went  to  Spain  in  1803,  and
became  a  merchant  and  ship-owner  in  Cadiz,  and
from  1805  till  1816  was  U.  S.  navy  agent  for  that
port.  During  the  peninsular  war  he  entered  into
many  contracts  with  the  Spanish  government,  im
ported  supplies  into  Cadiz  and  frustrated  Victor's
attempts  to  starve  out  the  allied  garrison,  and  in
1810  his  vessels  carried  thither  250,000  barrels  of
flour.  During  the  siege  of  Cadiz  by  the  French
his  presence  in  the  city  was  regarded  by  the  Span
ish  junta  as  a  support  to  the  Spanish  cause,
through  the  moral  and  material  aid  that  it  repre
sented.  The  indebtedness  of  the  country  to  him
was  so  generally  recognized  that  the  Spanish  cortes,
assembled  in  1811-'12.  offered  him  the  honor  of  citi
zenship,  which  he  declined,  declaring  that  his  high
est  desire  was  to  remain  an  American  citizen.  Soon
after  the  restoration  of  the  Spanish  government,
through  the  return  of  Ferdinand  VII.  to  the  throne
of  Spain,  the  finances  of  the  country  being  low,
through  the  drain  of  the  peninsular  war,  Mr.
Meade  found  it  impossible  to  collect  the  amounts
due  him,  and  he  also  became  involved  in  litigation
growing  out  of  his  having  been  appointed  assignee


for  an  insolvent  agent  of  an  English  house  doing
business  iti  Cadiz.  Although  all  the  action  he
had  taken  in  this  last  matter  had  been  tinder  the
direction  of  the  proper  authorities,  the  result  of
the  suits  was  his  incarceration,  on  2  May.  1816,  in
the  prison  of  Santa  Catalina,  Cadiz,  where  he  re
mained  for  two  years,  until  released  by  royal  man
date,  obtained  through  the  interposition  of  the
U.  S.  minister.  Upon  his  release,  although  he  was
anxious  to  return  home,  and  had  already  sent  his
family  to  Philadelphia,  he  was  compelled  to  re
main  in  Spain  to  attend  to  his  large  monetary  in
terests.  Meanwhile  the  treaty  of  1819  between
the  United  States  and  Spain,  known  as  the  treaty
of  Florida,  remitted  to  the  United  States,  in  re
turn  for  the  cession  of  Florida  by  Spain,  the  pay
ment  of  all  just  claims  of  American  citizens  on
Spain,  whereupon  Mr.  Meade  at  once  returned
home.  The  case  that  has  since  been  celebrated  as
the  Meade  claim  grew  out  of  the  losses  incurred
by  him  at  this  time  and  the  ruin  of  his  business
consequent  upon  his  long  imprisonment.  In  1819
a  special  tribunal,  appointed  by  the  Spanish  gov
ernment,  awarded  him  a  certificate  of  debt,  which
was  signed  by  the  king,  for  §491,153.62.  In  1822
the  commission  appointed  at  Washington  to  con
sider  such  claims  declined  to  receive  this  certifi
cate,  demanding  the  original  vouchers ;  but  before
these  could  be  procured  the  session  expired,  and
the  fund  was  distributed  among  other  claimants.
All  attempts  to  obtain  another  hearing  of  this  case
were  fruitless,  though  the  most  celebrated  lawyers
were  retained,  including  Webster,  Clay,  and  Choate.
A  bill  has  twice  passed  the  senate,  and  once  the
house  of  representatives,  but  not  both  bodies  in
the  same  session,  whereby  it  has  failed  to  become
law.  Supported  although  it  is  by  the  treaty  and
by  documentary  proofs,  by  the  special  affirmation
of  the  cortes,  and  by  the  royal  sign-manual,  neither
Mr.  Meade  nor  his  heirs  have  been  able  to  obtain
payment.  After  the  institution  of  the  court  of
claims,  subsequently  to  his  death,  the  claim  was
disallowed,  though  with  a  dissenting  opinion.  Mr.
Meade  possessed  a  fine  private  gallery  of  paintings
and  statuary,  which  contained  the  only  bust  of
Washington  taken  from  life,  and  he  is  said  to  have
been  the  first  to  import  merino  sheep  and  sherry
wine  into  this  country. — Richard  Worsanvs  son,
Georffe  Gordon,  soldier,  b.  in  Cadiz,  Spain,  31
Dec.,  1815  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  6  Nov.,  1872,
attended  school  in
Philadelphia  and
afterward  Salmon
P.  Chase's  school  in
Washington.  D.  C.,
and  Mt.  Hope  in
stitution  near  Bal
timore,  Md.,  from
which  he  went  to
the  U.  S.  military
academy,  where  he
was  graduated  in
1835.  He  was  as
signed  to  the  3d
artillery,  and  or
dered  to  Florida.
While  he  was  serv
ing  in  the  war
against  the  Semi-
noles  his  health
failed,  and  he  was  detailed  to  conduct  a  party
of  Seminoles  to  Arkansas,  and  then  ordered  to
Watertown  arsenal,  Mass.,  and  was  on  ordnance
duty  there  till  26  Oct.,  1836,  when  he  resigned.
He  was  engaged  as  assistant  civil  engineer  in  the


280


MEADE


MEADE


construction  of  the  railroad  at  Pensacola,  Fla.,  till
April,  1837,  then,  under  the  appointment  of  the
war  department,  made  a  survey  of  the  mouth  of
Sabine  river,  and  afterward  assisted  in  the  survey
of  the  delta  of  the  Mississippi  till  February,  1839.
In  1840  he  was  employed  in  the  astronomical
branch  of  the  survey  of  the  boundary-line  between
the  United  States  and  Texas,  and  in  August  of
that  year  became  civil  assistant  in  the  survey  of
the  northeastern  boundary  between  the  United
States  and  British  North  America.  On  31  Dec.,
1840,  he  married  Margaretta,  a  daughter  of  John
Sergeant.  On  19  May,  1842,  he  was  appointed  a
2d  lieutenant  in  the  corps  of  topographical  engi
neers,  and  continued  on  duty  in  the  survey  of  the
northeastern  boundary  till  November,  1843.  In
1844-'5  he  was  engaged  on  surveys  in  Delaware
bay.  In  September,  1845,  he  joined  the  staff  of
Gen.  Zachary  Taylor  at  Corpus  Christi,  Texas.  He
took  part  in  May,  1840,  in  the  battles  of  Palo  Alto
and  Resaca  de  la  Palma,  and  in  the  occupation  of
Matamoras,  and  later,  under  Gen.  William  J.
Worth,  led  the  assault  on  Independence  hill  at
Monterey,  for  which  he  was  brevetted  1st  lieuten
ant,  and  shared  in  the  march  to  Tampico.  In  the
siege  of  Vera  Cruz  he  served  on  the  staff  of  Gen.
Robert  Patterson.  Then  returning  home,  he  was
engaged  in  1847-'9  in  constructing  light-houses  in  j
Delaware  bay  and  in  mapping  surveys  of  Florida
reefs.  He  served  in  the  field  against  the  Semi-
noles  in  1849-'5(),  was  on  light-house  duty  in  Dela
ware  bay  in  1850-'!,  was  commissioned  1st  lieuten
ant  of  topographical  engineers  on  4  Aug.,  1851,
and  for  the  next  five  years  was  engaged  in  the
construction  of  light  -  houses  at  Carysfort  Reef,
Sand  Key,  Cedar  Key,  and  Coflins's  Patches,  in
the  Florida  reefs.  He  was  promoted  captain  on
19  May,  1850,  served  on  the  geodetic  survey  of  the
northwestern  lakes  in  that  year,  and  in  1857-'01
was  in  charge  of  all  the  northern  lake  surveys.

Soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  Capt.
Meade  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volun
teers,  dating  from  31  Aug.,  1801.  and  assigned  to
the  command  of  the  2d  brigade  of  Pennsylvania
reserves,  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  'On  18
June,  1802,  he  was  promoted  major  of  topograph-  |
ical  engineers.  In  the  peninsular  campaign  he
commanded  his  brigade  in  the  battles  of  Mechan-
icsville  and  Gaines's  Mills,  and  at  New  Market
Cross-Roads,  otherwise  called  Glendale,  where  he
was  severely  wounded.  lie  was  taken  to  Philadel
phia,  but,  soon  recovering,  rejoined  the  army  in
time  to  render  service  against  the  enemy  then  ad
vancing  toward  Washington,  and  took  part  in  the
second  battle  of  Bull  Run.  In  the  invasion  of
Maryland  he  commanded  the  division  of  Pennsyl
vania  reserves,  in  the  absence  of  Gen.  John  "F.
Reynolds,  at  the  battle  of  South  Mountain  and  at
Antietam,  where  he  flanked  the  enemy  from  the
right,  and  so  signalized  himself  by  his"  skill  and
intrepidity  that  he  was  placed,  by  Gen.  McClellan,
on  the  field  of  battle,  in  coinmand  of  the  1st  corps
after  the  wounding  of  Gen.  Joseph  Hooker.  In
this  engagement  Gen.  Meade's  horse  was  shot  under
him.  In  October  and  November,  1802,  he  marched
to  Falmouth,  Va.,  in  command  of  his  division,
which  at  Fredericksburg  was  opposed  to  the  troops
of  Stonewall  Jackson.  It  alone,  of  all  the  army,
drove  everything  before  it,  and  broke  through  the
enemy's  lines,  finding  itself,  as  Gen.  Meade  ex
pressed  himself  in  testifying  before  a  commission,
'•  in  the  presence  of  the  enemy's  reserves."  Dur
ing  the  action  two  horses  were  shot  under  him.
For  want  of  timely  support,  the  division  was
finally  forced  to  fall  back.  Gen.  Meade  was  now


promoted  major-general,  his  commission  dating
from  29  Nov.,  1802,  and  on  25  Dec.  was  placed  in
command  of  the  5th  corps.  He  commanded  this
corps  at  the  battle  of  Chancellorsville,  and  on  the
first  day  was  pressing  forward  on  the  left,  meeting
with  some  resistance,  but  successfully  overcoming
it,  when  he  was  recalled  and  ordered  to  retire  to
his  former  position  before  Chancellorsville.

Gen.  Meade  was  placed  in  command  of  the  Army
of  the  Potomac  on  23  June,  1803.  The  change  of
commanders  was  made  while  the  corps  were  on
the  march  in  pursuit  of  an  enemy  who  had  pushed
far  into  the  invaded  country.  The  general  had
yet  to  learn  everything  of  the  positions  of  the  ene
my  and  of  his  own  separated  corps,  of  personnel
and  materiel  at  his  command,  and  to  gain  all  the
essential  knowledge  that  a  commander  possesses
who  directs  a  movement  from  its  inception.  He
was  ordered  to  relieve  Gen.  Hooker,  without  warn
ing,  in  the  night  of  27  June,  1803.  His  army  lay
encamped  about  Frederick,  Md..  while  Lee's  had
marched  up  the  Cumberland  valley.  Meade  de
termined  to  follow  the  enemy  in  a  parallel  march
on-  the  opposite  side  of  South  mountain,  dispose
his  troops  so  as  to  guard  the  passes  of  the  moun
tain  and  prevent  a  descent  on  Baltimore  and  har
ass  Lee,  with  a  view  of  bringing  on  a  general
engagement.  The  troops  began  to  move  on  the
morning  of  29  June,  and  by  two  forced  marches
gained  positions  that  would  enable  them  to  deploy
along  the  line  between  Westminster  and  Waynes-
borough.  When  Lee  began  to  concentrate  east  of
South  mountain,  Meade  ordered  his  columns  to
occupy  the  slope  along  Pipe  creek,  and  advanced
his  left  wing  to  the  neighborhood  of  Gettysburg,
Pa.,  making  his  dispositions  so  as  to  face  either
north  or  west.  The  advanced  forces  at  Emmetts-
burg  and  Gettysburg  were  only  expected  to  delay
the  march  of  the  Confederates  until  the  concen
tration  could  be  accomplished  on  the  selected  line,
fifteen  miles  in  the  rear  of  those  positions.  On
the  morning  of  1  July,  National  cavalry  came  into
collision  with  the  head  of  a  Confederate  column
near  Gettysburg.  Gen.  John  F.  Reynolds  sent
infantry  to  support  his  cavalry,  and  at  first  gained
an  advantage,  but  the  Confederates  soon  came  up
in  overwhelming  force,  and  drove  the  National
troops  through  the  town  to  the  hills.  Gen.  Win-
field  S.  Hancock,  who,  after  Reynolds  had  fallen,
was  sent  by  Meade  to  conduct  operations  at  Gettys
burg,  found  the  Confederate  army  approaching  by
the  roads  that  led  to  that  village,  and  sent  word
to  Gen.  Meade  to  bring  forward  his  forces  to  the
heights  near  Gettysburg,  on  which  he  posted  the
remnants  of  the  two  corps  that  had  been  engaged.
Meade,  after  hearing  the  report  of  Hancock,  who
returned  to  Taneytown  in  the  evening,  was  con
vinced  of  the  superiority  of  Gettysburg  as  a  defen
sive  position,  and  ordered  a  concentration  there.
During  that  night  and  the  following  morning  his
troops  came  up  and  took  position  on  Cemetery
ridge,  while  Lee  posted  his  on  Seminary  ridge  far
ther  west,  both  commanders  deferring  an  attack
until  their  main  force  was  on  the  ground.  Gen.
Meade  arrived  at  the  front  soon  after  noon.  The
battle  was  opened  at  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon
by  a  vigorous  attack  on  the  3d  corps  forming  the
left  and  left  centre,  and  soon  became  general  along
the  entire  line.  The  3d  corps  was  routed,  but  the
line  was  not  broken,  because  the  National  troops,
strongly  re-enforced  from  the  right,  fell  back  to
the  ridge  more  directly  connecting  the  wings  of  the
army,  while,  after  a  desperate  conflict,  they  gained
possession  of  Little  Round  Top,  a  position  of  vital
importance,  which  they  had  neglected  to  occupy


MEADE


MEADE


281


before  the  battle.  The  partial  defeat  impelled  Gen.
Meadeto  make  preparations  for  a  retreat.  Generals
Abner  Doubleday  and  Alfred  Pleasonton,  who  were
intrusted  with  the  arrangements,  subsequently  rep
resented  that  their  commander  had  already  given
up  the  hope  of  holding  the  position,  but  he  denied,
with  solemn  protestations,  before  the  congressional
committee  on  the  conduct  of  the  war,  "ever  having
intended  or  thought,  for  one  instant,  to  withdraw
that  army  unless  the  military  contingencies  which
the  future  should  develop  during  the  course  of  the
day  might  render  it  a  matter  of  necessity  that  the
army  should  be  withdrawn."  In  the  evening  he
called  a  council  of  war,  which  advised  him  against
either  retreating  or  attacking,  in  which  opinion  he
coincided,  though  expressing  the  belief,  it  is  said,
that  the  position  was  bad.  Flushed  with  the  suc
cess  of  the  day,  and  relying  on  the  prestige  gained
at  Fredericksburg  and  Chancellorsville,  Gen.  Lee
determined  to  renew  the  attack  on  the  National
army  in  its  strong  position  on  the  following  day.
In  the  morning  Meade  took  the  offensive  against
Ewell,  and  drove  him  from  the  intrenchments  that
he  had  captured  on  the  right,  nearest  the  town.
At  one  o'clock  the  Confederates  opened  fire  with
145  guns,  to  which  the  National  artillery  replied
with  80,  which  was  all  that  could  be  advanta
geously  planted  on  their  ridge.  When  the  National
fire  ceased,  after  two  hours,  Gen.  George  E.  Pickett's
division  charged  Meade's  centre  under  a  heavy  artil
lery  and  infantry  fire,  poured  in  from  all  sides,  and
was  nearly  annihilated ;  a  few  of  them  reached  the
breastworks,  only  to  fall  there  or  be  made  prison
ers.  Gen.  Meade  then  ordered  an  advance  on  the
left,  and  drove  back  Gen.  John  B.  Hood's  division.
Both  armies  remained  in  their  positions  until  the
evening  of  the  next  day,  when  Lee  retreated  to  the
Potomac,  and  was  there  obliged  to  intrench  until
the  waters  subsided.  Meade  followed  slowly  by  a
longer  route,  and  when  he  came  up  to  the  Con
federates,  on  12  July,  intrenched  himself,  postpon
ing  an  attack,  in  deference  to  the  decision  of  a
council  of  war,  until  he  could  make  a  reconnois-
sance.  An  advance  was  ordered  to  be  made  on
the  morning  of  the  14th,  but  during  the  night  the
enemy  had  crossed  the  river.  The  Confederate  force
engaged  at  Gettysburg  was  about  69.000  men,  while
the  effective  strength  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac
was  between  82,000  and  84,000,  but  its  numerical
superiority  was  in  a  measure  neutralized  by  the
fatigues  of  its  long  marches.  Gen.  Meade  was
commissioned  brigadier  -  general  in  the  regular
army  on  3  July.  1863.

After  the  advance  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac
into  Virginia  the  detachment  of  large  forces  caused
comparative  inactivity,  which  was  followed  in  the
autumn  by  the  actions  at  Bristoe's  Station,  Kelly's
Ford,  and  Rappahannock  Station,  and  the  opera
tions  at  Mine  Run  in  December.  The  army  ex
perienced  no  reverse  while  Gen.  Meade  was  com-
mander-in-chief,  and  he  was  continued  in  the
command  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  after  Gen.
Ulysses  S.  Grant  had  been  made  commander  of
all  the  armies  of  the  United  States  and  assumed
the  direction  of  the  operations  in  person.  He  was
made  major-general  on  18  Aug.,  1864.  During  two
years,  or  more  than  half  the  period  of  its  exist
ence.  Gen.  Meade  was  in  immediate  command  of
the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and,  having  been  in
every  campaign  of  the  army  since  its  formation
and  in  all  of  its  battles  except  two,  commanded  in
the  grand  review  that  took  place  in  Washington
after  the  close  of  the  war.  During  the  time  that
intervened  before  the  southern  states  resumed
regular  political  relations  with  the  government


he  commanded  the  military  division  of  the  At-
!  lantic.  From  August,  1806,  till  January,  1868,
he  commanded  the  Department  of  the  East,  then
till  August,  1868.  the  military  district  embracing
Georgia  and  Alabama,  next  the  Department  of  the
South,  comprising  the  same  states  with  South  Caro
lina  and  Florida,  and  from  March,  1869,  till  his
death,  he  was  at  the  head  of  the  military  division
of  the  Atlantic  again.  He  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Harvard  in  1865,  and  was  a  member
of  the  American  philosophical  society,  of  the  Penn
sylvania  historical  society,  and  of  the  Philadel
phia  academy  of  natural  sciences,  and  one  of  the
commissioners  of  Fairmount  park.  His  death  was
caused  by  pneumonia,  aggravated  by  complications
resulting  from  the  gun-shot  wound  that  he  had
received  at  New  Market  Cross-Roads.  He  was
buried  with  imposing  military  honors.  An  eques
trian  statue  of  Gen.  Meade,  designed  by  Milne
Calden,  was  dedicated  in  Fairmount  park,  Phila
delphia,  on  18  Oct.,  1887.  The  allegation  that  Gen.
Meade  planned  a  retreat  on  the  second  day  at
Gettysburg  is  controverted  in  a  pamphlet  by
George  Meade.  entitled  "Did  General  Meade  desire
to  retreat  at  the  Battle  of  Gettysburg?"  (Phila
delphia,  1883). — Another  son  of  Richard  Worsam,
Richard  Worse m,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Cadiz,
Spain,  in  1807 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  16  April,
1870,  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  a  midshipman  on
1  April,  1826.  and  passed  that  grade  on  14  June,
1834.  He  became  a  lieutenant  on  the  reserved  list,
20  Dec.,  1837,  commander  on  the  active  list,  14  Sept.,
1855,  and  captain  on  16  July,  1862.  In  1861  he
took  command  of  the  receiving-ship  ''  North  Caro
lina,"  which  vessel  he  greatly  improved,  and  in
1864  he  commanded  the  steam  sloop-of-war  "  San
Jacinto,"  which  was  wrecked  and  lost  on  one  of
the  Florida  reefs.  He  was  retired  with  the  rank
of  commodore  on  11  Dec..  1867.  —  The  second
Richard  Worsam's  son.  Richard  Worsam,  naval
officer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  9  Oct.,  1837,  entered
the  U.  S.  navy  as  a  midshipman,  2  Oct.,  1850,  passed
that  grade,  20  June,  1856,  became  a  lieutenant,  23
Jan.,  1858,  lieutenant-commander,  16  July,  1862,
commander,  20  Sept.,  1868,  and  captain,  13  March,
1880.  He  served  during  the  civil  war  on  the
Mississippi  river,  and  in  the  South  Atlantic  and
\Vestern  Gulf  blockading  squadrons,  being  highly
commended  in  the  official  despatches  for  "skill
and  gallantry."  —  George  Gordon's  son,  George,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  2  Nov..  1843.  was  educated  in
Philadelphia,  and  in  September,  1862,  enlisted  as  a
private  in  the  8th  Pennsylvania  militia  regiment,
and  served  in  the  ranks  during  the  Antietam  cam
paign,  after  which  he  was  honorably  discharged.
In  October  he  was  appointed  2d  lieutenant  in  the
6th  Pennsylvania  cavalry  (Rush's  lancers),  and
served  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  in  the  Fred
ericksburg  campaign,  and  in  Gen.  Stoneman's
cavalry  raid  of  April  and  May,  1863.  He  was  pro
moted  to  the  rank  of  captain  and  aide-de-camp  in
June,  1863.  and  appointed  to  the  staff  of  his  father,
who  then  commanded  the  5th  corps,  Army  of  the
Potomac,  and  he  served  continuously  on  the  staff
until  the  surrender  of  Gen.  Lee.  In  November,
1865,  he  was  appointed  a  2d  lieutenant  in  the  9th
U.  S.  infantry,  and  in  July,  1866,  promoted  to  a
captaincy  in  the  31st  infantry.  Upon  the  consoli
dation  of  the  army  in  1869  he  was  transferred  to
the  22d  infantry,  after  being  brevetted  major  and
lieutenant-colonel.  U.  S.  A.,  for  gallant  and  meri
torious  services  during  the  civil  war.  He  con
tinued  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Meade  most  of  the  time
until  the  death  of  the  general,  and  resigned  from
the  army  in  October,  1874.  Col.  Meade  was  the  only


282


MEADE


MEADE


one  of  his  father's  sons  that  was  associated  with
him  in  the  army,  his  elder  brother  being  in  ill
health,  and  his  other  brothers  too  young.  He  is
the  author  of  the  pamphlet  mentioned  above  and
of  various  articles  and  letters  that  have  appeared
in  the  daily  press  regarding  his  father's  career.

MEADE,  Richard  Kidder,  soldier,  b.  in  Nan-
seinond  county,  Va.,  14  July,  1740  ;  d.  in  Frederick
(now  Clarke)  county,  Va.,  in  February,  1805.  lie
was  educated  at  Harrow  in  England,  entered  the
Revolutionary  army  in  1775,  soon  after  his  return  to
Virginia,  and  was  one  of  the  twenty-four  persons
that  on  24  June  of  that  year  daringly  removed  the
arms  from  Lord  Dunmore's  house  and  placed  them
in  the  magazine  in  Williamsburg.  In  December,
1775,  he  commanded  a  company  at  the  battle  of
Great  Bridge,  near  Norfolk,  Va.,  the  first  that  was
fought  in  that  state.  He  was  then  received  into
Gen.  Washington's  military  family  as  one  of  his
aides,  in  which  capacity,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,
he  served  throughout  the  war.  He  was  with  the
commander-in-chief  in  all  of  his  great  battles,  and
used  to  say  that  Alexander  Hamilton  did  the  head-
work  of  Washington's  staff  and  he  the  riding,  his
black  mare  being  well  known  to  both  armies.  He
superintended  the  execution  of  Maj.  Andre.  When
Washington  took  leave  of  his  aides  at  the  close  of
the  war  he  said  to  Col.  Meade  :  "  Friend  Dick,  you
must  go  to  your  plantation;  you  will  make  a  good
farmer,  and  an  honest  foreman  of  the  grand  jury."
The  latter  part  of  his  life  was  spent  on  a  farm  that
he  had  bought  in  the  valley  of  Virginia,  which  he
called  "  Lucky  Hill,''  since  it  had  proved  a  profita
ble  investment.  About  1705  he  married  Elizabeth
Randolph,  aunt  of  John  Randolph,  of  Roanoke.
In  1780  he  married  for  his  second  wife  the  widow
of  William  Randolph,  of  Chatsworth. — His  son,
William,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  near  Millwood,  Frederick
(now  Clarke)  co.,  Va.,  11  Nov.,  1789;  d.  in  Rich
mond,  Va.,  14  March,
1802,  wTas  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1808,
studied  theology,  was
made  deacon,  24  Feb.,
1811,  and  ordained
priest,  10  Jan.,  1814.
He  began  his  ministry
in  his  native  parish
as  assistant  to  Rev.
Alexander  Balmaine,
but  in  the  autumn  of
1811  he  became  rector
of  Christ  church,  Al
exandria,  Va.,  where
he  remained  for  eigh
teen  months.  He  then
returned  to  Millwood,
succeeding  the  rector

on  the  death  of  the  latter  in  1821.  Being  in
dependent  in  his  pecuniary  circumstances,  Mr.
Meade  officiated  gratuitously  for  many  years  in
his  own  parish  and  in  the  surrounding  country.
In  1813-'14  he  took  an  active  part  in  procuring
the  election  of  Dr.  Richard  C.  Moore,  of  New
York,  as  the  successor  of  Bishop  James  Madison
in  the  episcopate  of  Virgina,  and  contributed  ma
terially  to  the  establishment  of  a  diocesan  theo
logical  seminary  at  Alexandria,  and  various  educa
tional  and  missionary  societies  connected  with  his
denomination.  In  1819  he  went  to  Georgia  as  a
commissioner  to  negotiate  for  the  release  of  certain
recaptured  Africans  who  were  about  to  be  sold.
and  succeeded  in  his  mission.  On  his  journey  he
was  active  in  establish  ing  auxiliaries  to  the  Ameri
can  colonization  society,  and  was  similarly  occu-


pied  during  a  subsequent  trip  through  the  middle
and  eastern  states.  lie  emancipated  his  own
slaves,  but  the  experiment  proved  so  disastrous  to
the  negroes  that  he  ceased  to  advise  its  repetition
by  others.  In  1820  he  was  recommended  as  assist
ant  bishop  of  Pennsylvania,  but,  certain  complica
tions  having  arisen,  he  caused  his  name  to  be  with
drawn.  In  1829,  Bishop  Moore  having  asked  for
an  assistant,  Dr.  Meade  was  elected  to  that  office,
and  was  consecrated  in  Philadelphia  on  19  Aug.
In  1834,  in  addition  to  his  episcopal  labors,  he  un
dertook  the  pastoral  charge  of  Christ  church,
Norfolk,  one  of  the  largest  congregations  in  the
diocese.  Here  he  spent  two  years,  which  he  after
ward  characterized  as  "  the  happiest  and  most  use
ful  "  of  his  life.  Infirm  health  induced  him  to
spend  four  months  in  Europe  in  1841.  and  soon
after  his  return  he  became  bishop  of  the  diocese
through  the  death  of  Dr.  Moore,  on  11  Nov..  1841.
The  following  year  Dr.  Meade  was  compelled  in
his  turn  to  ask  for  the  services  of  an  assistant,  and
Rev.  John  Johns,  D.  D.,  was  elected.  Bishop  Meade
felt  called  upon  to  speak  out  plainly  in  opposition
to  the  Tractarians  of  England,  and  published,  at
his  own  expense,  an  American  edition  of  the  works
of  his  friend,  Rev.  William  Goode,  afterward  dean
of  Ripon.  In  1847  Dr.  Meade  and  other  bishops
founded  the  Evangelical  knowledge  society  during
the  sessions  of  the  General  convention  in  New
York  city,  which  enterprise  he  earnestly  sustained
with  his  pen,  his  purse,  and  his  influence  during
the  last  fifteen  years  of  his  life.  In  1801  Bishop
Meade  made  many  earnest  efforts  to  save  Virginia
from  the  horrors  of  civil  war.  lie  steadfastly  op
posed  secession  to  the  last,  but  yielded  to  the
inevitable  after  his  state  had  taken  the  step.  When
Bishop  Meade  decided  to  study  for  the  ministry,
his  church  in  Virginia  had  so  little  vitality  that  no
convention  had  been  held  between  1805  and  1811,
and  in  the  latter  year  a  General  convention  at
New  Haven,  Conn.,  reported  that  "the  church  in
Virginia  was  so  depressed  that  there  was  danger
of  her  total  ruin."  When  young  Meade  asked
Chief-Justice  Marshall  to  subscribe  to  a  fund  for
the  education  of  ministers,  the  latter  remarked,
after  acceding  to  the  request,  that  he  feared  it  was
unkind  to  tempt  young  men  into  a  church  which
could  never  be  revived.  The  gross  worldliness  and
even  open  immorality  of  many  of  the  Virginia
clergy  of  that  day,  and  the  introduction  of  French
infidelity  during  the  war  of  the  Revolution,  caused
Dr.  Meade  to  regard  the  development  of  the  sub
jective  in  religion  as  of  paramount  importance.
Beginning  with  a  crusade  against  horse-racing,
card-playing,  and  theatre-going  by  professing
Christians,  he  lived  to  see  the  church  of  his  choice-
rise  from  the  dust  and  become  a  power  in  the  land.
"Raised  up  by  God,"  said  Bishop  Elliott,  of  Geor
gia,  "to  leaven  the  church  at  a  moment  when
that  church  was  full  of  coldness  and  Erastianism.
he  felt  that  he  must  first  school  himself  ere  lie
could  perform  the  work  for  which  he  had  been
anointed.  .  .  .  Fearless  by  nature,  frank  by  tem
perament,  straightforward  because  he  always  aimed
at  noble  ends,  commanding  through  character,
he  turned  all  the  qualities  which  would  have
made  him  a  hero,  or  a  warrior,  into  the  channels
of  the  church."  Dr.  Meade  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  William  and  Mary  in  1827.  Besides
many  occasional  sermons,  reports,  tracts,  pastoral
letters  and  addresses,  he  published  "Family
Prayers"  (Alexandria  and  Richmond.  1834.  and
other  editions);  "  Pastoral  Letters  on  the  Dutv  of
affording  Religious  Instruction  to  those  in  Bond
age  "  (Alexandria,  1834;  Richmond.  1854;  New


MEAGHER


MEANS


283


York,  1858) ;  "  Life  of  Rev.  Devereux  Jarratt.  by  ',
Himself,  abridged  by  Bishop  Meade  "  (Washing-  ,
ton, 1840): ''Companion to the Font and the  i
Pulpit''  (1846) ;  "Lectures on  the  Pastoral  Office"
(New  York,  1849) ;  "  Reasons  for  loving  the  Epis
copal Church" (Philadelphia, 1852; New  York,
1858);  "Old  Churches.  Ministers,  and  Families  of
Virginia  "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1857) ;  and  "  The
Bible and  the Classics "  (New  York,  18(51). See
"  Memorial  of Bishop  Meade "  (Baltimore,  1857),
by  Rev.  John  Johns,  D.  D. — -Another  son,  Richard  i
Kidder.  politician,  b. in Frederick county,  Va.,  j
about  1795  ; d. in  Virginia,  20  April,  1862,  was  |
well  educated,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  began  practice  in  Petersburg. He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  6
Dec.,  1847,  till  3  March, 1853,  and  in  the  latter
year  declined  the  appointment  of  charge  d'affaires
in  Sardinia, lie  was  afterward  appointed  minister
to Brazil,  and  held  this  office  from  27  July,  1857,
till  9  July,  1801,  when  he  returned  to  Virginia  and
supported  the  Confederacy.

MEAGHER,  Thomas  Francis  (marr),  soldier,
b.  in  Waterford,  Ireland,  3  Aug.,  1823 ;  d.  near
Fort  Benton,  Montana,  1  July,  1867.  His  father,
a  merchant,  who  had  made  a  fortune  in  the  New
foundland  trade,  represented  Waterford  in  parlia
ment  for  several  years.  At  the  age  of  nine  Thomas
Francis  was  sent  to  the  Jesuit  college  of  Clongowes
Wood,  County  Kildare,  where  he  remained  six
years,  and  then  entered  Stonyhurst  college,  near
Preston,  England.  In  1843  he  left  that  institution,
and  soon  afterward  made  his  appearance  as  a  public
speaker  at  the  great  national  meeting  at  Kilkenny,
over  which  Daniel  O'Connell  presided.  From  that
time  he  was  devoted  to  the  cause  of  Ireland,  and
in  1846  became  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Young
Ireland  party,  whose  object  was  to  obtain  Irish  in
dependence  by  force  of  arms.  In  1848  he  was  sent
to  Paris  with  an  address  to  the  provisional  govern
ment  of  France  from  the  Irish  confederation,  and
on  his  return  he  presented  the  citizens  of  Dublin
with  an  Irish  tricolor,  upon  which  occasion  he
made  a  fiery  patriotic  speech.  On  21  March  he
was  arrested  on  the  charge  of  sedition,  and  was
bailed  to  appear  at  the  court  of  cpueen's  bench.
After  the  passage  of  the  treason-felony  act  Meagher
was  arrested  again,  and  in  October,  1848,  was  con
victed  of  treason  and  sentenced  to  death.  The
sentence  was  afterward  commuted  to  banishment  I
for  life,  and  on  9  July,  1849,  he  was  transported  to  i
Van  Diemen's  Land,  but  he  escaped  in  1852  and  i
took  refuge  in  the  United  States.  In  1855  he  had
begun  the  study  of  the  law,  and  he  was  subse
quently  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  at  the  beginning  |
of  the  civil  war  he  at  once  abandoned  his  profession,
and,  organizing  a  company  of  zouaves  for  the  Na
tional  army,  he  joined  the  69th  New  York  volun
teers,  under  Col.  Michael  Corcoran,  and  served
during  the  first  campaign  in  Virginia.  At  the  first
battle  of  Bull  Run,  where  he  was  acting  major  of
his  regiment,  a  horse  was  shot  under  him.  Upon
the  expiration  of  his  three  months'  term  of  service
he  returned  to  New  York,  and  in  the  latter  part  of
1861  organized  the  "Irish  brigade,"  being  elected  ]
colonel  of  the  first  regiment.  He  was  afterward
assigned  to  command  the  brigade,  his  commission  as
brigadier-general  bearing  the  date  of  3  Feb..  1862.
Gen.  Meagher  and  his  command  fought  bravely
during  the  seven  days'  battles  around  Richmond,  >
Va.,  and  at  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run,  Fred-  i
ericksburg,  and  Antietam,  where  again  a  horse  i
was  shot  under  him.  At  Fredericksburg  he  was  .
wounded  in  the  leg.  After  Chancellorsville  his
brigade  was  so  decimated  that  he  resigned,  and  i


was  out  of  the  war  until  early  in  1864,  when  he
was  recommissioned  brigadier-general  of  volun
teers  and  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  district
of  Etowah.  In  January,  1865,  he  was  relieved
from  duty  in  Tennessee,  and  ordered  to  report  to
Gen.  Sherman  in  Savannah,  but  the  close  of  the
war  prevented  his  performing  any  further  active
service.  After  being  mustered  out  of  the  service
in  1865,  Gen.  Meagher  became  secretary  of  Mon
tana  territory,  and  in  the  following  September,
Gov.  Sydney  Edgerton. 'being  on  the  point  of  leaving
the  territory  for  a  few  months,  appointed  Gen.
Meagher  governor  pro  tern-pore.  The  hostile  atti
tude  of  the  Indians  compelled  him  to  take  measures
to  protect  the  white  settlers.  While  engaged  in
this  duty  he  fell  into  the  Missouri,  from  the  deck
of  a  steamboat,  and  was  drowned.  He  was  the
author  of  "  Speeches  on  the  Legislative  Independ
ence  of  Ireland "  (New  York,  1852),  of  which  six
editions  were  issued.

MEANS,  Alexander,  clergyman,  b.  in  States-
ville,  N.  C.,  6  Feb.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Oxford,  Ga.,  5  June,
1883.  He  was  educated  at  the  academy  in  States-
ville,  but  removed  to  Georgia  about  1822,  and,  after
teaching  for  four  years,  attended  medical  lectures
at  Transylvania  university.  In  1826  he  began  the
practice  of  medicine  in  Covington,  Ga.,  and  in  1828
was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church.  He  was  called  to  the  charge  of  a  manual-
labor  school  near  Covington  in  1834,  and  on  the
organization  of  Emory  college,  at  Oxford,  in  1838,
he  was  chosen  professor  of  physical  sciences,  which
chair  he  held  for  eighteen  years.  In  1840  he  was
appointed  professor  of  chemistry  and  pharmacy  in
the  Medical  college  of  Georgia,  at  Augusta,  deliver
ing  the  regular  course  of  lectures  there  during  the
winter  months  in  addition  to  his  duties  at  Emory.
He  was  made  president  of  the  Masonic  female  col
lege  in  1853,  and  in  1854  called  to  the  presidency
of  Emory,  but  in  1855  resigned  to  accept  the
professorship  of  chemistry  in  Atlanta  medical  col
lege,  which  he  held  for  twelve  years,  including  the
period  of  the  civil  war.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Georgia  state  convention  in  1861,  and  opposed  the
ordinance  of  secession,  but  on  the  passage  of  that
act  promptly  identified  himself  with  the  south.
After  the  civil  war  he  became  state  chemist  of
Georgia  at  Savannah,  and  resumed  his  relations
with  Emory  college  as  professor  of  natural  philoso
phy.  He  received  the  degree  of  M.  I),  from  the
Medical  college  of  Augusta  in  1841,  that  of  D.  D.  in
1854,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1858  from  Emory.  His
publications  include  papers  on  chemistry  in  the
"Medical  and  Surgical  Journal  "  and  other  south
ern  monthly  periodicals.

MEANS,  John  II 111:  li.  governor  of  South  Caro
lina,  b.  in  Fairfield  district,  S.  C.,  18  Aug.,  1812  ;
d.  in  Manassas.  Va.,  28  Aug.,  1862.  His  father,
Thomas,  was  a  native  of  Boston,  Mass.  The  son
was  graduated  at  South  Carolina  college  in  1832,
after  which  he  engaged  in  planting.  His  advocacy
of  state  sovereignty  brought  him  into  notice,  and
he  served  in  the  legislature  during  the  agitation
regarding  state  rights.  He  was  elected  governor
of  South  Carolina  in  1850  and  served  one  term,  the
constitution  of  the  state  forbidding  re-election.
During  his  administration  he  made  many  speeches
favoring  secession,  and  gave  much  attention  to
the  state  militia.  He  was  president  of  the  conven
tion  of  1852  which  passed  a  resolution  that  affirmed
the  right  of  the  state  to  dissolve  at  once  all  political
connection  with  her  co-states  and  that  she  forbear
the  exercise  of  this  manifest  right  of  self-govern
ment  from  considerations  of  expediency  only.  He
then  retired  to  private  life,  but  was  a  delegate  to


284


ME  ARKS


MEDARY


the  convention  of  I860,  affixing  his  name  to  the
ordinance  of  secession.  He  was  elected  colonel  of
the  17th  South  Carolina  regiment,  and  was  killed
in  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run,  28  Aug.,  18(52.

MEARES,  John,  English  navigator,  b.  in
England  in  1740;  d.  in  London,  England,  in  1801.
He  became  a  sailor,  and,  after  making  many  voy-
'ages  to  Newfoundland,  Labrador,  and  Greenland,
he  entered  the  navy  in  1776,  served  against  the
French  in  the  West  Indies,  and  became  captain  in
the  merchant  service  after  the  peace  of  178-3.  He
then  went  to  India,  where  he  formed  the  North
west  America  company  for  opening  trade  with
Russian  America,  and  sailed  from  Calcutta  on  12
March,  1786,  in  the  "  Nootka,"  a  vessel  of  two  hun
dred  tons,  with  which  he  explored  part  of  the
coast  of  Alaska.  Meeting  with  little  success  in
trade  with  the  Russians,  he  returned  to  China  by
way  of  the  Sandwich  islands.  He  then  fitted  out  a
new  expedition  of  two  vessels  with  which  he  sailed
from  Typa  on  22  Jan.,  1788,  explored  Nootka
sound,  which  he  entered  in  May,  178!),  and  recon
noitred  the  neighboring  coasts,  of  which  he  took
possession  in  the  name  of  the  crown.  He  reached
Macao  on  5  Dec.,  1789.  Capt.  Meares's  discoveries
form  the  chief  basis  upon  which  the  British  title  to
Oregon  and  British  Columbia  was  based.  He  pub
lished  "Voyages  in  the  Years  1788-'9  from  China
to  the  Northwest  Coast  of  America  "  (London,  1790).

MEARS,  John  William,  clergyman,  b.  in
Reading,  Pa,.  10  Aug.,  1825 ;  d.  in  Clinton,  N.  Y.,
10  Nov.,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Delaware
college,  Newark,  Del.,  in  1844,  and  at  the  Yale
divinity-school  in  1831,  and  held  pastorates  in
Camde'n,  N.  J.,  Elkton.  Md..  and  Milford,  Del.
He  became  assistant  editor  in  1860,  and  afterward
editor  and  proprietor,  of  the  "American  Presby
terian,"  a  weekly  paper  published  in  Philadelphia
in  the  interest  of  the  new-school  branch  of  the
Presbyterian  church.  In  1870  this  was  merged
into  the  "  New  York  Evangelist,"  and  he  was  called
to  the  chair  of  ethics  and  metaphysics  in  Hamilton
college,  which  he  held  until  his'  death.  In  1878
he  was  chosen  president  of  the  New  York  state
teachers'  association,  and  was  chairman  of  the  uni
versity  convocation  at  Albany.  In  1881  he  arranged
for  a  meeting  of  metaphysicians  in  Saratoga  for
the  centennial  celebration  of  the  appearance
of  Kant's  "Critique  of  Pure  Reason,"  at  which  he
read  a  paper  that  he  afterward  repeated  at  the
Concord  school  of  philosophy.  He  was  a  leader  in
the  cause  of  temperance,  and  was  nominated  as
candidate  for  congress  in  1878,  and  for  governor
of  New  York  in  "l879  by  the  Prohibition  party.
For  many  years  he  labored  to  overthrow  the  Onei-
<la  community  which  had  been  formed  in  1848  by
John  H.  Noyes  (q.  r.),  and  he  was  finally  successful
in  his  efforts.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1870.  He  was  the  author  of  "The  Bible  in  the
Workshop"  (New  York,  1857);  "The  Martyrs  of
France"  (Philadelphia,  1860);  "The  Beggars  of
Holland"  (1867);  "The  Story  of  Madagascar"
<1873);  "The  Heroes  of  Bohemia"  (1879);  and
'•  From  Exile  to  Overthrow  "  (Philadelphia,  1881).

MEASE,  .lames,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1771 ;  d.  there,  15  May,  1846.  He  was  grad
uated  in  medicine  at  the  University  of  Pennsyl
vania  in  1792,  reading  a  thesis  on  "  Hydrophobia,"
which  lie  afterward  published  (1792).  He  was  the
first  vice-president  of  the  Philadelphia  athena?um
and  an  active  member  of  the  Philosophical  society.
His  publications  are  "  Geological  Account  of  the
United  States"  (Philadelphia,  1807):  "Picture  of
Philadelphia"  (1811);  "On  William  Penn's  Treaty
with  the  Indians  "  (1836) ;  "  Utility  of  Public-Loan


Offices  "  (1836) :  "  Description  of  Some  of  the  Medals
struck  in  the  National  Academy"  (1821);  and  a
"Letter  on  the  Rearing  of  Silk-Worms"  (1828).

MEASE,  John,  soldier,  1).  in  Strabane,  Ireland,
in  1746;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa,,  in  1826.  lie  came
to  this  country  in  1754  and  became  a  shipping-
merchant  in  Philadelphia.  He  was  an  original
member  of  the  first  troop  of  city  cavalry,  and  was
one  of  the  twenty-four  of  that  corps  who  crossed
the  Delaware  under  Gen.  Washington  on  25  Dec.,

1779.  Mease  was  one  of  the  five  that  were  detailed
to  keep  alive  the  fires  along  the  line  of  American
encampment at Trenton to deceive the enemy
while  the  army  marched  to  attack  the  rear-guard
at  Princeton. He  served  during  the  entire  war,
suffering  great  loss  of  property  in  his  dwelling  and
warehouses. He  subscribed  £4.000  for  the  army  in

1780.  For  the  last  thirty  years  of  his  life  he  was
one  of  the  admiralty  surveyors  of  the  port  of  Phila
delphia. Mr.  Mease  continued  in  his  later  days  to
wear  the  old  three-cornered  hat  of  the  Revolution,
and  was  frequently  called  "  The  Last  of  the  Cocked
Hats." — His  nephew.  Matthew, b.  in Strabane,
Ireland:  d.  in  Philadelphia  in  1787,  emigrated  at
an  early  age  to  this  country  and  settled  in  Phila
delphia. Although  educated  for  a  merchant,  he
entered  the  navy  and  became  purser  of  the  "  Bon
Homme  Richard." In  the  encounter  between  this
vessel  and  the  "  Serapis  "  he  commanded  the  quar
ter-deck  guns  until  he  was  wounded.

MEHANE.  Alexander,  statesman,  b.  in  Orange
county,  N.  C.,  26  Nov.,  1744;  d.  there,  5  July,  1795.
His  father,  of  the  same  name,  came  from  the  north
of  Ireland  to  Pennsylvania,  but  removed  to  Orange
county,  N.  C.,  before  the  Revolution.  The  eldest
sons,  William  and  Robert,  were  officers  in  the  Con
tinental  army.  Alexander  was  a  member  of  the
Provincial  congress  at  Halifax  in  1776.  of  the  con
vention  that  refused  to  ratify  the  National  consti
tution  in  1787,  and  of  the  legislature  in  1783-'!»3.
In  the  latter  year  he  took  his  seat  in  congress,  and
he  was  re-elected,  but  died  before  entering  on  his
second  term. — His  son.  James,  was  many  times  a
member  of  the  legislature  between  1808  and  1828,
and  speaker  of  the  house  in  1821.

MEDARY,  Samuel,  editor,  b.  in  Montgomery
Square,  Montgomery  co..  Pa,,  25  Feb.,  1801 ;  d.
in  Columbus,  Ohio,  7  Nov.,  1864.  The  family
name  was  originally  spelled  Madeira,  and  is  still
so  pronounced.  He
was  reared  in  the
Quaker  faith,  his
mother's  ancestors
having  emigrated  to
this  country  with
William  Penn.  He
was  sent  to  the  Nor-
ristown  academy,
and  at  sixteen  years
of  age  became  a  con-
t  ributor  to  the  "  Nor-
ristown  Herald,"
both  in  prose  and
poetry.  He  then
taught  and  contin
ued  his  studies  in
the  higher  branches.
In  1820  his  family
went  to  Montgom
ery  county,  Md.,  and
two  or  three  years  later  to  Georgetown,  D.  C.  In
1825  he  went  to  Ohio,  and  settled  in  Batavia,  Cler-
mont  co.  When  he  was  twenty-six  years  old  he
was  made  county  surveyor  and  school  trustee,
and  later  he  became  auditor  of  the  county.  In


MEDBERRY


MEEHAN


285


1828  he  established  the  "  Ohio  Sun  "  to  advocate
the  claims  of  Gen.  Jackson  for  the  presidency.
He  was  elected  as  a  Jackson  man  to  the  state
house  of  representatives  in  1834,  was  then  sent
to  the  senate,  and,  after  serving  two  years,  re
moved  to  Columbus  and  purchased  the  "  Western
Hemisphere,"  which  was  afterward  changed  to  the
"  Ohio  Statesman."  and  which  he  edited  almost
continuously  till  1857.  This  paper  soon  became  a
power,  not  only  in  Ohio  but  in  all  the  northwest
and  the  south.  He  supported  Jackson  in  his  con
tests  with  the  U.  S.  bank,  and  advocated  his  views  on
the  tariff  with  ability,  and  probably  no  man  en
joyed  the  confidence  and  warm  personal  esteem
of  the  president  to  a  greater  extent  than  Medary.
The  cry  of  "  Fifty-four  forty,  or  fight,"  relative  to
the  Oregon  boundary  question,  is  said  to  have  been
originated  by  him,  and  he  became  the  warm  friend
of  Stephen  A.  Douglas  from  his  support  of  that
measure.  In  1844  he  was  chairman  of  the  Ohio
delegation  to  the  Baltimore  convention.  Jackson
had  written  a  letter  to  Mr.  Medary  asking  him  in
the  event  of  discord  to  present  the  name  of  James
K.  Polk  for  the  presidency.  In  the  midst  of  wild
excitement  Mr.  Medary  produced  this  letter  with
the  result  that  Polk  was  nominated  by  acclama
tion.  Mr.  Medary  declined  the  office  of  U.  S.  min
ister  to  Chili  in  1853.  In  1850  he  was  temporary
chairman  of  the  Cincinnati  convention  that  nomi
nated  James  Buchanan,  and  strongly  advocated  the
nomination  of  his  friend  Douglas.  He  was  the  last
territorial  governor  of  Minnesota  in  1857-'8,  and
of  Kansas  in  1859— '60.  His  administrations  were
eminently  successful,  particularly  in  Kansas.  The
press  of  both  parties  in  that  territory  accorded  him
equal  praise.  In  December.  1860,  he  resigned  and  re
turned  to  Columbus,  Ohio,  to  establish  the  "  Crisis,"
which  he  edited  until  his  death.  In  his  early  days
he  was  devoted  to  horticulture  and  agriculture,  and
he  was  one  of  the  originators  of  the  Ohio  state  fairs,
being  their  first  treasurer  and  for  several  terms
president.  He  also  actively  aided  Samuel  F.  B.
Morse  in  promoting  the  electric  telegraph.  He
was  known  as  the  "  Old  wheel-horse  of  Democracy."
One  of  his  characteristics  was  the  ability  to  write
while  keeping  up  a  running  conversation.  In  18G9
a  monument  was  erected  to  his  memory  in  Colum
bus  by  the  Democrats  of  Ohio.

MEDBERRY,  Rebecca  B.  (STETSON),  author,
b.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,  in  1808;  d.  in  Lynn,  Mass..
in  1808.  She  married  Rev.  George  Kalloch  in
1.829,  and  after  his  death  became  in  1837  the  wife
of  the  Rev.  Nicholas  Medberry,  pastor  of  the  Bap
tist  church  in  Watertown,  Mass.,  and  afterward
city  missionary  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.  She  pub
lished  "Memoir  of  William  G.  Crocker,  late  Mis
sionary  in  Western  Africa,  with  a  History  of  the
Bassa  Mission"  (Boston,  1848);  "Memoirs  of  Mrs.
Sarah  Emily  York  "  (1853) ;  and  numerous  Sunday-
school  books,  besides  contributions  to  journals.

MEDILL,  Joseph,  journalist,  b.  in  New  Bruns
wick,  Canada,  6  April,  1823.  His  father  re
moved  in  1832  to  Stark  county,  Ohio,  where  the
son  worked  on  a  farm,  subsequently  studied  law,
and  practised  at  Massillon.  He  founded  a  Free-
soil  paper  at  Coshocton  in  1849,  established  "  The
Leader,"  a  Whig  journal,  at  Cleveland  in  1852,  and
in  1854  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the  Republi
can  party  in  Ohio.  Soon  afterward  he  went  to
Chicago,  and  with  two  partners  bought,  in  May,
1855.  the  "Tribune,"  with  which  he  has  since  been
identified.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Illinois  con
stitutional  convention  in  1870,  and  the  author  of  a
minority  representation  clause.  In  1871  he  was  a
member  of  the  U.  S.  civil  service  commission,  and


was  elected  mayor  of  Chicago.  He  spent  a  year  in
Europe  in  1873-'4,  and  on  his  return  purchased  a
controlling  interest  in  the  "  Tribune,"  of  which  he
became  and  continues  editor-in-chief.

MEDILL,  William,  governor  of  Ohio,  b.  in
New  Castle  county,  Del.,  in  1805 ;  d.  in  Lancaster,
Ohio,  2  Sept.,  1805.  He  studied  law,  and  in  1832
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Lancaster,  Ohio,  to
which  state  he  had  previously  removed.  He  was
soon  afterward  elected  to  the  legislature,  served
several  years,  was  twice  speaker,  and  in  1838  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  till
1843.  He  was  first  assistant  postmaster  in  1845-'9T
then  became  commissioner  of  Indian  affairs,  and
in  1850  was  chairman  of  the  Ohio  constitutional
convention.  He  was  lieutenant-governor  of  the
state  in  1851-'3,  and  governor  in  1853-'6.  During
Buchanan's  administration  he  was  first  comptroller
of  the  U.  S.  treasury.

MEDINA,  Antonio  (may-dee'-nah),  Cuban  au
thor,  b.  in  Havana  in  1824:  d.  in  1884.  He  was  of
African  descent,  but  was  born  free.  He  opened  in
1801  a  public  school  for  colored  boys,  where  many
of  the  African  race  received  free  education,  and  he
worked  in  other  ways  for  the  elevation  of  the  col
ored  people.  He  showed  from  his  youth  a  love  for
poetry,  and  in  1849  published  a  drama,  "  Ladoiska."
He  was  also  the  author  of  a  volume  of  poems
(1851);  "El  Guajiro  generoso"  (1858);  and  "Jaco-
bo  Gerondi,"  a  drama  (1880);  and  wrote  two  other
dramas.  "  LaMaldicion  "  and  "La  hija del  pueblo."

MEDLEY,  John,  Canadian  Anglican  bishop,  b.
in  London,  England,  19  Dec.,  1804.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Oxford  in  1826,  ordained  priest  in  1829,
and  in  1838  became
vicar  of  St.  Thomas's,
Exeter,  and  prebend
ary  of  the  cathedral
there.  In  1845  he  was
consecrated  first  bish
op  of  Frederic-ton,  his
diocese  including  the
entire  province  of  New
Brunswick.  In  1804
the  degree  of  I).  D.
was  conferred  upon
him,  and  in  1879  he
became  metropolitan
of  Canada.  Among
other  works  he  is  the
author  of  "  Episcopal
Form  of  Church  Gov
ernment  "  (London,  1835) ;  "  Translation  of  the
Homilies  of  St.  Chrysostom  "  (Oxford,  1839-'40) ;
"  Sermons  "  (London,  1845) ;  "  Translation  of  the
Book  of  Job  "  (Fredericton,  1879) ;  "  The  Reforma
tion."  and  charges  to  clergy,  republished  at  Oxford.

MEEHAN,  Thomas,  botanist,  b.  in  Potter's
Bar,  Middlesex,  England,  21  March,  1826.  He  was
educated  in  public  schools  in  England,  and  spent
two  years  in  botanical  studies  in  Kew.  In  1848  he
arrived  in  the  United  States  and  settled  in  Phila
delphia,  where  he  became  a  gardener,  and  in  1854
established  a  nursery  in  Germantown,  which  he
still  (1888)  maintains.  In  1876  he  accepted  the  ap
pointment  of  botanist  to  the  Pennsylvania  board
of  agriculture  without  compensation,  and  he  has
been  annually  re-elected  since  that  time.  He  is
also  professor  of  botany  to  the  State  herb  associa
tion  and  vice-director  of  the  Academy  of  natural
sciences  of  Philadelphia,  of  which  he  became  vice-
president  in  1879.  In  1883  he  was  elected  to  the
city  council  of  Philadelphia,  and  he  has  been  an
nually  re-elected.  His  scientific  work  has  included
original  investigations  in  botany,  which  have  been


eJ-AsiSi  c^t. a-


286


iMEEK


MEGAPOLENSIS


published  in  the  proceedings  of  scientific  societies.
One  of  the  most  important  of  these  was  on  "  The
Law  which  Governs  the  Production  of  Sex  in
Flowers."  His  papers  exceed  sixty  in  number,
and  the  botanical  articles  in  the  "  Encyclopaedia
Americana"  were  prepared  by  him.  In  185$)  he  es
tablished  "  The  Gardeners'  Monthly,"  which  he
still  issues,  and  he  was  a  member  of  the  editorial
staff  of  the  Philadelphia  "  Press"  in  1865-'81.  In
book-form  helms  published  "  The  American  Hand-
Book  of  Ornamental  Trees  "  (Philadelphia,  1853)
and  "  The  Flowers  and  Ferns  of  the  United  States  "
(1st  series,  Boston,  1878;  2<1  series,  Philadelphia,
1880 ;  3d  series,  Boston,  1887).

MEEK,  Alexander  Beaufort,  jurist,  b.  in  Co
lumbia,  S.  0.,  17  July,  1814  ;  d.  in  Columbus,  Miss.,
30  Nov.,  1865.  He  was  educated  at  the  University
•of  Alabama,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1835,  and  in
the  same  year  edited  a  newspaper  at  Tuscaloosa.
He  was  lieutenant  of  volunteers  in  the  Seminole
war,  and  at  the  close  of  the  campaign  was  ap
pointed  attorney-general  of  Alabama,  but  soon  re
signed  and  resumed  practice.  He  was  judge  of
the  county  court  of  Tuscaloosa  in  1842-'4,  ami  dur
ing  that  time  prepared  a  supplement  to  Aiken's
"  Digest  of  Alabama."  He  was  associate  editor  of
the  "  Mobile  Register "  in  1848-'52,  and  in  1853
served  in  the  legislature,  where  he  secured  the  es
tablishment  of  a  free-school  system  in  the  state.
He  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Democratic
ticket  in  1856,  served  in  the  legislature  again  in
1859,  and  was  chosen  speaker.  His  later  years
were  devoted  chiefly  to  literary  pursuits.  His
publications  include  "  Red  Eagle  (New  York,
1855) ;  "  Songs  and  Poems  of  the  South  "  (1857) ;
and  "  Romantic  Passages  in  Southwestern  His
tory  "  (1857).  He  left  an  unfinished  "  History  of
Alabama."  His  best-known  poem  is  one  on  "The
Charge  at  Balaklava."

MEEK,  Fielding1  Bradford,  paleontologist.
b.  in  Madison,  Ind.,  10  Dec.,  1817 ;  d.  in  Washing
ton,  D.  C.,  21  Dec.,  1876.  He  received  a  public-
school  education,  and  when  a  student  became  in
terested  in  the  fossil  remains  that  were  found  in
the  vicinity  of  his  home.  As  he  grew  older  he
chose  a  mercantile  career,  but,  failing  in  this,  he
directed  his  attention  to  geology,  and  became  in
1848  an  assistant  in  the  U.  S.  geological  survey  of
Iowa,  Wisconsin,  and  Minnesota,  then  under  the
direction  of  David  D.  Owen.  During  1852-'8  lie
assisted  James  Hall  in  the  paleontological  work  of
the  state  of  New  York  except  in  the  summers,  when
he  was  engaged  in  field-work.  In  1853  he  was  as
sociated  with  Ferdinand  V.  Hayden  in  making  a
collection  of  invertebrate  and  other  fossils  in.  the
bad-lands  of  Dakota.  He  settled  in  Washington,
D.  C.,  in  1858,  and  thereafter  devoted  his  time  prin
cipally  to  investigating  and  reporting  on  the  organ
ic  remains  that  had  been  accumulated  by  the  gov
ernment  exploring  expeditions.  The  invertebrate
paleontology  of  the  Rocky  mountain  region,  as
developed  in  the  survey  under  Prof.  Hayden,  was
intrusted  to  Mr.  Meek.  'He  also  devoted  much  time
to  the  paleontology  of  Illinois,  Ohio,  California,  and
of  many  of  the  territories.  He  was  a  member  of
many  scientific  societies,  and  in  1870  was  elected
to  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  His  papers,
which  were  numerous,  appeared  in  the  transactions
of  societies  to  which  he  belonged,  in  state  and  na
tional  geological  reports,  and  in  scientific  journals.
Mr.  Meek  published,  through  the  Smithsonian  in
stitution,  with  Ferdinand  V.  Hayden,  "  Paleontol
ogy  of  the  Upper  Missouri  "  (1865) ;  and  alone
*•  Check-List  of  the  Invertebrate  Fossils  of  North
America,"  cretaceous,  Jurassic,  and  miocene  (1864) ;


also  a  "  Report  on  the  Invertebrate,  Cretaceous,
and  Tertiary  Fossils  of  the  Upper  Missouri  Coun
try  "  (Washington,  1876).

MEEKER,  Joseph  Rusting,  artist,  b.  in  New
ark,  N.  J.,  21  April.  1827.  He  studied  at  the  Na
tional  academy  of  design  in  1845-'6,  and  has  ex
hibited  at  the  American  art  union  in  1849-?50,
the  Academy  of  design  in  1867,  and  the  Boston
art  club  in  1877.  His  studio  is  at  St.  Louis.  Mr.
Meeker  has  shown  a  special  sympathy  with  south
ern  scenery,  and  has  successfully  rendered  the  land
scapes  of  Louisiana.  Among  his  paintings  are
"  The  Indian  Chief,"  "  The  Acadians  in  the  At-
chafalaya,"  "  The  Vale  of  Cashmere,"  "  The  Lotos
Eaters,"  "  Louisiana  Bayou,"  and  "  The  Noon-Day
Rest."  from  Longfellow's  "  Evangeline."

MEEKER,  Moses,  pioneer,  b.  in  Newark.  N.  J.,
17  June,  1790  ;  d.  in  Skullsburg,  VVis.,  7  July,  1865.
He  removed  to  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  in  1817,  and  en
gaged  in  the  manufacture  of  white  lead  till  1822.
He  then  led  a  pioneer  expedition  to  the  then  In
dian  settlement  of  Galena,  111.,  and  was  the  first
to  engage  in  smelting  lead-ore.  lie  served  in  the
Black  Hawk  war  as  captain  of  a  volunteer  com
pany,  and  at  the  close  of  hostilities  removed  to
Iowa  county,  Wis.,  where  he  built  the  first  smelt-
ing-furnaces  in  that  territory.  He  served  in  the
Wisconsin  legislature  in  1840-'3  and  in  the  first
constitutional  convention  in  1846.  He  published
a  "  History  of  the  Early  Lead  Regions "  in  the
sixth  volume  of  the  "  Wisconsin  Historical  Society
Collections"  (Madison,  1864).

MEEKS,  Entrcne,  artist,  b.  in  New  York  in
1843.  He  studied  art  in  his  native  city,  and  then
for  five  years  at  the  Hague  academy  and  under
Van  Lerius  and  De  Keyser  at  Antwerp.  Most  of
his  professional  life  has  been  passed  at  Florence,
Italy,  and  he  is  an  associate  of  the  Florence  acade
my.  Among  his  works  are  "  Little  Nell  and  her
Grandfather,"  "Bridal  Chamber  in  Palazzo  Man/.i-
Lucca,"  " Gondola  Party,  Venice,"  "Startling  Bit
of  Gossip"  (1884),  and  "Halt  at  the  Golden  Lion."

MEES,  Carl  Leo,  physicist,  b.  in  Columbus,
Ohio,  20  May,  1853.  He  was  graduated  at  Ohio
university  and  at  Starling  medical  college  in  1875,
meanwhile,  in  1870-'5,  holding  the  office  of  assist
ant  chemist  of  the  Ohio  geological  survey.  Dr.
Mees  was  then  called  to  the  professorship  of  chem
istry  and  physics  in  the  Louisville,  Ky.,  schools,
where  he  remained  until  1880,  after  which  he  spent
some  time  in  study  at  the  Imperial  university  in
Berlin,  Germany.  In  1882  he  became  professor  of
physical  science  in  Ohio  university,  and  in  1887  he
was  called  to  the  chair  of  physics  in  Rose  poly
technic  school,  Terre  Haute,  Ind.  Dr.  Mees  is  a
member  of  scientific  societies,  and  in  1887  was  sec
retary  of  the  physical  section  of  the  American  as
sociation  for  the  advancement  of  science,  of  which
organization  he  has  been  a  fellow  since  1876.  He
has  contributed  the  results  of  his  researches  to  sci
entific  periodicals,  including  determinations  of
wind  velocity,  comparative  measurements,  and
photographs  of  blood.

MEGAPOLENSIS,  Johannes,  clergyman,  b.
in  Koedyck,  Holland,  in  1603;  d.  in  New  York
city,  14  Jan.,  1670.  The  original  form  of  the  fami
ly  name,  Van  Mecelcnburg,  was  Hellenized  into
Megapolensis  by  his  father,  who  was  settled  as  a
minister  in  Egmont-aan-Zee.  The  son  came  to  the
United  States,  under  the  patronage  of  the  patroon
of  Rensselaerwyck,  in  1642.  He  was  the  first
Protestant  missionary  to  the  Indians,  preceding
John  Eliot  by  three  months,  and  the  second  that
was  sent  by  the  classis  of  Amsterdam.  Having
j  learned  what  he  called  the  "  heavy  language  of  the


MEIGGS


MEIGS


Mohawks,"  he  preached  fluently  in  it,  received
many  converts  into  the  church,  and  soon  exerted  a
visible  influence  in  restraining  the  immoralities  of
frontier  life.  He  was  instrumental  in  saving  from
torture  and  probable  death  Father  Isaac  Jogues
(q.  i'.),  and  he  subsequently  rescued  two  other  Jesu
its  under  similar
circumstances.  At
the  end  of  his  mis
sion,  to  which  he
was  appointed  for
six  years,  he  was

g-rsuaded  by  Gov.
eter  Stuyvesant
to  remain  in  New
York  as  senior  pas
tor  of  the  Dutch
church,  which  of
fice  he  occupied  for
twenty  years.  The
building,  erected
in  1630,  is  shown
in  the  illustration.

Although  intolerant  toward  Lutherans  and  Inde
pendents,  by  his  scholarship  and  character  he  ex
ercised  a  marked  influence  in  public  affairs.  To
prevent  bloodshed,  he  urged  Stuyvesant  to  sur
render  the  colony  to  the  English  in  1064.  He  pub
lished  several  treatises  and  tracts,  and  "  A  Short
Account  of  the  Mohawk  Indians,  their  Country,
Language,  Figure,  Costume,  Religion,  and  Gov
ernment  "  (Amsterdam,  1651).  There  is  a  trans
lation  in  Hazard's  "  State  Papers "  and  in  the
'•  Xew  York  Historical  Society's  Collections." —
His  son,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Koedyck.
Holland,  in  1634 ;  d.  after  1700,  accompanied  his
father  to  this  country,  spent  three  years  at  Har
vard,  and  in  1658  returned  to  Holland,  where  he
studied  at  the  universities  of  L'trecht  and  Ley-
den,  and  received  at  the  latter  his  medical  degree.
Returning  to  America,  he  became  associate  pastor
with  his  father  in  New  York.  In  1664  he  was  one
of  the  Dutch  commissioners  that  prepared  the  terms
of  surrender  to  the  English,  and  it  is  probable  that
the  rights  of  the  Dutch  Reformed  church  were  pre
served  through  his  influence.  He  returned  to  Hol
land  in  1668,  and,  being  "  well  skilled  in  both  Dutch
and  English,"  served  the  English  and  Scotch  church
es  in  Flushing  and  Dordrecht  from  1685  till  1700.
when  he  became  pastor  emeritus.  The  exact  date
of  his  death  is  not  known.

3IEI(x(jS,  Henry,  contractor,  b.  in  Catskill,
X.  Y.,  7  July,  1811  :  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,  30  Sept..
1877.  He  came  to  Xew  York  city  about  1835  and
engaged  in  the  lumber  business.  The  financial
crisis  of  1837  caused  his  failure,  but  he  at  once
established  a  new  lumber-yard  in  Williamsburgh,
and  among  his  contracts  at  that  time  was  the
building  of  St.  Mark's  church,  which  he  completed.
In  1842  he  again  met  with  reverses  and  returned
to  Xew  York,  whence  he  shipped  lumber  to  the
Pacific  coast.  Subsequently  he  went  to  San  Fran
cisco  with  a  cargo  of  lumber,  which  he  sold  for
twenty  times  its  cost.  He  soon  built  a  fleet  of
sloops  and  schooners,  with  which  he  brought  lum
ber  from  different  points  on  the  coast,  and  em
ployed  500  men  in  felling  trees  for  a  single  saw
mill  on  the  Bay  of  San  Francisco.  In  this  manner
he  attained  a  large  fortune.  In  the  financial  de
pression  of  1854  he  was  unable  to  meet  his  obliga
tions,  and.  leaving  debts  to  the  amount  of  $1,000,-
000.  he  fled  with  his  family  on  one  of  his  schooners,
which  he  had  loaded  with  everything  that  his  resi
dence  contained.  He  then  engaged  in  the  build
ing  of  bridges  on  the  Valparaiso  and  Santiago  road


in  Chili,  and  in  1858  contracted  with  the  govern
ment  of  that  country  for  the  construction  of  rail
roads,  from  which  tie  realized  a  profit  of  $1.500,-
000.  This  gained  for  him  the  reputation  of  being
the  greatest  railway-contractor  in  South  America,
and  he  next  undertook  the  building  of  six  railroads
in  Peru,  of  which  three  were  completed  and  the
remainder  were  in  course  of  construction  at  the
time  of  his  death.  Of  these  the  Callao,  Lima,  and
Oroya  road  ranks  among  the  most  daring  achieve
ments  of  modern  engineering.  It  is  a  successful
j  attempt  to  connect  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  oceans,
!  by  a  railway  across  the  Andes,  from  Callao  to  the
!  head  of  navigation  on  the  Amazon.  The  height
ascended  by  this  road  is  within  136  feet  of  that  of
the  summit  of  Mont  Blanc.  The  road  bends  upon
itself  with  sharp  angles  as  it  ascends  the  moun
tains,  and  pierces  the  obstructing  peaks  with  thirty-
two  tunnels,  which  often  come  together  so  closely
that  they  seem  continuous  to  the  traveller.  Great
gorges  had  to  be  traversed  and  torrent  streams
.spanned  by  bridges  that  seemed  to  hang  in  mid
air.  In  several  places  the  mountain-sides  were  so
precipitous  that  the  workmen  could  only  reach  the
point  at  which  a  tunnel  started  by  being  let  down
with  ropes  from  the  edge  of  the  cliff  and  held
there  until  they  had  cut  for  themselves  a  foot-hold
in  the  rock.  The  diamond-drill  was  used  in  many
of  the  borings  where  the  rocks  were  hard  enough
to  scratch  glass.  One  of  the  bridges,  over  a  chasm
2.000  feet  deep,  leads  to  a  tunnel  at  either  end.
The  difficulties  of  the  work  were  increased  by  the
necessity  of  transporting  all  the  implements",  ma
terials,  and  workmen  up  to  these  almost  inaccessi
ble  heights.  Before  Mr.  Meiggs's  death  the  greater
part  of  the  work  was  completed  and  in  running  or
der.  When  the  Peruvian  government  was  unable
to  assist  him,  Mr.  Meiggs  sacrificed  his  own  private
means  rather  than  allow  the  enterprise  to  fail.
One  of  the  public  works  that  he  undertook  in  Peru
was  the  improvement  of  the  environs  of  Lima.
The  city  was  surrounded  by  a  rampart  of  filth  and
rubbish,  the  accumulated  refuse  of  many  genera
tions.  Mr.  Meiggs  replaced  this  by  a  park  more
than  seven  miles  in  length,  and  he  provided  for
his  own  fortune  by  securing  and  afterward  selling
the  adjoining  property  for  building  purposes.  His
success  in  South  America  made  it  possible  for  him
to  meet  all  of  his  former  obligations,  and  those  in
California  he  paid  in  full  with  interest.  The  legis
lature  of  that  state  ultimately  passed  an  act  re
lieving  him  of  all  penalties  on  account  of  his  con
nection  with  the  over-issued  bonds  of  San  Fran
cisco.  Pie  was  a  frequent  contributor  of  funds  to
charities  in  the  United  States.

MEHiS,  .Limes  Aitken.  physician,  b.  in  Phila
delphia.  31  July,  1829 :  d.  there,  9  Nov.,  1879. He
was  graduated  at  the  Central  high-school  of  Phila
delphia  in  1848,  and  at  the  Jefferson  medical  col
lege  in  1851.  and  practised  in  his  native  city  until
his  death. His  first  collegiate  appointment was
that  of  assistant  to  the  chair  of  physiology  in  the
Pennsylvania  medical  college. In  1854-'(J2  he  was
lecturer  on  climatology  and  physiology  at  Franklin
institute,  and  also  lectured  frequently on  physi-
j  ological and ethnological subjects elsewhere in
j  Philadelphia. He  was  professor  of  the  institutes
I  of  medicine  in Philadelphia  college  of  medicine
j  and  surgery  in  1857-'9.  and  was  then  transferred
j  to  the  similar  chair  in  the  Pennsylvania  medical
I  college. About  this  time  he  delivered  two  syste-
[  matic  courses  in  physiology,  illustrating  them  with
an extensive series of  vivisectal demonstrations,
I  which  attracted  much  attention  from  the  fact  that
\  until  that  time  no  systematic  effort  had  been  made


288


MEIGS


MEIGS


to  teach  physiology  experimentally  in  any  of  the
medical  colleges  of  Philadelphia.  During  the  civil
war  he  devoted  himself  exclusively  to  practice,
resigning  from  his  professorships,  but  in  June.  1800,
he  delivered  a  series  of  lectures  on  the  physiology
and  pathology  of  the  blood  and  circulation  at  Jef
ferson  medical  college,  and  in  18(58  became  pro
fessor  of  the  institutes  of  medicine  and  medical
jurisprudence  there,  lie  was  physician  to  the  de
partment  of  diseases  of  the  chest  in  Howard  hospi
tal  and  infirmary  for  incurables  in  1855-'08,  and
was  appointed  physician  of  the  Pennsylvania  hos
pital  in  1808.  Dr.  Meigs  was  a  member  of  medi
cal  societies  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  and
was  president  of  the  Philadelphia  county  medical
society  in  1871,  also  librarian  of  the  Philadelphia
academy  of  natural  sciences  in  1850-'!),  and  a  dele
gate  to  the  International  medical  congress  in  Phila
delphia  in  1870.  His  bibliography  was  extensive,
and  was  chiefly  devoted  to  ethnological  and  cranio-
logical  subjects.  He  prepared  an  appendix  for  the
first  American  edition  of  William  B.  Carpenter's
"Microscope  and  its  Revelations "  (Philadelphia.
1850);  and  the  article  on  "  The  Cranial  Character
istics  of  the  Races  of  Men"  in  Nott  and  Glydden's
"Indigenous  Races  of  the  Earth  "  (1857) ;  and  he
also  edited  an  American  edition  of  Kirke's  "Man
ual  of  Physiology  "  (1857).

MEKwS,  Return  Jonathan,  soldier,  b.  in  Mid-
dletown,  Conn.,  17  Dec.,  1734;  d.  in  the  Cherokee
agency,  Ga.,  28  Jan.,  1823.  He  marched  with  a
company  of  light  infantry  to  the  vicinity  of  Bos
ton  immediately
after  the  battle  of
Lexington,  and
was  assigned  to
duty  under  Col.
Benedict  Arnold
with  the  rank  of
major.  He  accom
panied  the  ex
pedition  through
Maine  to  Canada,
and  was  captured
in  the  assault  on
Quebec,  but  was
exchanged  dur
ing  the  following
year.  He  then  de
voted  his  energies
toward  raising  a
regiment,  and  in
1 777  was  promot
ed  to  colonel.  In  May,  1777,  at  the  head  of  170
men.  he  attacked  the  British  troops  at  Sag  Harbor,
L.  I.,  making  ninety  prisoners,  and  destroying
twelve  vessels  and  much  forage  without  the  loss  of
a  man.  For  this  brilliant  exploit,  congress  voted
him  thanks  and  a  sword.  Col.  Meigs  commanded  a
regiment  under  Gen.  Anthony  Wayne  at  the  storm
ing  of  Stony  Point,  and  was  honorably  mentioned
by  Washington.  Subsequently  he  served  in  various
places  until  the  close  of  the  war.  He  was  one  of
the  earliest  settlers  in  Ohio,  going  there  in  1788,
and  he  drew  up  a  system  of  regulations  for  the  first
emigrants,  that  was  posted  on  a  large  oak-tree,  near
the  confluence  of  Ohio  and  Muskingum  rivers.  In
1801  he  was  appointed  Indian  agent  of  the  Chero-
kees,  among  whom  he  passed  the  remainder  of  his
life.  The  origin  of  his  name  is  of  peculiar  interest.
His  father,  when  a  young  man,  was  very  attentive
to  a  fair  Quakeress,  who  resided  in  the  Vicinity  of
Middletown,  but  he  was  unsuccessful  in  his  suit
and  repeatedly  rejected  with  "  Nay,  Jonathan,  I
respect  thee  much  ;  but  I  cannot  marry  thee."  But


on  his  last  visit,  as  he  slowly  mounted  his  horse,
the  relenting  lady  beckoned  to  him  to  stop,  saying:
"Return,  Jonathan!  return,  Jonathan!"  These,
the  happiest  words  he  had  ever  heard,  he  gave  as  a
name  to  his  first-born  son.  Col.  Meigs's  journal  of
the  expedition  to  Quebec,  which  is  said  to  be  the
best  account  extant,  appeared  in  the  "  American
Remembrancer "  of  1770,  and  was  published  with
an  introduction  and  notes  by  Charles  I.  Buslmell
(New  York,  1804). — His  son,  Return  Jonathan,
senator,  b.  in  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  November,
1705;  d.  in  Marietta,  Ohio,  29  March.  1825,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1785.  and  then  studied  law.
In  1788  he  went  to  Ohio  with  his  father  and  settled
in  Marietta.  He  was  sent  on  a  commission  to  the
British  commander  at  Detroit  by  Gen.  Arthur  St.
(.'lair  in  17!)0,  and  subsequently  participated  fre
quently  in  the  Indian  fights  of  that  period.  During
1803-'4  he  was  chief  justice  of  the  Ohio  supreme
court,  and  he  then  had  charge  of  the  St.  Charles
district  in  Louisiana  until  1800.  with  the  brevet
rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  U.  S.  army,  bring
:  also  judge  of  the  supreme  court  in  that  district
during  1805-'0.  Mr.  Meigs  was  appointed  judge  of
the  U.  S.  district  court  of  Michigan  in  April,  1807,
and  continued  in  that  office  until  1808,  when  he.
was  elected  as  a  Democrat  to  the  U.  S.  senate  from
Ohio,  serving  from  0  Jan..  180!),  till  1  May,  IKK).
He  was  elected  governor  of  Ohio  in  1810.  and  held
that  office  until  1814.  During  the  war  with  Great
Britain  in  1812-M5  he  did  more  than  any  other
governor  to  aid  the  country  during  that  conflict
by  the  prompt  organization  of  the  militia,  by  gar
risoning  the  forts  and  securing  safety  to  the  ex
posed  settlements,  and  by  the  aid  that  he  rendered
to  the  army  under  Gen.  William  H.  Harrison.  On
the  resignation  of  Postmaster-General  Gideon
Granger  in  March,  1814,  President  Madison  invited
Col.  Meigs  to  fill  that  place  in  the  cabinet,  and  he
continued  in  office  under  Monroe  until  December,
1823,  when  he  retired  to  Marietta.  Ohio,  and  there
passed  the  remainder  of  his  life.— The  second  lie-
turn  Jonathan's  nephew,  Return  Jonathan.  law
yer,  b.  in  Clark  county,  Ky.,  14  April,  1S01.  was
educated  at  various  academies  and  after  studying
law  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Frankfort,  Ky..  in
October,  1822.  He  then  visited  his  grandfather,
who  was  stationed  at  that,  time  as  Indian  agent  in
Hiawassee  garrison,  East  Tenn.,  and  subsequently,
after  that  relative's  death,  administered  his  estate.
He  was  made  special  agent  to  the  Cherokee  and
Creek  Indians  in  1834,  and  was  appointed  in
March,  1841.  U.  S.  district  attorney  for  the  middle
district  of  Tennessee.  Later  he  served  for  one
term  as  state  senator.  In  1803,  on  the  organiza
tion  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  district  of  Colum
bia,  he  became  its  clerk,  which  office  he  still  (1888)
holds.  He  has  published  "  Reports  of  Cases  in  the
Supreme  Court  of  Tennessee  "  (Nashville,  183!)) ;
"  Digest  of  all  the  Decisions  of  the  Former  Supe
rior  Courts  of  Law  and  Equity,  and  of  the  Su
preme  Court  of  Errors  and  Appeals  in  the  State
of  Tennessee"  (1848);  and  "The  Code  of  Tennes
see,"  prepared  in  connection  with  William  F.  Coop
er,  under  enactment  of  the  legislature  of  Tennessee
(1858).  His  son  and  grandson,  who  are  residents
of  Washington,  D.  0.,  bear  the  same  name. — Re
turn  Jonathan's  brother,  Josiah,  educator,  b.  in
Middletown,  Conn..  21  Aug.,  1757;  d.  in  Wash
ington.  D.  C.,  4  Sept.,  1822.  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1778,  where,  among  his  classmates,  were  Joel
Barlow,  Uriah  Tracy,  Noah  Webster,  and  Oliver
Wolcott.  In  1781  he  was  appointed  tutor  in  math
ematics,  natural  philosophy,  and  astronomy  in
Yale,  and  at  the  same  time  studied  law,  being  ad-


MEIGS


MEIGS


289


mittcd  to  the  bar  of  New  Raven  in  April,  1783.
He  resigned  the  tutorship  in  1784,  and  in  conjunc
tion  with  Daniel  Bowen  and  Eleutheros  Dana  es
tablished  a  printing-office,  and  published  weekly
"  The  New  Haven  Gazette."  to  which  in  time  he
added  the  sub-title  of  "  Connecticut  Magazine,"
and  ultimately  became  its  sole  publisher.  To  its
columns  many  of  the  distinguished  men  of  the
time  contributed,  but  it  was  not  a  financial  suc
cess,  and  finally  ceased  in  1788.  In  1784  he  was
elected  city  clerk  of  New  Haven,  which  office  he
held  until  1789,  during  which  year  he  also  deliv
ered  a  series  of  philosophical  lectures  in  the  chapel
of  Yale  college.  He  went  to  Bermuda  in  1789  for
the  purpose  of  establishing  a  law-practice,  and  ap
peared  as  the  defender  of  American  vessels  that
were  captured  by  British  privateers.  This  course
led  him  into  difficulties,  and  he  was  tried  for  trea
son,  but  was  acquitted,  and  in  1794  returned  to
New  York.  In  that  year  he  became  professor  of
mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in  Yale,  where
he  remained  until  1801.  On  the  opening  of  the
University  of  Georgia  in  1800,  he  was  chosen  the
first  professor  and  acting  president,  continuing  in
the  latter  office  until  1810,  but  retaining  the  profes
sorship  of  mathematics,  natural  philosophy,  and
chemistry  a  year  longer.  In  1812  he  was  appoint
ed  surveyor-general,  and  in  1814  became  com
missioner  of  the  general  land-office  of  the  United
States,  which  office  he  held  until  his  death.  Mr.
Meigs  was  always  an  active  student  of  the  sciences,
and  showed  great  interest  in  their  advancement.
He  advised  that  meteorological  registers  be  estab
lished  in  each  of  the  U.  S.  land-offices,  and  that
monthly  returns  be  made.  In  1821,  having  been
president  of  the  Columbian  institute  since  1819,  he
became  professor  of  experimental  philosophy  on  the
establishment  of  Columbian  college  in  Washington,
and  delivered  there  lectures  during  the  last  year  of
his  life.  His  name  was  on  the  rolls  of  several  sci
entific  societies.  See  "  Life  of  Josiah  Meigs,"  by
his  great-grandson,  William  M.  Meigs  (Philadel
phia,  1887).— Josiah's  son,  Charles  Pelucena,  phy
sician,  b.  in  St.  George,  Bermuda,  19  Feb.,  1792 ;  d.
in  Delaware  county,  Pa.,  22  June,  1869,  was  gradu
ated  at  the  University  of  Georgia  in  1809,  and  began
the  study  of  medicine  at  first  as  an  apprentice,  and
then  at  the  medical  department  of  the  University
of  Pennsylvania,  where  he  received  his  degree  in
1817.  Meanwhile  he  had  settled  in  Augusta,  Ga.,
and  there  practised  until  1817,  when  he  returned
to  Philadelphia  and  attained  note  in  his  profession.
In  1830  he  began  to  lecture  on  midwifery  at  the
School  of  medicine,  and  continued  to  do  so  for  sev
eral  years.  He  was  invited  in  1841  to  fill  the  chair
of  obstetrics  and  the  diseases  of  women  and  chil
dren  in  Jefferson  medical  college,  and  remained
there  until  1861.  In  1818  he  received  the  honorary
degree  of  M.  D.  from  Princeton.  Dr.  Meigs  was  a
member  of  medical  societies  and  of  scientific  or
ganizations  in  Philadelphia,  to  which  he  frequently
contributed  papers.  In  1827  he  became  a  fellow
of  the  Philadelphia  college  of  physicians,  of  which
he  was  censor  in  1841-'8,  and  vice-president  in  1848-
'55.  He  was  one  of  the  original  editors  in  1826  of
the  "  North  American  Medical  and  Surgical  Jour
nal,"  and  delivered  various  public  addresses  and
lectures.  His  literary  work  was  very  great.  Be
sides  contributing  memoirs  of  Dr.  Samuel  G.  Morton
(1851)  and  of  Dr.  Daniel  Drake  (1853)  to  the  "  Trans
actions  of  the  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences,"
he  translated  Velpeau's  "  Elementary  Treatise  on
Midwifery"  (Philadelphia.  1830);  Colombat  de
L'Isere's  "  Treatise  on  the  Diseases  and  Special  Hygi
ene  of  Females  "  (1845) ;  and  "  L'Abbaye  de  Typha-
VOL.  iv. — 19


nies,"  a  novel.  He  was  the  author  of  "  The  Phila
delphia  Practice  of  Midwifery  "  (1838) ;  "  Woman,
her  Diseases  and  Remedies  "  (1847) ;  "  Obstetrics,
the  Science  and  Art  "  (1849) ;  "  Observations  on
Certain  Diseases  of  Children  "(1850) ;  "Treatise on
Acute  and  Chronic  Diseases  of  the  Neck  of  the
Uterus  "  (1854) :  and  "  On  the  Nature.  Signs,  and
Treatment  of  Child-Bed  Fevers"  (1854).  See
"  Memoir  of  Charles  D.  Meigs,"  by  John  F.  Meigs
(1872). — Charles  Delucena's  son,  Montgomery
Cunningham,  soldier,  b.  in  Augusta,  Ga.,  3  May,
1816,  studied  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
and  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1836  with  an  ap
pointment  in  the  ar
tillery,  but  in  1837
was  transfeiTed  to
the  corps  of  engi
neers.  He  was  ad
vanced  to  1st  lieu
tenant  in  1838  and
to  captain  in  1853.
Meanwhile  he  was
occupied  in  the  build
ing  of  Fort  Delaware,
in  the  improvement
of  harbors  in  Dela
ware  river  and  bay,
and  in  various  other
works  along  the  At-
lantic  coast  until
1841,  when  he  be-
came  superintending  engineer  of  the  construc
tion  of  Forts  Wayne,  Porter,  Niagara,  and  On
tario,  and  so  continued  during  1841-'9.  Pie  then
spent  the  year  1849-'50  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  in
the  engineer  bureau,  after  which  he  served  again
as  superintending  engineer  on  the  building  of  Fort
Montgomery,  where  he  was  sent  in  1852,  but  his
orders  were  changed  to  Washington,  D.  C.,  and  lie
was  given  control  of  the  survey  for  the  aqueduct
before  he  took  charge  of  this  work.  In  November.
1852,  he  returned  to  Washington,  under  orders  to
take  charge  of  designing  and  constructing  the  Po
tomac  aqueduct,  also  superintending  the  building
of  the  new  wings  and  iron  dome  of  the  capitol  ex
tension,  and  the  extension  of  the  U.  S.  general  post-
office,  and  completion  of  Fort  Madison  in  Annapo
lis,  Md.  He  was  sent  to  Florida  in  October.  1860,
to  take  charge  of  the  building  of  Fort  Jefferson,
but  in  1861  was  appointed  to  organize  an  expedi
tion  to  relieve  Fort  Pickens.  Fla.,  which  was  be
sieged  by  the  Confederate  forces.  On  14  May,
1861,  he  was  promoted  to  colonel  of  the  llth  in
fantry,  and  on  the  loth  was  made  quartermaster-
general  of  the  U.  S.  army  with  the  rank  of  briga
dier-general,  which  post  he  continued  to  hold  until
his  retirement  in  1882.  During  the  civil  war  he
was  engaged  in  directing  the  equipment  and  sup
ply  of  the  armies  in  the  field,  generally  from  head
quarters  in  Washington,  although  he  was  present
at  the  battle  of  Bull  Run  in  July,  1861,  and  during
1863-'4  was  specially  engaged  in  providing  trans
portation  and  supplies  for  the  forces  at  Chatta
nooga,  being  present  during  the  investment  and
bombardment  of  that  city,  and  the  subsequent
battle  in  November,  1863.  During  the  overland
campaign  in  1864  he  had,  by  orders  of  the  War  de
partment,  for  a  short  time  "personal  charge  of  the
base  of  supplies  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  at
Fredericksburg  and  Belle  Plain.  He  commanded
a  brigade  of  quartermasters  men  and  other  troops
during  the  threatened  invasion  of  Washington  in
July,  1864,  and  was  brevetted  major-general  on  5
July,  1864.  Subsequently  he  visited  Savannah,  Ga.,


290


MEILLEUR


MEJlA


supplying  and  refitting  the  array  under  Gen.  Will
iam  T.  Sherman,  and  shipping  captured  stores,
after  which  he  was  in  Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  during
March,  1865,  directing  the  opening  of  communica
tions  for  again  supplying  Gen.  Sherman's  armies.
After  the  war  he  continued  in  Washington,  and  in
connection  with  the  duties  of  his  office  inspected
the  workings  of  the  department  under  his  control
in  Texas  and  the  southwest  in  1869-'?0,  in  Califor
nia  and  Arizona  in  18?l-'2,  the  western  posts  and
railroad  routes  in  1872,  and  in  California  and  Co
lumbia  in  1873-'4.  He  visited  Europe  in  1867-'8
for  his  health,  and  again  in  1875-'6,  on  special  ser
vice,  to  study  the  constitution  and  government  of
European  armies,  and  then  was  made  a  member  of
the  commission  for  reform  and  reorganization  of
the  army  in  1876.  Gen.  Meigs  has  also  been  a  mem
ber  of  the  board  to  prepare  plans  and  specifications
for  the  new  war  department  building  in  1866,  the
new  building  for  the  National  museum  in  1876,  and
in  preparing  a  plan  for  a  hall  of  records  in  1878.
Since  his  retirement  he  has  been  architect  of  the
building  for  the  pension  bureau  in  Washington,
which  was  completed  during  1887.  He  is  a  regent
of  the  Smithsonian  institution,  and  a  member  of
various  scientific  societies,  including  the  National
academy  of  sciences,  to  which  he  was  chosen  in
1865.  He  has  published  annual  reports  of  the
quartermasters'  department  in  1861-'82,  and  other
government  reports. — Another  son  of  Charles  Delu-
cena,  John  Forsyth,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  3  Oct.,  1818  ;*d.  there,  16  Dec.,  1882,  was  edu
cated  at  private  schools,  and  graduated  at  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl
vania  in  1838.  In  1841  he  travelled  and  studied  in
Europe,  after  which  he  engaged  in  the  practice  of
his  profession  in  Philadelphia,  devoting  his  atten
tion  especially  to  diseases  of  women  and  children.
In  1843  he  lectured  on  obstetrics  at  the  Philadel
phia  association  for  medical  instruction,  and  con
tinued  his  courses  until  1854.  He  was  one  of  the
attending  physicians  of  the  hospital  from  1859  till
1881.  He  was  a  member  of  the  College  of  physi
cians,  and  an  active  member  of  the  Union  league
of  Philadelphia,  which  was  formed  in  his  office.
He  was  a  frequent  contributor  to  medical  periodi
cals,  and  was  the  author  of  "  Medical  Diseases  of
Children  "  (Philadelphia,  1848) ;  "  History  of  the
1st  Quarter  of  the  2d  Century  of  the  Pennsylvania
Hospital "  (1876) ;  and  "Memoir  of  Charles  D.  Meigs,
M.  D."  (1876). — Montgomery  Cunningham's  son,
John  Rodgers,  soldier,  b.  in  Washington,  D.  C..  9
Feb.,  1842 :  d.  near  Harrisonburg,  Va.,  3  Oct.,  1864,
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1863,  standing  first  in  his  class,  and  entered  the
army  as  1st  lieutenant  in  the  corps  of  engineers.
He  served  as  engineer  on  the  staffs  of  various  com
manders  during  the  campaigns  in  Maryland  and  at
Harper's  Ferry,  and  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Philip
H.  Sheridan  during  the  Shenandoah  valley  cam
paign  in  1864.  For  the  battles  of  Opequan  and
Fisher's  Hill  he  received  the  brevets  of  captain  and
major.  He  attained  the  office  of  chief  engineer  of
the  Army  of  the  Shenandoah,  and  while  making  a
military  reconnoisance  was  shot  by  guerillas.

MEILLEUR,  Jean  Baptiste,  Canadian  author,
b.  in  St.  Laurent,  island  of  Montreal,  9  May,  1795;
d.  in  Montreal,  6  Dec.,  1878.  He  was  educated  at
the  College  of  the  Sulpitians,  Montreal,  and  studied
law,  but  abandoned  it  for  medicine,  and  was  gradu
ated  at  Castleton  medical  college,  Vermont,  in  1825.
On  his  return  to  Canada  he  became  one  of  the
principal  assistants  to  the  "  Tessier  Journal,"  and
was  elected  a  member  of  parliament  in  November,
1834.  In  May,  1842,  he  was  appointed  superintend


ent  of  public  instruction  by  Sir  Charles  Bagot,
and  during  the  fifteen  years  that  he  held  this
office  he  aided  in  founding  forty-five  superior
educational  establishments,  with  funds  from  the
department.  He  was  afterward  postmaster  of
Montreal  till  1862.  He  was  the  principal  founder
of  the  College  of  L'Assomption,  was  a  provincial
registrar,  and  a  few  days  before  his  death  received
from  France  the  decoration  of  "  Les  palmes  aca-
demiques."  In  addition  to  lectures  and  editorial
work  he  wrote :  "  Treatise  on  Chemistry,"  in
French  (Montreal,  1832);  "English  Grammar,"
written  in  French  (1833) ;  "Treatise  on  the  Rules
of  Epistolary  Art,"  in  French  (3d  ed.,  1852)  and
"  Memorial  de  1'education  "  (1860).

MEIRELLES,  Joaquim  (Jandido  Soares
de  (mi-ray'-les),  Brazilian  physician,  b.  in  Santa
Luzia  do  Sabara,  Nov.  5,  1777 ;  d.  in  Rio  de
Janeiro,  13  July,  1868.  He  made  his  preparatory
studies  in  the  Seminary  of  Sao  Jose  in  Rio  de
Janeiro,  and  in  1819  entered  the  medical  and  sur
gical  college.  In  1822  he  graduated  and  entered
the  army  as  assistant  surgeon,  and  was  ordered  to
the  cavalry  regiment  of  Minas-Geraes.  lie  ren
dered  important  services  to  his  native  province,
organizing  the  military  hospital  at  Ouro  Freto,  and
treating  the  sick  during  the  terrible  epidemic  which
then  raged  in  the  province.  In  1825  he  went  to
Europe  as  a  state  pensioner,  for  the  purpose  of
perfecting  in  France  his  medical  studies.  Return
ing  to  Brazil,  he  solicited  arid  obtained  in  1828  the
charge  of  a  ward  in  the  hospital  of  the  Santa  Casa
da  Misericordia,  where  he  gratuitously  gave  the
benefit  of  his  talents  to  those  who  needed  them.
On  24  April,  1830,  he  organized  the  Imperial  acad
emy  of  medicine,  and  is  considered  the  founder
of  this  establishment,  of  which  he  was  for  several
years  president.  In  1840  he  supported  the  propo
sition  to  declare  the  emperor  of  age,  but  in  1842,
in  consequence  of  political  commotions,  was  ban
ished  to  Europe.  On  his  return  he  did  not  find  a
tribunal  disposed  to  try  him,  and  he  was  restored
to  his  offices  and  honors.  Dr.  Meirelles  had  been
honored  with  the  title  of  councillor,  and  enjoyed
the  confidence  of  the  emperor,  being  physician  of
the  imperial  household.  In  1865,  notwithstanding
his  advanced  age,  on  the  invasion  of  Rio  Grande
do  Sul  by  the  Paraguayans,  he  followed  the  em
peror  to  Porto  Alegre  and  the  seat  of  war,  par
ticipating  in  the  capitulation  of  Uruguayana.  He
was  an  honorary  member  of  many  literary  and  sci
entific  societies  in  Brazil  and  abroad.

MEJIA,  Tomas  (may-hee'-a),  Mexican  soldier,  b.
in  Sierra  Gorda,  Guanajuato,  about  1815;  d.  in
Queretaro,  19  June,  1867.  Little  is  known  of  his
earlier  years,  only  that  he  was  of  pure  Indian  race,
and  born  in  humble  circumstances.  He  was  bred
under  the  influence  of  the  parish  priests,  and  from
early  life  was  conspicuous  in  defence  of  the  Con
servative  church  party,  at  the  head  of  the  natives,
over  whom  he  exercised  a  powerful  influence,  as  he
claimed  lineal  descent  from  the  Aztec  emperors  of
Mexico.  Scarcely  had  the  government  of  Santa-
Anna  ceased  in  1855,  in  consequence  of  the  revolu
tion  that  resulted  from  the  plan  of  Ayutla,  when
Mejia  rose  in  arms  against  the  Liberal  authorities
in  his  native  mountains,  and  soon  became  so  for
midable  that  Ignacio  Comonfort  sent  Gen.  Ghilardi
at  the  head  of  a  strong  army  against  Mejia,  but
obtained  little  success  in  the  difficult  mountain
fastnesses.  When  Mejia  descended  to  the  plains
to  attack  the  city  of  Queretaro,  he  was  defeated  in
June,  1856,  and  his  forces  were  dispersed,  but  they
soon  rallied  again  in  the  mountains,  and  early  in
1857  he  captured  San  Luis  Potosi,  but  he  was  de-


MELCHER


MELGAREJO


291


feated  on  6  Feb.  in  Tunas  Blancas.  By  June  of
the  same  year  he  was  so  strong  again  that  the  gov
ernment  entered  into  negotiations  with  him,  offer
ing  favorable  conditions,  but  Mejia  refused  to  treat.
After  the  fall  of  Comonfort  in  January,  1858,  Me
jia  joined  the  Conservative  government  of  Zuloaga
and  afterward  that  of  Miramon  (q.  v.),  and,  being
appointed  commander  of  a  brigade  in  April,  1859,
was  one  of  the  chief  supporters  of  the  reactionary
government.  On  13  Nov.,  1859,  he  command
ed  one  of  the  wings  of  Miramon's  army  in  the
defeat  of  the  constitutional  forces  under  Santos
Degollado  near  Queretaro,  and  in  May,  1860,  ac
companied  Miramon  in  his  campaign  in  the  south
of  Jalisco.  After  the  final  defeat  of  the  Church
party  at  Calpulalpam  and  the  flight  of  Mira
mon,  Mejia  returned  to  the  mountains,  and  con
tinued  his  resistance  against  the  government  of
Juarez.  Gen.  Mariano  Escobedo,  who  was  sent
against  him,  was  defeated  in  the  mountains  near
Queretaro,  and  in  February,  1861,  was  captured,
with  nearly  his  whole  force,  after  a  desperate  re
sistance,  in  the  town  of  Rio  Verde,  by  Mejia  and
Leonardo  Marquez.  The  latter  wished  to  shoot
Escobedo,  but  Mejia  saved  his  Iffe.  In  March  of
the  same  year  he  captured  Arroyozarco,  and  in
June  was  included  in  the  decree  of  congress  that
offered  a  price  for  the  heads  of  the  principal  reac
tionary  chieftains.  Although  he  had  often  but  a
handful  of  followers,  their  enthusiastic  adherence
made  up  for  their  small  number,  and  he  soon  be
came  one  of  the  most  dreaded  opponents  of  the
Liberal  government.  After  the  French  had  occu
pied  the  capital,  and  the  Church  party  proclaimed
the  empire,  Mejia  joined  their  cause  with  enthu
siasm,  and  on  27  Sept.,  1863,  defeated,  near  San
Luis  Potosi,  the  Juarist  general.  Xegrete,  and,  to
gether  with  French  troops  under  Col.  Aymard,
routed  Escobedo  in  Matehuala  in  May,  186"4.  He
was  then  appointed  chief  of  operations  on  the  north
ern  frontier,  occupied  Matamoras,  26  Sept.,  1864,
and  in  1865  defeated  an  attack  of  Escobedo  on  the
city,  for  which  Maximilian  bestowed  on  him  the
grand  cross  of  the  newly  created  order  of  the
Mexican  eagle.  When  the  French  troops  began  to
evacuate  Mexico.  Mejia  marched  to  the  capital,
where  he  was  appointed  commander  of  the  third
military  division  of  the  empire,  with  headquarters
at  San  Luis  Potosi.  There  he  sustained  several
encounters  with  the  Liberal  forces,  and  was  even
said  to  contemplate  an  advance  on  Monterey,  but
on  the  advance  of  Escobedo's  army  he  evacuated
the  city  on  24  Dec.,  1866,  and  retired  to  Queretaro.
Mejia  assisted  Maximilian  with  never-wavering
loyalty  in  the  defence  of  the  city,  and  led  several
brilliant  charges  against  the  .besiegers,  but  when
Queretaro  fell  he  was  taken  prisoner  with  the  em
peror,  and  with  him  and  Miramon  was  shot  on  the
Cerro  de  Campanas.  Though  a  fanatic,  he  was
thoroughly  honorable,  and  never  sullied  his  fame
by  unnecessary  cruelty.

'  MELCHER,  Joseph,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Vienna.
Austria,  in  1807 ;  d.  at  Green  Bay,  Wisconsin,  20
Dec..  1873.  He  received  his  preparatory  education
in  Vienna,  and  then  entered  the  ecclesiastical  col
lege  of  Modena,  where  he  studied  philosophy  and
theology,  and  obtained  the  degree  of  D.  D.  a't  the
end  of  his  course.  He  was  ordained  priest  in  1830,
and  immediately  afterward  was  appointed  chaplain
to  the  Austrian  court.  Meeting  Bishop  Rosati,  of
St.  Louis,  who  was  visiting  the  Austrian  capital  in
search  of  priests  for  his  mission,  he  determined  to
give  effect  to  a  long-felt  desire  of  laboring  in  the
United  States.  On  his  arrival  in  1843,  he  started
immediately  for  Arkansas,  and  was  appointed  to  a


!  pastorate  in  Little  Rock. In  1844  he  went  to  St.

•  Louis,  where  he  was  vicar-general  for  several  years,
i  and  was  assigned  to  St.  Mary's  church,  where  he

spent  the  rest  of  his  missionary  life. The  diocese

of  Green  Bay,  comprising  the  part  of  the  state  of

1  Wisconsin  which is situated north of  Fox  and

Manitowoc  rivers  and  east  of  Wisconsin  river,  was

created  in  1868,  and  Dr.  Melcher  was  consecrated

its  first bishop  on 12  July  of  that  year. He  at

i  once  set  about  the  task  of  organizing  his  see,  and

I  his  successful administration  was shown in the

|  fact that at his death it contained sixty-five

churches  and  chapels,  and  a  Catholic  population  of

j. 60,000  ministered  to  by  fifty-six  priests.

MELCrAR,  Mariano  (mel-gar ').  Peruvian  poet,
b.  in  Arequipa  in  1791  ;  d.  in  Cuzco,  12  March,
1815. From his  childhood he  gave  proofs  of
great  talent,  and  at  eight  years  of  age*  he  had
mastered  Latin,  and  became  teacher  of  his  own
|  schoolmates. His  parents  destined him for  the
j  church,  but,  deciding to study law,  he  went to
I  Lima,  was  graduated,  and  began  to  practise. Xot-
.  withstanding  his  good  prospects  in  that  city,  he
I  returned  to  Arequipa.  having  conceived  an  attach-
I  ment  for  a  young  lady  there,  but,  on  being  disap
pointed  in  love,  he  sought  consolation  in  poetry,
!  which  he  had  cultivated  since  his  childhood. He
related  his  misfortunes  in  his  celebrated  "  Quejas,"
and  translated  Ovid's  "  Art  of  Forgetting." While
Melgar  was  in  the  country  near  Chuquibamba  in
1814,  the  revolution  of  Ciizco  began,  and  he  imme
diately  joined  the  patriot  forces. He  left  Arequipa
with  the  army,  entered  Cuzco  with  Gen.  Puma-
|  cahua,  and.  after  gathering all  the  revolutionary
forces,  they  met  Gen.  Juan  Ramirez  near  Umachiri,

•  11  March,  1815,  and  were  totally  defeated. Melgar
fought  as  chief  of  artillery,  was  taken  prisoner,

i  and  shot  the  next  day. Before  his  death  his  con-

:  fessor  offered  him  pardon  if  he  would  denounce

|  his  accomplices,  but  he  refused  indignantly,  and,

after  smoking  a  cigarette,  gave  the  order  to  fire.

His  poems  were  numerous,  but  the  greater  part  have

been  lost,  as  they  were  preserved  only  by  tradition,

j  till  they  were  published  successively  in  the  "  Re-

i  publicano "  of  Arequipa  from 1840  to  1845. In

1878  a  collection  of  his  compositions  was  printed

!  in  Arequipa. The  ladies  of  that  town  still  sing

!  his  plaintive  "  Despedidas."

MELGAREJO,  Mariano  (mel-gah-ray'-ho),  Boli-
1  vian  soldier,  b.  in  Cochabamba,  18  April.  1818;  d.
I  in  Lima,  Peru.  23  Nov.,  1871. With  only  a  limited
;  education  he  entered  the  military  service  in  early
1  life,  and  by  his  courage  in  the  different  revolution-
!  ary  movements  soon  rose  in  rank. He  was  the
chief  adviser  of  Gen.  Acha  in  the  victory  that  the
latter  won  on  16  Sept..  1862,  over  the  revolutionary
chief  Perez,  for  which service  he  was  promoted
general. But  in  1864  he  headed  a  revolutionary
movement  against  President  Acha,  was  proclaimed
president  on  28  Dec.  of  that  year,  and  totally  defeat
ed  Acha in  February,  1865,  near  Potosi.  obliging
him  to  abandon  the  'country. The  ex-president,
Gen.  Belzu,  took  advantage  of  Melgarejo's  absence
to  return  to  the  country,  and  by  a  bold  movement
took possession of the capital  and government
;  palace  ;  but  Melgarejo  returned  with  only  a  hand
ful  of  followers  and  entered  the  palace,  and,  the
guard  not  daring  to  resist him,  he  killed  Belzu
i  with  his  own  hands,  27  March,  1865,  and  declared
:  himself  dictator. On  24  Jan.,  1866,  he  defeated
:  another  revolutionary  movement  on  the  plain  of
|  Viacha,  and  on  10  Feb.  of  the  same  year  entered
!  the  defensive alliance  that Peru and Chili  had
1  formed  against  Spain. But  his  tyranny  soon  be-
i  came  unbearable,  and  there  were  insurrections  on


292


MELINE


MELLEN


all  sides.  In  November,  1870,  he  marched  with
his  forces  to  quell  a  formidable  rising  in  Potosi,
and  during  his  absence  the  capital  rose  against
him,  proclaimed  Morales  president,  and  declared
Melgarejo  deposed.  After  subduing  Potosi  he
marched  against  La  Paz,  and  as  he  had  with  him
the  flower  of  the  army,  and  the  capital  was  nearly
destitute  of  military  forces,  the  provisional  govern
ment  called  to  their  aid  the  Indians,  who  sur
rounded  and  harassed  Melgarejo.  and,  assisted  by
a  few  troops  from  La  Paz,  totally  defeated  him  j
near  that  city  on  15  Jan.,  1871.  He  barely  escaped  I
with  his  life,  and  took  refuge  in  Peru.  He  resided  ]
for  some  time  in  Chili  and  Peru,  in  both  of  which
republics  he  was  given  the  rank  of  general  for  his
assistance  during  the  war  with  Spain,  and  he  finally
settled  in  the  city  of  Lima,  where  he  was  killed  by
the  brother  of  his  mistress.

MELINE,  James  Florant,  author,  b.  in  Sack-
ett's  Harbor,  N.  V..  in  1811  ;  d.  in  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.,
14  Aug.,  1873.  His  father  was  a  French  officer  in
the  U.  S.  army.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Mount
St.  Mary's  college,  Emmettsburg,  Md. ;  and  after
teaching  for  some  time  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  afterward
studied  for  three  years  in  Europe,  and  held  different
U.  S.  consulships'  there.  On  his  return  he  was  for
several  years  a  banker  in  Cincinnati,  was  connected
with  the  "  Catholic  Telegraph  "  in  that  city,  and
was  French  consul  there  a  short  time  before  the  {
civil  war.  He  served  during  the  war,  chiefly  on
the  staff  of  Gen.  John  Pope,  first  as  major  and
judge-advocate  and  afterward  as  colonel.  After  '
the  war  he  was  chief  of  the  bureau  of  civil  affairs
in  the  3d  military  district.  Subsequently  he  was
employed  by  the  government  in  connection  with
the  Freedmen's  bureau  in  Georgia,  and  during
that  time  was  a  correspondent  of  the  New  York
••  Tribune."  His  later  years  he  devoted  to  litera
ture.  He  was  a  regular  contributor  to  the  "  Catho
lic  World,"  in  which  his  vindication  of  Mary,  Queen
of  Scots,  in  answer  to  James  Anthony  Froude.  first
appeared.  He  also  wrote  for  the  '•  Galaxy,"  and
at  the  time  of  his  death  was  completing  a  series
of  articles  on  Savonarola,  three  of  which  have
been  published.  His  principal  works  are  "  Two
Thousand  Miles  on  Horseback"  (New  York,  1867);
"  Commercial  Travelling  "  (Cambridge,  1869) ;  "  Ma
ry,  Queen  of  Scots,  and  her  latest  English  His
torian  "  (New  York,  1871) ;  and  a  "  Life  of  Sixtus
the  Fifth ''(1871).

MELISH,  John,  traveller,  b.  in  Scotland  in
1771 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  30  Sept.,  1822.  He
came  to  the  United  States  and  travelled  exten
sively,  publishing  accounts  of  his  journeys,  with
comments  on  his  experiences.  His  works  include
"Travels  in  the  United  States,  Great  Britain,  and
Canada,  in  1806-'ll "  (Philadelphia,  1812);  "De
scription  of  Roads"  (1814);  "A  Traveller's  Direc
tory  "  (1815) ;  "  Description  of  the  United  States  "
(1816) ;  "  Necessity  of  Protecting  Manufactures "
(1818) ;  "  Maps  of  Pennsylvania  and  of  the  United
States";  ••  Information  to  Emigrants "  (1819) ;  and
"Statistical  View  of  the  United  States"  (1822).

MELL,  Patrick  Hues,  educator,  b.  in  Wal-
thourville,  Ga.,  19  July,  1814;  d.  in  Athens,  Ga.,  26
Jan.,  1888.  His  parents  died  when  he  was  a  boy,
leaving  him  without  means  for  his  support,  but  with
an  elementary  education.  He  spent  two  years  at
Amherst,  in  1833-'5,  but  left  before  graduation,
and  taught  for  several  years  in  Massachusetts,  Con
necticut,  and  Georgia. '  In  1842  he  was  elected  to
the  professorship  of  ancient  languages  in  Mercer
university.  After  thirteen  years  of  service  he  was
called  to  the  same  professorship  in  the  state  uni


versity  at  Athens.  In  1860  he  was  transferred  to
the  chair  of  metaphysics  and  ethics,  which  he  held
until  his  death.  In  1878  he  was  elected  chancellor
of  the  university  and  ex-officio  president  of  the
State  college  of  agriculture  and  mechanic  arts.
Dr.  Mell  was  a  clergyman  of  the  Baptist  denomi
nation,  to  whose  ministiy  he  was  ordained  in  1842.
In  connection  with  his  educational  work  he  had
pastoral  charge  of  various  churches.  He  was  presi
dent  of  the  Southern  Baptist  convention,  to  which
post  he  was  regularly  elected  during  a  long  term
of  years.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  in  the
Confederate  service,  and  was  elected  colonel  of  a
regiment.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
the  University  of  Georgia  in  1858,  and  that  of
LL.  D.  from  Howard  college,  Ala,,  in  1869.  Dr.
Mell  is  the  author  of  "  Baptism  "  (Charleston.  S.  C.,
1852);  "Corrective  Church  Discipline"  (1860);  a
treatise  on  "  Parliamentary  Practice  "  (Atlanta.  Ga.,
1868);  "The  Philosophy 'of  Prayer"  (New  York,
1875):  and  "Church  Polity"  (Atlanta,  1878).

MELLEN,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hopkinton,
Mass.,  in  1722;  d.  in  Reading,  Mass.,  in  1H07.  Ik-
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1741,  and  became  a
Unitarian  clergyman,  being  settled  as  first  minis
ter  of  Sterling.  Mass.,  where  he  preached  from
1 744  till  1 778.  He  was  pastor  of  Hanover.  Mass.,
in  1784-1805,  and  afterward  removed  to  Reading,
Mass.  lie  published  eight  occasional  sermons
(1753-'95),  and  "Fifteen  Discourses  on  Doctrinal
Subjects"  (1765). — His  son,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in
Sterling,  Mass.,  in  1752;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
in  1828,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1770.  and
was  tutor  there  in  1780-'3.  He  was  minister  of
Barnstable,  Mass.,  and  after  retiring  from  the  pas
torate  removed  to  Cambridge.  He  published  eight
separate  sermons  and  discourses,  1791-'!),  and  two
"  Dudleian  Lectures"  (1795-'9).  —  Another  son,
Henry,  b.  in  Sterling,  Mass.,  in  1757;  d.  in  1809,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1804,  studied  law,  and
practised  at  Dover,  N.  II.  He  had  some  ability  as
a  writer  of  verse,  and  a  volume  of  his  poems  was
published. — Another  son,  Prentiss,  jurist,  b.  in
Sterling,  Mass.,  11  Oct.,  1764;  d.  in  Portland,  Me.,
31  Dec.,  1840,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1784,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1786.  He  began  practice  at  Bridgewater,  Mass.,
removed  in  1792  to  Biddcford,  and  in  1806  to  Port
land,  Mass,  (afterward  Maine),  and  was  a  member
of  the  executive  council  of  Massachusetts  in  1806-'9
and  1817.  He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  from
Massachusetts  in  place  of  Eli  P.  Ashmun,  who  had
resigned,  and  served  from  16  Nov.,  1818,  till  15
;  May,  1820,  when  he  resigned  in  conseqiience  of  the
separation  of  Maine  from  Massachusetts.  He  was
elected  the  first  chief  justice  of  the  new  state,  and
served  from  1820  till  1834,  when  he  was  disqualified
bv  age.  He  afterward  practised  law  at  Portland,
Me.  Judge  Mellen  was  a  trustee  of  Bowdoin  from
1817  till  1836.  His  judicial  decisions  are  published
in  the  first  eleven  volumes  of  the  "  Maine  Reports."
— Prentiss's  son,  Grenville,  poet,  b.  in  Biddcford,
Me.,  19  June,  1799;  d.  in  New  York,  5  Sept.,  1841,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1818.  studied  law  at
Portland,  and  removed  in  1823  to  North  Yarmouth,
where  he  practised  till  1828.  He  subsequently
spent  five  or  six  years  in  Boston,  and  then  removed
to  New  York,  where  he  resided,  with  occasional
intervals  of  absence,  during  the  remainder  of  his
life.  In  New  York  in  1839  he  began  the  publica
tion  of  a  monthly  magazine,  which  was  discontinued
after  a  few  numbers.  In  the  summer  of  1840  he
made  a  voyage  to  Cuba  for  the  benefit  of  his  health,
but  rapidly  declined  after  his  return  and  died  of
consumption.  He  was  much  esteemed  as  a  poet


MELLO


MELVILLE


293


during  his  lifetime,  and  published  "  The  Rest  of
the  Nations"  (Portland,  1826);  ''Our  Chronicle  of
'26 :  a  Satirical  Poem  "  (Boston,  182?) ;  "  The  Mar
tyr's  Triumph  "  and  "  Buried  Valley  "  (1888) ;  "  The
Passions"  (1836):  and  a  "Poem  »t  Amherst  Col
lege,"  delivered  27  Aug.,  1839  (Amherst,  1889).

MELLO,  Antonio  Joaqnini  de  (mel'-lo),  Brazil
ian  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Itu,  29  Sept.,  1791 ;  d.  there,
16  Feb.,  1861.  He  entered  the  army  in  early  life,
but  in  1810  resigned  and  studied  theology,  being
ordained  priest  in  1814,  and  acquired  soon  after
ward  a  reputation  as  a  popular  preacher.  In  1820
he  sided  with  the  Liberal  party,  and  in  1822  he
assisted  in  gaining  the  independence  of  Brazil,
being  an  intimate  friend  of  Father  Feijo,  whom  he
assisted  in  the  government  from  1832  till  1836.
From  1840  till  1851  he  devoted  himself  to  develop
ing  in  the  country  an  interest  in  the  improvement
of  primary  instruction.  In  1852  he  was  appointed
by  Pedro  II.  bishop  of  Sao  Paulo,  and,  although
he  declined,  on  account  of  his  advanced  age,  the
emperor  insisted,  and  he  accepted.  During  his  ad
ministration  the  seminary  of  the  diocese  and  the
College  of  the  Irmas  de  Sao  Jose  were  founded.

MELLO.  Francisco  Manool,  Portuguese  au
thor,  b.  in  Lisbon,  23  Nov.,  1611 ;  d.  there,  13  Oct.,
1665.  lie  served  as  a  soldier  in  the  Netherlands,
and  became  brigadier-general  in  1635.  Returning
to  Spain  in  the  same  year  he  served  till  1640,  when
he  entered  the  service  of  the  Duke  of  Braganca.
Having  killed  one  of  his  adjutants  in  a  fit  of  pas
sion  he  was  imprisoned  till  1652,  when  he  was  lib
erated  on  condition  that  he  should  emigrate  to
Brazil.  Pie  remained  ten  years  in  the  latter  country,
over  which  he  travelled  extensively,  and  devoted
his  time  to  literary  studies.  Mello  wrote  over  one
hundred  volumes  both  in  Spanish  and  Portuguese.
His  works  include  "  Relacao  dos  successes  da
Armada  que  a  companhia  geral  do  commercio  ex-
peden  ao  Estado  do  Brazil  a  anno  de  1549  "  (Lisbon,
1650);  "  Historia  dos  movimientos  en  el  Brazil  el
anno  1650"  (1651) ;  "  Ephemerides  de  varia  historia
Portugueza,  em  cinco  relacoes  dos  successes  per-
tencentes  a  este  reino  "  (1660-'6).  Mello  was  also  a
poet,  and  composed  tragedies  and  comedies,  some
of  which  are  deposited  in  manuscript  in  the  Royal
library  of  Lisbon.

MELSHEIMER,  Frederick  Valentine,  clergy
man,  b.  in  Regenborn,  Brunswick,  Germany,  29
Sept.,  1749;  d.  in  Hanover,  Pa.,  4  July,  1814.  He
was  educated  at  Helmstaedt,  came  to  this  country
as  chaplain  of  German  troops,  landing  at  Quebec
on  1  June.  1776.  In  May,  1779,  he  accepted  a  call
as  pastor  of  five  Lutheran  congregations  in  Dauphin
county.  Pa.,  and  served  them  until  1784  as  a
licensed  preacher.  He  removed  to  Manheim.  Lan
caster  county,  in  1784,  was  ordained  to  the  ministry
by  the  Lutheran  ministerium  of  Pennsylvania  in
1785,  and  was  pastor  at  New  Holland  in  1786-'89.
In  1787  he  became  an  instructor  in  Franklin  col-  |
lege.  Lancaster,  and  he  was  pastor  at  Hanover,  i
York  county,  in  1790-1814.  He  was  the  earliest  i
local  investigating  entomologist  in  this  country,  ,
and  his  services  in  this  deparment  are  frequently
referred  to  by  Thomas  Say  and  other  scientists.
He  published  "  Wahrheit  de'r  christlichen  Religion,
mit  Beantwortung  deistischer  Einwiirfe  "  ;  '•  Ge-
spraeche  zwischen  einem  Protestanten  und  ro-
mischen  Priester  "  (Hanover.  1797) :  and  "Catalogue
of  the  Insects  of  Pennsylvania"  (1806).

MELVIL -BLONCOURT,  Sainte  Suzanne
(mel-vil-blon-koor),  West  Indian  reformer,  b.  in
Pointe-a-Pitre,  Guadeloupe,  23  Oct.,  1825.  He  is
the  son  of  wealthy  mulattoes,  and  received  his
early  education  in  Basse-Terre,  but  finished  it  in


Paris,  where  he  was  graduated  in  law  in  1846.  He
then  devoted  himself  to  the  anti-slavery  cause,
wrote  several  pamphlets  on  abolition,  organized  a
club  of  which  the  members  pledged  themselves  to
do  justice  to  the  negroes,  and  won  to  their  cause
several  statesmen,  including  Victor  Schoelcher.
In  1848  Schoelcher  was  made  under-secretary  for
the  colonies,  and,  being  reminded  of  his  promises
by  Melvil,  caused  a  decree  to  be  issued  freeing  all
the  slaves  in  the  French  dominions.  The  liberated
negroes  showed  their  gratitude  by  electing  Melvil
their  deputy  to  the  constituent  assembly  in  1848.
In  1849,  and  during  the  whole  of  Napoleon  III.'s
reign,  Melvil  devoted  his  time  to  literary  purposes,
wrote  on  the  colonies  in  most  of  the  French  maga
zines,  and  published  biographies  of  many  colored
citizens  of  South  America.  In  1871  he  was  again
elected  deputy  of  Guadeloupe,  but  was  condemned
for  participation  in  the  commune.and  took  refuge  in
Switzerland  till  1880,  when  he  was  allowed  to  return
to  his  own  country.  He  is  preparing  a  complete
edition  of  his  sketches  of  the  West  Indies.

MELVILLE,  George  Wallace,  engineer,  b.  in
New  York  city,  10  Jan.,  1841.  He  was  educated
in  his  native  city,  and  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  in
July,  1861,  as  third  assistant  engineer,  with  rank
of  midshipman,
and  has  passed
through  all  the  in
termediate  grades
to  that  of  chief
engineer,  with  the
rank  of  lieutenant-
commander,  which
heattained  in  1881.
Pie  was  engineer  of
the  "Jeannette,"
which  sailed  from
San  Francisco,  8
July.  1879,  under
the  command  of


with  the  object
of  discovering  an
opening  to  the
supposed  polar  sea  by  a  northeast  passage  near
Wrangel  land.  After  the  sinking  of  the  "  Jean
nette,"  13  June,  1881,  Engineer  Melville  accom
panied  De  Long  over  the  ice  to  Bennett  island,
and  after  the  party  divided,  Lieut.  John  W.  Dan-
enhower  being  disabled,  commanded  one  of  the
"  Jeannette's  "  boats  on  the  subsequent  perilous
passage  to  one  of  the  eastern  mouths  of  the  Lena
delta,  which  was  reached  on  17  Sept.,  1881.  Pie
now  searched  for  Lieut.  De  Long  and  his  party,
and  discovered  some  of  the  huts  where  De  Long
had  stayed,  and  obtained  from  the  natives  certain
of  his  records.  In  the  following  spring  Melville
explored  the  delta  thoroughly  for  traces  of  the
missing  party,  and  about  the  end  of  March  the
remains  of  De  Long  and  his  eleven  companions
were  found.  Melville  subsequently  returned  to  the
United  States,  and  was  appointed  chief  of  the
bureau  of  steam-engineers,  with  the  rank  of  com
modore,  8  Aug.,  1887,  and  engineer-in-chief  of  the
U.  S.  navy.  Pie  is  the  author  of  '•  In  the  Lena
Delta  "  (Boston.  1885).

MELVILLE.  Herman,  author,  b.  in  New  York
city,  1  Aug.,  1819.  Plis  grandfather,  Maj.  Thomas
Melvill  (1751-1832).  was  a  member  of  the  Boston
tea-party,  served  in  the  Revolution,  and  is  sup
posed  to"  have  been  the  last  American  that  adhered
through  life  to  the  cocked  hat.  His  maternal
grandfather  was  Peter  Gansevoort  (q.  v.).  His  fa-


MELVILLE


MEMMINGER


ther,  Allan,  was  a  merchant,  who  travelled  wide
ly  and  cultivated  literary  tastes.  Herman  shipped
as  a  sailor  before  the  mast  in  1837  for  a  voyage  to
Liverpool.  Four  years  later  he  sailed  round  Cape
Horn  in  the  "  Dolly  "  for  a  whaling  cruise  in  the
south  Pacific.  But  the  treatment  of  the  captain

was  so  harsh,  and
the  state  of  affairs
on  board  was  so
bad  in  every  re
spect,  that  Melville
and  a  companion
resolved  to  leave
the  ship.  While
she  lay  in  the  har
bor  of  Nukahiva,
in  the  Marquesas
islands,  in  the  sum
mer  of  1842,  they
made  their  escape.
The  island,  about
twenty  miles  long
by  ten  miles  broad,
is  mountainous  in


nearly 4,000 feet,

with  alternate  ridges  and  valleys  radiating  to  the
sea.  One  of  these  valleys  is  inhabited  by  the  Typees.
a  war-like  tribe  of  cannibals,  and  the  next  by  the
Happars,  a  friendly  tribe.  Com.  David  Porter
(q.  ?•.),  while  refitting  his  ships  here  in  1813-'14,  had
taken  part  with  the  Happars  in  a  war  against  the
Typees.  which  he  described  in  his  published  jour
nal.  Melville  and  his  companion,  with  great  labor
and  many  narrow  escapes,  climbed  the  mountains,
intending  to  descend  into  the  Happar  valley,  but
lost  their  way  and  finally  found  themselves  among
the  Typees.  While  still  uncertain  where  they
were,  they  were  surrounded  by  a  group  of  savage
chiefs,  one  of  whom  sternly  demanded  whether
they  were  friendly  to  Happar  or  to  Typee.  "  I
paused  for  a  second,"  writes  Melville,  "and  I  know
not  by  what  impulse  it  was  that  I  answered '  Typee.'
The  piece  of  dusky  statuary  nodded  in  approval,
and  then  murmured  '  Mortarkee  ? '  [good  ?]  '  Mor-
tarkee.'  said  I.  without  further  hesitation — '  Typee
mortarkee.'  The  dark  figures  around  us  leaped  to
their  feet,  clapped  their  hands  in  transport,  and
shouted  again  and  again  the  talismanic  syllables,
the  utterance  of  which  appeared  to  have  settled
everything."  Melville  was  held  in  captivity  for
four  months,  treated  in  most  respects  as  an  hon
ored  guest,  but  constantly  watched  to  prevent  his
escape.  His  companion  soon  got  away,  and  at
length  Melville  himself  was  rescued.  An  Austral
ian  whaler,  short  of  men,  visited  the  harbor  of
Nukahiva,  where  the  captain  learned  that  there
was  an  American  sailor  in  the  Typee  valley,  and
accepted  the  offer  of  a  native  to  obtain  him."  The
native  made  his  way  to  Melville,  and  guided  him
to  the  beach,  where  a  boat  from  the  whaler  was  in
waiting,  and  Melville  was  taken  off  after  a  bloody
fight.  He  spent  two  years  more  in  the  Pacific,
and  on  his  return  home  published  "  Typee :  a
Peep  at  Polynesian  Life  during  a  Pour  Months'
Residence  in  a  Valley  of  the  Marquesas"  (New
York  and  London,  1846).  This  work,  in  which
the  story  of  his  romantic  captivity  is  told  with  re
markable  vividness,  had  an  immediate  success  and
rapidly  passed  through  several  editions!  It  was
dedicated  to  Chief-Justice  Lemuel  Shaw,  of  Massa
chusetts,  whose  daughter  Mr.  Melville  afterward
married.  He  removed  to  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  in  1850,
but  subsequently  returned  to  New  York  and  was


appointed  to  a  place  in  the  custom-house.  His
remaining  works  are  "  Omoo,  a  Narrative  of  Ad
ventures  in  the  South  Seas"  (1847);  "  Mardi,  and
a  Voyage  Thither,"  a  philosophical  romance  (1848) ;
"  Redburn,"  a  novel  (1848) ;  "  White- Jacket,  or  the
World  in  a  Man-of-War  "  (1850) ;  "  Moby  Dick,  or
the  White  Whale"  (1851);  "Pierre,  or  the  Am
biguities  "  (1852) ;  "  Israel  Potter,  his  Fifty  Years
of  Exile"  (1855);  "The  Piazza  Tales"  (1856);
"The  Confidence  Man"  (1857);  "Battle-Pieces,
and  Aspects  of  the  War,"  a  volume  of  poems
(1866):  and  "  Clarel,  a  Pilgrimage  in  the  Holy
Land,"  a  poem  (2  vols.,  1876).

MELVILLE,  Robert,  British  soldier,  b.  in
Monimail,  Scotland,  12  Oct.,  1723;  d.  20  Aug.,
1809.  He  served  in  the  West  Indies  in  the  seven
years'  war,  aided  in  the  capture  of  several  French
islands,  including  Guadeloupe,  Martinique,  and
Dominica,  and  became  their  governor,  with  the
rank  of  brigadier-general.  He  afterward  attained
note  as  an  antiquary.

MEM BERTOr,  Henry,  Micmac  sagamore,  b.
about  1510;  d.  in 1611. He  is  said  to  have  seen
j  Jacques  Cartier  in  his  youth,  received  De  Monts
j  and his  colonists  on their  arrival in  Acadia  in
1004  in  a  most  friendly  manner,  and,  being the
most  powerful  chief  on  the  coast,  was  ever  after
ward of great assistance to them. When the
French were threatened by hostile Indians,  he
gathered  400  of  his  tribe  in  a  palisaded  village  near
the  French  post  for  their  defence. In 1607 lie
1  led  a  large  Micmac  force  against  the  Armouchi-
quois  Indians,  near  Merrimack  river,  and  defeated
them. Lescarbot  commemorated  his  victory  in  a
!  French  poem. Membertou  was  hastily  baptized,
1  with  his  wife  and  three  sons  and  sixteen  others,  24
June, 1610, and seemed to endeavor to live a
Christian  life,  though  his  excessive  zeal  led  him  to
wish  to  make  war  on  all  tribes  that  refused  to  em
brace  Christianity. In  the  autumn  of  the  follow
ing  year  he  wras  brought  in  a  dying  condition  to
Port  Royal,  and,  though  carefully  attended  by  the
missionaries,  soon  expired  at  the  reputed  age  of
more  than  a, century.

MEMBRE,  /£iiohie,  French  missionary,  b.  in
Bapaumc,  France,  in  1645:  d.  in  Texas  in  1687.
He  was  the  first  novice  in  the  Recollet  province
of  St.  Anthony,  and  was  sent  as  a  missionary  to
Canada  in  1675.  In  1679  he  accompanied  La  Salle
on  the  latter's  expedition  to  the  west,  remained  at
Fort  Crevecoeur  with  Henry  de  Tonti,  and  aided
him  in  securing  peace  between  the  Iroquois  and
Illinois.  He  descended  the  Mississippi  with  La
Salle  in  1682,  returned  to  France  the  same  year
and  wrote  a  history  of  the  expedition,  which  was
published  by  his  cousin,  Father  Christian  Le
Clerq,  in  his  work,  "  Etablissement  de  la  foi  dans
la  Nouvelle  France  "  (1691).  He  was  warden  of  a
convent  at  Bapaumc  for  a  short  time,  and  accom
panied  La  Salle  in  his  final  expedition  to  the
mouth  of  the  Mississippi  in  1684.  He  was  left  by
La  Salle  in  Fort  St.  Louis,  Tex.,  where  he  and  his
companions  were  massacred.  Membre  was  es
teemed  for  his  mildness  and  many  virtues.  His
narrative  was  plagiarized  by  Hennepin  in  1697,
and  by  some  authorities  is  said  to  have  been  writ
ten  by  La  Salle  himself.

MEMMINGER,  Charles  Gustjivus,  financier,
b.  in  Wurtemberg,  German v,  9  Jan..  1803;  d.  in
Charleston,  S.  C.,  7  March,  "1888.  His  mother,  a
widow,  emigrated  to  Charleston,  S.  C.,  when  he  was
an  infant,  and  soon  died.  At  the  age  of  nine  years
he  was  adopted  by  Gov.  Thomas  Bennett.  He  was
graduated  at  the  South  Carolina  college  in  1820,
began  to  practise  law  in  Charleston  in  1825,  and


MENA


MENDANA DE NEYRA


295


was  a  leader  of  the  Union  party  during  the  nulli
fication  excitement.  He  published  "  The  Book  of
Nullification"  (1832-'3),  satirizing  the  advocates  of
the  doctrine  in  biblical  style.  In  1836  he  was
elected  to  the  legislature,  where  he  opposed  the
suspension  of  specie  payments  by  the  banks  in
1839.  He  assisted  the  attorney-general  in  the
prosecution  of  the  principal  case,  which  resulted  in
a  decision  that  the  banks  had  forfeited  their  char
ters.  For  nearly  twenty  years  he  was  at  the  head
of  the  finance  committee  in  the  lower  house  of  the
legislature,  from  which  he  retired  in  1852.  He  was
again  returned  in  1854,  having  become  particularly
interested  in  the  reformation  of  the  public-school
system.  In  1859  he  was  a  commissioner  from
South  Carolina  to  Virginia  to  secure  co-operation
against  the  movements  of  abolitionists.  He  was
appointed  secretary  of  the  Confederate  treasury  in
February,  1801,  and  resigned  in  June,  1864.  After
the  civil  war  he  lived  in  retirement.

MENA,  Csirlos  de  (may'-nah),  Mexican  linguist,
b.  in  Valladolid,  Yucatan,  about  1560;  d.  in  the
convent  of  Mococha,  16  Jan.,  1633.  He  studied  in
the  Seminary  of  Merida  and  entered  the  order  of
San  Francisco,  becoming  afterward  guardian  of
the  convent  of  Mococha,  which  post  he  occupied  till
his  death.  Mena  contributed  greatly  to  the  knowl
edge  of  the  Indian  languages.  He  wrote  "Ser
mons  and  Dissertations "  in  the  Maya  language,
and  Cogoyudo,  in  his  "  Historia  de  Yucatan,"  says
that  Mena  was  among  the  great  Indian  linguists
of  the  province.  Ephraim  G.  Squier,  in  his
"  Monography  of  Authors "  (London,  1861),  also
gives  him  a  prominent  place.

MEXACHO,  Juan  Perez  de  (may-nah'-cho),
Peruvian  clergyman,  b.  in  Lima  in  1565 ;  d.  there,
20  Jan.,  1626.  He  studied  in  the  University  of
Lima,  was  graduated  in  Latin  and  philosophy  in
1582,  and  entered  the  Jesuit  order.  He  was  gradu
ated  as  doctor  in  theology  at  the  University  of  San
Marcos  in  1601,  and  obtained  the  chair  ot  theology,
which  he  held  during  twenty-seven  years,  gaining
a  wide  reputation.  During  the  earthquake  that
occurred  in  Lima  in  1609  he  suffered  a  fall,  the  re
sults  of  which  obliged  him  to  keep  his  bed  for  six
teen  years.  During  this  long  period,  and  not
withstanding  his  sufferings,  he  wrote  many  of  his
works.  These  are  now  in  the  library  at  Lima,  and
include  "Summa  theologiae  Sancti  Thomae "  (6
vols.) ;  "  Theologiaee  moralis  tractatus  "  (2  vols.) ;
"  Tractatus  preeepti  ecclesia?e"  ;  "  Privilejios  de  la
Compania  de  Jesus"  (2  vols.);  "Privilejios  de  los
dios  "  ;  "  El  Decalogo  "  ;  "  Consciencia  erronea  "  ;
and  "  Vida,  virtudes  y  revelaciones  de  Santa  Rosa."

MENARD,  Michel  Branamour,  pioneer,  b.  in
Lapraine,  Lower  Canada,  5  Dec.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Gal-
veston,  Tex.,  in  1856.  He  was  of  French  parent
age,  and  at  the  age  of  sixteen  was  engaged  in  the
northwest  fur-trade  in  the  employ  of  a  company
at  Detroit.  Two  years  afterward  -he  went  to  Mis
souri  at  the  request  of  his  uncle,  Bierra  Menard,
then  lieutenant-governor  and  an  extensive  Indian
trader,  and  for  several  years  bargained  for  him
among  the  Indians.  Becoming  attached  to  the  In
dian  mode  of  life,  he  determined  to  remain  among
them,  and  was  elected  chief  by  the  Shawnees.  lie
held  this  place  for  several  years,  and  not  only  dur
ing  that  period  but  afterward  had  great  influence
over  that  tribe  and  others  among  whom  he  was
known.  It  is  said  that  at  one  time  he  negotiated
with  the  U.  S.  government  for  the  removal  of  all
the  tribes  of  the  northwestern  Indians  to  Utah  and
California.  Regarding  this  abortive  scheme,  Me
nard  subsequently  said  that  he  almost  succeeded
in  uniting  all  the  Indian  tribes  into  one  great  na


tion  and  being  their  king.  He  went  to  Texas
about  1833,  settled  at  Nacogdoches,  and  engaged
in  trading  with  the  Mexicans  and  Indians.  At  the
beginning  of  the  revolution  in  Texas,  the  Mexicans
endeavored  to  induce  the  Indians  on  the  north
east  frontier  to  overrun  and  desolate  the  country,
which  they  doubtless  would  have  attempted  to  do
but  for  the  exertions  of  Menard,  who  prevailed
upon  them  to  remain  neutral.  He  was  a  member
of  the  convention  that  declared  the  independence
of  Texas,  of  the  congress  of  that  republic  in  1839,
and  was  the  author  and  promoter  of  its  system  of
finance  by  the  issue  of  exchequer  bills.  The  first
congress  of  Texas,  in  December,  1836,  conveyed  to
Menard,  for  $50,000,  a  league  of  land,  including
most  of  the  site  of  Galveston.  At  that  time  it  was
unoccupied  by  a  single  dwelling.  Menard  was
practically  the  founder  of  the  city,  and  closely
identified  with  its  progress  till  his  death.  A  few
days  before  that  event,  a  brother  of  Tecumseh,  with
several  other  Shawnees,  visited  him  at  Galveston,
and  begged  him  to  return  and  be  their  chief.  The
Indians  long  cherished  his  name,  and  in  speaking
of  him  said :  "  Michelee  never  deceived  us."

MENARD,  Rene,  French  missionary,  b.  in
Paris  in  1604;  d.  near  Lake  Superior  in  August,
1661.  He  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus  in  1624,
went  to  Montreal  in  1640,  and  was  the  confessor  of
the  Daileboust  family  in  that  city.  He  was  sent
soon  afterward  as  a  missionary  to  the  Nipissings
and  other  Algonquin  tribes,  and  labored  among
them  till  the  Iroquois  subdued  the  Hurons,  when
he  was  stationed  at  Three  Rivers.  When  a  mission
was  begun  among  the  Iroquois,  he  was  sent  among
the  Cayugas  and  Oneidas  of  central  New  York,
where  he  labored  with  success  in  1656-'60,  al
though  he  was  often  subjected  to  personal  vio
lence.  After  the  suspension  of  the  Iroquois  mis
sions  he  was  sent  to  the  Ottawas  on  Lake  Superior,
and  established  the  mission  station  of  St.  Therese
on  Keweenaw  bay.  In  the  summer  of  1661,  in  re
sponse  to  the  appeal  of  some  fugitive  Hurons  on
Black  river,  he  set  out  to  visit  them,  and  perished
in  some  unknown  manner  while  on  the  journey.
A  county  in  Illinois  is  named  for  him.

MENDAXA  DE  NEYRA,  Alvaro  (men-dan-
yah-deh-nay'-rah),  Spanish  navigator,  b.  in  Sara-
gossa  in  1541 ;  d.  in  Santa  Cruz,  Solomon  islands,
18  Oct.,  1596.  He  emigrated  in  1565  to  Peru,
where  his  uncle,  Lope  Garcia  de  Castro,  was  gov
ernor-general,  and  held  various  posts  till  1567,
when  Garcia  appointed  him  to  the  command  of
two  ships,  with  which  to  make  discoveries  and
conquests  in  the  Pacific  ocean.  Sailing  from  Cal-
lao  on  19  Nov.,  1567,  Mendana  after  a  long  voyage
discovered  a  group  which  he  named  the  Solomon
islands,  and  visited  the  principal  ones.  He  re
turned  to  Callao  in  1569,  and  published  a  marvel
lous  relation  of  his  discoveries,  praising  the  Solo
mon  group  as  a  very  rich  country,  but,  owing  to
the  wars  in  which  Spain  was  involved,  he  could
not  obtain  the  necessary  means  for  a  second  expe
dition.  He  then  married  a  wealthy  Peruvian  lady.
Isabel  Barreto,  and  in  1594  Philip  II.  commis
sioned  him  governor  of  the  island  of  San  Cristobal
in  the  group  that  he  had  discovered,  and  gave  or
ders  to  found  a  colony  there.  Mendana  left  Callao
on  11  April,  1595,  with  four  vessels  and  280  sol
diers,  accompanied  by  his  wife  and  Pedro  de  Quiro.s
as  chief  pilot.  At  Payta  more  colonists  joined  the
expedition,  and  on  16  June  he  left  Peru  for  the
Solomon  islands.  He  discovered  on  21  July  a
group,  which  he  named  Marquesas  de  Mendoza,  in
honor  of  the  viceroy  of  Peru.  Continuing  his  voy
age  toward  the  Solomon  group,  he  discovered  on


296


MEXDENHALL


MEXDES


the  way  a  large  island  which  he  named  Santa  Cruz,
and  resolved  to  establish  his  colony  there.  He  was
at  first  well  received  by  the  natives,  but  some  of
his  crew  murdered  one  of  the  native  chiefs,  and  a
bloody  war  was  begun  against  the  invaders.  Af
terward  there  was  a  mutiny  among  the  troops.
These  adversities  undermined  Mendana's  health,
and  he  soon  died,  leaving  the  government  to  his
wife,  who  under  the  direction  of  Quiros  resolved
to  abandon  the  colony,  and  after  the  loss  of  two
vessels  arrived  safely  at  the  Philippine  islands.
Hernan  Gallego,  Mendana's  pilot  in  the  first  voy
age,  described  the  discovery,  and  his  manuscript  is
now  in  the  library  of  Barcia.  Mendana  himself
left  notes  about  both  voyages,  and  they  were  col
lected  by  the  historian  Pedro  Guerico  de  Victoria
under  the  title  "  Derrotero  de  Mendana  de  Xeyra,"
the  manuscript  of  which  is  still  preserved  in  the
National  library  of  Paris.

MEN  DEN  HALL,  George,  physician,  b.  in
Sharon,  Pa.,  5  May,  1814 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati.  Ohio,  4
June,  1874.  He  studied  medicine  in  Salem,  Ohio,
and  was  graduated  at  the  medical  department  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1835.  He  set
tled  in  Cincinnati  in  1843,  and  there  acquired  a
large  practice,  making  a  specialty  of  obstetrics,  in
which  he  held  a  high  rank.  He  was  professor  of
that  branch  in  the  Miami  medical  college,  where  he
was  also  dean.  On  the  organization  of  the  U.  S.
sanitary  commission,  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war.  he  was  one  of  the  associates  and  president
of  the  Cincinnati  branch  of  the  commission.  In
this  capacity,  with  his  wife's  aid,  he  rendered  valu
able  services  to  the  work  of  that  body.  After  the
close  of  the  war  they  continued  their  philanthropic
work  in  other  directions,  and  were  distinguished
for  their  charitable  labors.  Dr.  Mendenhall  was  a
fellow  of  the  Royal  obstetric  society  in  England,
and  in  1870  was  president  of  the  American  medical
association.  In  1854,  with  other  physicians,  he  es
tablished  the  "Cincinnati  Observer,"  and  also  con
tributed  to  other  medical  journals.  He  was  the
author  of  "The  Medical  Student's  Vade-Mecum "
(Philadelphia,  1852).

MENDENHALL,  Thomas  Corwin,  physicist,
b.  near  Hanoverton,  Ohio,  4  Oct.,  1841.  He  re
ceived  a  common-school  education,  but,  having  a
fondness  for  the  study  of  mathematics  and  natural
science  from  his  childhood,  acquired  by  himself  a
knowledge  of  those  branches  of  physics,  in  which
he  has  since  attained  note.  He  was"  first  professor
of  physics  and  mechanics  in  Ohio  university  in
1873-'8,  and  then  went  to  Japan  as  professor  of
physics  in  the  Imperial  university  in  Tokio.  In
connection  with  this  appointment  he  organized  the
special  course  of  physics  and  also  the  physical
laboratory  of  the  science  department  of  the  uni
versity.  He  founded  a  meteorological  observatory
in  which  systematic  observations  were  made  dur
ing  his  residence  in  Japan,  and  afterward  until  it
was  merged  into  the  general  meteorological  system
that  has  since  been  established  by  the  imperial
government.  From  measurements  of  the  force  of
gravity  at  the  sea-level  and  at  the  summit  of  the
extinct  volcano  Fujiyama.  Prof.  Mendenhall  de
duced  a  value  for  the  mass  of  the  earth  that  agrees
closely  with  that  which  Francis  Baily  obtained  in
England  by  another  method.  He  also  made  a  se
ries  of  elaborate  measurements  of  the  wave-lengths
of  the  principal  Frauenhofer  lines  of  the  solar
spectrum  by  means  of  a  large  spectrometer,  which
at  the  time  of  its  construction  was  one  of  the  most
perfect  in  existence.  He  became  interested  in
earthquake  phenomena  while  in  Japan,  and  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Seismological  society  of


Tokio.  In  1881  he  returned  to  the  United  States
and  resumed  his  chair  at  Ohio  state  university.
He  organized  the  Ohio  state  weather  service  in
1882,  was  its  director  until  1884,  and  was  the  first
to  devise  and  put  into  operation  a  system  of
weather-signals  for  display  on  railroad-trains.  This
method  became  general "  throughout  the  United
States  and  Canada,  and  continued  to  be  employed
until  the  introduction  in  1887  of  a  new  code  by
the  chief  signal  officer.  In  1884  he  became  pro
fessor  in  the  U.  S.  signal  service,  and  was  charged
with  the  organization  and  equipment  of  a  physical
laboratory  in  connection  with  the  bureau  in  Wash
ington,  with  the  introduction  of  systematic  obser
vations  of  atmospheric  electricity,  and  with  the
investigation  of  methods  for  determining  ground-
temperatures.  He  was  the  first  to  establish  sta
tions  in  the  United  States  for  the  systematic  ob
servation  of  earthquake  phenomena.  Immediately
after  the  Charleston  earthquake,  on  31  Aug.,  1886,
he  visited  that  city  and  made  a  report  upon  the
agitation,  with  a  co-seismic  chart  of  the  disturbed
area.  In  1886  he  resigned  from  the  government
service  to  accept  the  presidency  of  Rose  polytech
nic  institute.  Terre  Haute,  ihd.  Prof.  Menden
hall  has  lectured  extensively  throughout  the  United
States  on  subjects  that  relate  to  physics,  and  in
Japan  he  was  one  of  the  American  professors  that
in  addition  to  their  university  duties  gave  public
lectures  on  scientific  subjects  to  general  audiences
in  the  temples  and  theatres  of  the  city  of  Tokio,
resulting  in  the  establishment  of  the  first  public
lecture  hall  in  the  empire.  He  received  the  degree
of  Ph.  I),  from  Ohio  university  in  1878,  and  that  of
LL.  D.  from  the  University  of  Michigan  in  1887.
Besides  membership  in  other  scientific  societies,
Prof.  Mendenhall  in  1882  was  vice-president  for
the  physical  section  of  the  American  association
for  the  advancement  of  science,  and  in  1887  was
elected  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  In
addition  to  papers,  scientific  monographs,  and  spe
cial  reports,  he  has  published  "  A  Century  of  Elec
tricity"  (Boston,  1887).

MENDES,  Pedro  (men'-des),  Portuguese  clergy
man,  b.  in  VillaviQosa  in  1558 ;  d.  in  Mexico  in
1643.  In  1575  he  entered  the  company  of  Jesus.
From  Toledo,  where  he  was  professor  of  Latin,  he
went  to  Mexico,  and  in  the  province  of  Sinaloa
worked  in  the  missions  during  twenty-four  years,
after  which  he  was  sent  into  retirement  in  Mexico.
At  the  age  of  seventy  years  he  was  sent  again  to
Sinaloa  to  convert  several  tribes.  In  1633  he  un
dertook  the  conversion  of  the  Sisibotario  and  Te-
hueco  Indians,  with  whom  lie  lived  four  years,  and
in  1638  he  returned  to  Mexico.  He  wrote  "  Varias
cartas  historicas  sobre  las  misioncs  de  los  Mayas,
Sisibotares,  y  Batucas  6  Tehueeos."

MENDES,  Manoel  Odorico  (men'-des),  Brazil
ian  politician,  b.  in  Maranhao  in  1709 ;  d.  in  Paris,
France,  in  1864.  He  was  graduated  at  Coimbra  in
1824,  and  returning  to  Maranhao  began  to  publish
the  "  Argos  da  Lei."  In  1826  he  was  elected  to
congress  by  his  province,  and  sided  with  the  most
advanced  political  party,  also  publishing  the  "  As-
trea,"  a  daily  paper.  In  1829  he  issued  in  S.  Paulo
the  "Pharol  Paulistano."  In  1831  he  was  present
at  the  abdication  of  Pedro  I.,  and.  though  asked  to
be  a  member  of  the  regency,  he  absolutely  de
clined,  and  retired  to  private'life.  In  1839  he  ap
peared  again  as  a  journalist,  publishing  the  "  Liga
Americana,"  which  paper  was  under  his  direction
till  1844,  when  he  was  again  elected  to  congress.
In  1847  he  went  to  Europe  on  a  commission  from
his  government.  Mendes  is  highly  esteemed  as  a
poet.  His  writings  include  "  Hirnno  a  Farde,"  and


MEN DBS


MENDOZA


297


translations  of  Voltaire's  "  Tancredo  e  Merope,"
and  of  Virgil's  works.  He  published  "  Eneida  Bra-
sileira  and  Virgilio  Brasileiro"  (1854),  and  in  his
will  left  to  his  province  a  manuscript  translation
of  the  "  Iliad,"  which  has  been  published  by  the
council  of  the  province.

MEXUES,  Yalentini,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cacho-
eira,  South  America,  in  1689 ;  d.  in  Brazil  after
1747.  He  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus  at  the  age
of  fourteen,  and  after  his  ordination  taught  classics
in  the  colleges  of  the  order  in  Bahia  and  Parahiba,
and  philosophy  in  Rio  Janeiro.  He  was  afterward
professor  of  theology  in  Bahia.  Besides  eight
volumes  of  sermons  (Lisbon,  1734-'47),  he  published
a  volume  of  poems  entitled  '•  Dous  Sonetos  em
applauso  do  Desambargador  Ignacio  Dias  Madeira
tomando  posse  de  Ouvidor  Geral  do  Crime  em  a
Cidade  da  Bahia ''  (1742).

MEN  1)E  SAA  (men-day-sah'),  Brazilian  gov
ernor,  b.  in  Portugal  early  in  the  16th  century ;  d.
in  Bahia  in  1572.  In  his  youth  he  was  an  officer
in  the  Portuguese  army.  In  1558  he  was  appointed
governor  of  Brazil,  and  during  his  administration
of  fifteen  years  he  pacified  several  tribes  of  Indians
by  his  prudent  measures.  Since  1555  the  French
had  occupied  a  large  tract  of  land  along  the  coast
of  Brazil,  and  had  built  a  fort  in  the  place  where
the  city  of  Rio  Janeiro  now  stands.  The  govern
ment  of  Portugal  gave  orders  to  Men  in  1560  to
expel  the  French  from  this  territory,  and  with  only
120  soldiers  and  140  Indian  allies  he  attacked  and
defeated  them.  The  war  continued  till  1566,  when
Men  received  re-enforcements  from  Portugal,  and
conquered  the  whole  territory.  In  his  despatch  to
Queen  Catharine  announcing  this  event  occurs  the
celebrated  expression  :  "  Eu  me  puz,  logo  prestei  o
melhor  que  pude,  que  foi  o  peior  que  um  goberna-
dor  podia."  ("  I  set  immediately  about  doing  the
best  I  might,  which  was  the  worst  a  governor  could
do.")  He  afterward  founded  the  city  cf  Rio  Janei
ro,  and  others  in  that  province.  In  1572  he  left
the  government  of  Brazil  to  his  successor,  and  re
tired  to  private  life  in  Bahia.

MEXDEZ  Y  LA  BARTA.  Ramon  Ignacio
(men'-deth),  Venezuelan  archbishop,  b.  in  Barinas
in  1784 ;  d.  in  Villeta,  Colombia,  6  Aug..  1839.  He
studied  in  the  Seminary  of  Caracas  and  the  Uni
versity  of  Merida,  was  graduated  at  an  early  age
with  honors  in  philosophy,  law,  and  theology,  and
appointed  canon  of  the  cathedral  of  Merida.
When  the  revolutionary  movement  of  19  April,
1810.  began,  he  was  at  Barinas  as  vicar-general,  and
espoused  the  cause  of  independence  with  enthu
siasm.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  provis
ional  government,  and  appointed  in  1811  a  mem
ber  of  congress,  signing  the  act  of  independence
on  5  July.  He  also  fought  in  the  battles  of  Guay-
ana,  Apure,  and  New  Granada,  and  was  the  com
panion  of  Paez  in  Arichuna  at  the  capture  of
Achaguas  and  San  Fernando  and  in  the  brilliant
battle  of  the  Yagual.  He  occupied  a  seat  in  the
Colombian  congress  at  Cucuta  in  1821,  and  was
senator  in  the  same  congress  from  1823  till  1826.
A  dispute  with  Senator  Gomez  resulted  in  a  per
sonal  attack  by  Mendez,  for  which  he  was  expelled
from  the  senate.  He  then  went  to  Venezuela,
where  he  was  warmly  welcomed,  and  elected  arch
deacon  of  the  cathedral  of  Caracas,  and  in  1828
he  became  archbishop  of  Venezuela.  Refusing  to
take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  constitution  of
Venezuela,  as  he  thought  it  incompatible  with
the  rights  and  immunities  of  the  church,  he  was
compelled  to  leave  the  country  and  went  to  Cu-  '
razao,  21  Xov.,  1830.  In  1832  he  returned,  but  in
November,  1836,  on  account  of  his  refusal  to  in-


'  vest  the  prebendaries  that  had  been  appointed  by

the  government,  he  was  again  compelled  to  leav'e

:  the  country. After  residing  nearly  three  years  in

Curazao,  he  sought  an  asylum  in  New  Granada,

but  died  on  his  way  to  Bogota.

MEXDIVE,  Rafael  Maria  de  (men-dee  -veh).
Cuban  author,  b.  in  Havana  in  1821 ;  d.  in  1886.
He  was  educated  in  his  native  city,  and  began  to
cultivate  literature  from  early  youth.  In  1845  he
,  published  a  literary  newspaper  named  "  Flores  del
Siglo,"  and  in  1847  a  collection  of  his  poems  with
'  the  title  of  "  Pasionarias.''  They  were  of  a  ro
mantic  character,  and  obtained  wide  recognition.
From  1848  till  1852  he  travelled  in  Europe,  and,
after  returning  to  Cuba,  founded  the  "  Revista  de
la  Habana,"  one  of  the  best  reviews  in  Spanish
'  America.  In  1869  he  was  banished  from  Cuba  on
account  of  his  liberal  opinions.  He  resided  alter
nately  in  New  York  and  Nassau,  New  Providence,
where  he  wrote  several  legends  and  tales  in  verse,
but  in  1878  he  returned  to  Cuba.  Mendive  is  con
sidered  one  of  the  best  of  Spanish-American  poets,
and  many  of  his  poems  have  been  translated  into
English,  French,  and  Italian.  He  has  published,
associated  with  three  other  writers,  a  book  of  poems
called  "  Cuatro  Laudes  "  (1856).  A  new  edition  of
his  poems  was  published  by  the  Spanish  critic  Don
Manuel  Canete  (Madrid,  1860),  and  other  editions
have  appeared  (Havana,  1861  and  1884).  He  trans
lated  Moore's  "  Irish  Melodies  "  in  verse  (1863).

MEXDOXTA,  Augusto  Xetto  de  (men-dong'-
sah),  Brazilian  naval  officer,  b.  in  Pernambuco,
4  Aug.,  1834 ;  d.  in  Paraguay,  9  Dec.,  1868.  After
studying  in  the  naval  academy  of  Rio  Janeiro,  he
became  a  midshipman,  and  in  1855  served  in  the
bombardment  and  capture  of  the  fortifications  of
Paysandu  in  Uruguay.  In  February.  1865,  he
was  praised  by  the  commander-in  chief  of  the  na
val  forces  at  Montevideo  for  his"  valor  in  the  attack
on  that  city,  and  for  his  defence  against  a  mob  of
the  prisoners  that  were  taken  there.  He  com
manded  a  gun-boat  in  Uruguay  in  1865,  and  after
ward  the  gun-boat  "  Greenhalgh  "  in  the  passage
of  the  army  to  the  Paraguayan  bank  of  the  Parana
on  16  April.  1866.  engaging  a  battery  on  the  17th.
He  took  part  in  the  bombardment  of  Curuzu  and
Curupaity,  and  in  the  iron-clad  "  Mariz  e  Barros  ''
led  the  fleet  when  a  reconnoissance  was  made  off
Angostura,  in  which  his  skull  was  fractured  by  a
fragment  of  a  shell.

MEXDOZA,  Antonio  de.  Count  of  Tendilla,
Viceroy  of  Mexico  and  Peru.  b.  in  Granada,  Spain,
about  1480:  d.  in  Lima.  21  July,  1552.  In  conse
quence  of  the  troubles  between  the  nobles  of  New
Spain  and  the  audiencia  the  Emperor  Charles  V.
resolved  to  create  a  viceroyalty,  and  appointed
Mendoza  viceroy  on  17  April,  1535.  To  strengthen
his  authority  he  was  also  made  president  of  the
Royal  audiencia.  He  introduced  in  Mexico  and  in
the  New  World  the  first  printing-press,  and  in  1536
the  first  book,  "  La  Escala  de  S.  Juan  Climaco,"  was
printed  in  Mexico.  Of  this  book  no  copy  now  re
mains.  In  1537  he  founded  the  Imperial  college  of
Santa  Cruz  de  Tlaltelolco  and  established  the  bish
opric  of  Michoacan.  Believing  in  the  existence  of
a  rich  country  called  Quivira.  situated  toward  the
northeast,  according  to  the  relations  of  Cabeza  de
Vaca  and  Marcos  de  Niza  (q.  r.\  Mendoza  resolved
to  send  an  exploring  expedition  thither.  Cortes,  who
was  still  in  Mexico,  claimed  the  right  of  new  con
quests  for  himself,  but  he  was  forced  to  submit  to
the  viceroy  and  left  in  disgust  for  Spain.  Mendoza
sent  in  1540  an  expedition  overland  under  Vas-
quez  de  Coronado  (q.  r.),  and  another  by  sea  under
Hernando  Alarcon,  but  both  failed  to  discover  the


298


MENDOZA


MENDOZA Y LUNA


fabulous  city  of  Cibola.  When  Pedro  de  Alvarado
died  on  an  expedition  against  the  Indians  of  New
Galicia,  who  had  revolted,  Mendoza,  alarmed  at
their  success,  left  the  capital  on  8  Oct.,  1541,  found
ed  the  city  of  Val-
ladolid  (now  Mo-
relia),  and,  after
defeating  the  In-
dians,  returned  to
Mexico  in  Febru-
ary,  1542.  During
his  reign  Bartolo-
me  de  las  Casas
(q.  v.)  came  to
Mexico  to  protect
the  Indians,  who
had  been  great
ly  abused  by  the
Spaniards,  but  the


^ /


Indian  slavery,  re
mained  without  ef
fect.  In  conse
quence  of  the  deplorable  state  of  affairs  in  Peru
that  had  resulted  from  the  rebellion  of  Gonzalo
Pizarro,  the  emperor  ordered  Mendoza  to  take  pos
session  of  that  vice-royalty.  He  accepted  the  place
with  reluctance,  and  arrived  in  Lima,  23  Sept.,  1551.
Not  being  able  to  inspect  the  state  of  the  country
for  himself,  he  commissioned  his  son,  Francisco,  for
the  purpose,  and  in  1552  sent  him  to  Spain  with  a  re
port  to  the  council  of  the  Indies.  During  his  admin
istration  the  University  of  Lima  was  founded,  and
the  first  provincial  council  assembled.  In  1552,  with
the  audiencia,  he  formed  the  first  code  for  Peru.

MENDOZA,  .In a ii.  Mexican  clergyman,  b.  in
the  city  of  Mexico  about  1540 ;  d.  in  Guatemala,  2
Aug.,  1619.  He  entered  the  order  of  San  Fran
cisco  in  Guatemala  about  1565,  and  went  to  study
in  the  province  of  Santo  Evangelic,  whence  he  re
turned  to  Guatemala  as  a  professor  of  theology.
He  wrote  many  books  in  the  Mexican  and  Guate-
maltec  languages.  Arochena,  in  his  "  Catalogo,"
gives  the  titles'  "  Doctrina  cristiana  en  Lengua
Mexicana,"  "Flos  sanctorum  6  Vida  de  Santos,"
and  "  Platicas  doctrinales  sobre  los  Evangelios  de
todo  el  ano,"  in  the  Kachiquel  language,  and  also
several  others  in  Latin.

MENDOZA,  Juan  Snarez  de,  clergyman,  b.
in  Mompox,  in  the  diocese  of  Carthagena,  Spanish
America:  d.  in  Seville,  Spain,  18  March,  1681.
He  was  educated  in  the  University  of  Salamanca,
and  appointed  judge  of  the  royal  court  of  Seville
for  hearing  appeals  in  Indian  affairs.  He  after
ward  became  a  priest.  He  wrote  "  Ad  titulum  Di-
gestorum "  (Salamanca,  1640)  and  "  De  Hispano-
rum  Monarchia,  rebus  gestis,  moribus,  politica."

MENDOZA,  Lorenzo  Snarez,  viceroy  of  New
Spain,  b.  in  Spain;  d.  in  Mexico  in  June,  1583.
He  belonged  to  a  wealthy  and  distinguished  family
that  furnished  the  first  and  noblest  of  the  viceroys
of  New  Spain.  Mendoza  was  the  fifth  viceroy,  and
exercised  power  from  October,  1580,  till  his  death.
He  established  the  royal  tribunal  of  commerce  of
Vera  Cruz  in  1581,  which  was  subsequently  an  im
portant  feature  in  Spanish  colonial  administration.
During  the  time  that  he  held  office  the  coinage
amounted  to  $9,000,000.

MENDOZA,  Pedro  de,  soldier,  b.  in  Cadiz,
Spain,  about  1487;  d.  at  sea  in  1536.  He  was  a
wealthy  gentleman  of  Cadiz,  belonging  to  a  dis
tinguished  family,  and,  while  holding  a  post  at
the  court,  made  an  offer  to  Charles  V.,  in  1534,  to
complete,  at  his  own  expense,  the  discovery  and


conquest  of  Paraguay  and  the  countries  on  the  Rio
de  la  Plata,  and  extend  the  Spanish  explorations
to  the  southern  extremity  of  South  America.  He
was  named  by  this  monarch  adelantado.  or  mili
tary  chief,  of  these  countries,  and  sailed,  24  Aug.,

1534,  with  fourteen  vessels  and  3,000  men. The
emperor  had  given  him  2,000  ducats,  and  advanced
2,000  more,  on  condition  that  lie  should  transport,
to  the  new  country,  within  two  years,  a  thousand
colonists  and  a  hundred  horses,  build  a  road  to  the
Pacific  ocean,  erect  three  forts,  and  take  with  him
eight  monks,  a  physician,  a  surgeon,  and  an  apothe
cary  ;  but  he  was  forbidden  to  introduce  a  lawyer
into  the  colony. Mendoza  was  made  hereditary
chief  judge  and  constable  of  the  countries  that  he
should  discover,  and  given  the  right  to  retain  half
the  treasures  of  the  caciques  who  might  be  killed
in  the  wars  that  he  should  wage,  with  nine  tenths
of  the  ransoms  of  prisoners. He  landed  on the
coast  of  Brazil,  after  a  terrible  tempest  had  dis
persed  the  fleet,  where,  falling  sick,  he  intrusted
the  command  of  his  ships  to  Juan  de  Osorio.  his
lieutenant. Having  had  reason  to  suspect  this  of
ficer  of  treachery,  he  caused  him  to  be  assassinated
a short time afterward. As soon as Mendoza
recovered  he  continued  his  voyage,  sailed  up  the
Rio  de  la  Plata  as  far  as  the  island  of  Saint  Ga
briel,  reconnoitred  the  southern  coast  opposite,  and
founded  there the city of  Buenos  Ayres,  2  Feb.,

1535,  with  two  forts  to  defend  it. Soon  after  the
arrival  of  the  expedition  the  provisions  began  to
fail,  and  the  aborigines  attacked  the  foraging  par
ties  that  were  sent  in  quest  of  supplies. The
Querandis,  a  tribe  numbering  about  3,000,  at  first
furnished  them  with  food,  but,  in  consequence  of
ill  treatment,  ceased  to  frequent  the  camp. Don
Diego,  a  brother  of  the  commander,  led  a  force
against  them,  but  was  killed  with  more  than  two
thirds  of  his  men. After  this  the  colonists  were
attacked  by  the  Querandi  Indians  frequently,  but
repelled  them  till,  in  December,  1535,  the  new  city
was  captured  by  the  Indians  and  burned. Mendoza
retired  to  the  fort  of  Sanctus-Spiritus,  whence  he
despatched  Juan  de  Ayolas  (q.  r.)  to  explore  the
upper  course  of  the  river. Disheartened by his
failure,  he  sailed  in  the  summar  of  1536  for  Spain
and  died  during  the  long  voyage.

MENDOZA  Y  LUNA,  Juan  de,  Marquis  of
Montesclaros,  Viceroy  of  Mexico  and  Peru,  b.  in
Spain  about  1560 ;  d.  in  Madrid  about  1625.  Noth
ing  is  known  of  his  early  life.  He  was  appointed
viceroy  of  Mexico  in  1603,  and  entered  the  capital
on  23  Oct.  with  his  wife.  In  the  first  year  of  his
government  the  capital  was  inundated  in  conse
quence  of  the  rains  of  August,  1604,  and  some
parts  remained  under  water  till  the  following  year.
It  was  proposed  to  remove  the  city  to  the  slopes  of
Tacubaya,  but  this  was  given  up  on  account  of  the
value  of  the  buildings  that  would  have  to  be  aban
doned,  and  Mendoza  thought  of  constructing  a
canal  at  Huehuetoca,  but  the  immense  amount  of
native  labor  that  was  needed  for  the  work  forced
him  to  leave  the  project  to  his  successor.  He  re
paired  the  dam  that  had  been  built  by  Luis  de  Ve-
lasco  fifty-one  years  before,  and  began  to  build  the
highways  of  Guadeloupe,  San  Cristobal,  San  Anto
nio,  Chapultepec,  and  others.  During  his  admin
istration  the  paving  of  the  capital  and  the  con
struction  of  an  aqueduct  to  conduct  the  water  from
Chapultepec  was  also  begun,  but  before  it  was  fin
ished  Mendoza  was  appointed  viceroy  of  Peru.  He
entered  Lima,  21  Dec.,  1607,  and  received  the  gov
ernment  from  the  audiencia.  His  administration
was  beneficial  to  the  country.  He  organized  in
1608  an  army  to  defend  the  Chilian  frontier  against


MENEES


MENTELLE


299


the  Araucanians,  and  built  in  1608-'10  a  stone
bridge  over  Rimac  river  that  is  still  in  existence.
In  1611  he  constructed  the  municipal  palace  and
the  public  promenade  of  Los  Descalzos,  and  in  the
next  year  he  prohibited  the  distribution  of  Indi
ans  for  the  service  of  the  viceroy,  the  supreme
judges,  and  other  superior  officers.  When  in  1015
a  Dutch  fleet  under  Admiral  Spilberg  entered  the
Pacific,  he  prepared  everything  for  resistance,
threw  up  defensive  works  in  Callao,  and  sent  a
fleet  under  his  nephew.  Rodrigo  de  Mendoza,  to  en
counter  Spilberg,  but  during  a  night  action  near
Pisco  on  17  July  one  of  the  Spanish  ships  was
sunk  by  their  own  flag-ship.  On  21  July,  Spilberg
appeared  before  Callao,  but  after  a  short  cannon
ade  left  for  Paita,  and  afterward  for  the  Philip
pines.  Notwithstanding  the  repeated  petitions  of
citizens  against  Mendoza's  removal,  the  Prince  of
Esquilache,  Francisco  de  Borja  (q.  v.\  was  appoint
ed  his  successor,  and  Mendoza  delivered  the  gov
ernment  to  him,  18  Dec.,  1615.  He  returned  to
Spain  and  was  appointed  councillor  of  state,  and
afterward  president  of  the  council  of  Aragonia.
He  was  the  author  of  noteworthy  sacred  poems,
which  have  not  been  printed,  but  the  manuscript
of  several  were  found  in  the  archives  of  Mexico.
He  also  wrote  "  Ordenanzas  para  el  mejor  beneficio
de  las  minas  de  la  N.  E."  (Mexico,  1606).

MENEES,  Thomas,  physician,  b.  near  Nash
ville.  Tenn.,  26  June,  1823.  He  was  graduated  in
medicine  at  Transylvania  university  in  1846,  and
practised  in  Springfield,  Tenn.,  and  after  1865  in
Nashville.  In  1874  he  was  chosen  professor  of
materia  medica  and  therapeutics  in  the  University
of  Nashville,  and  in  1875  he  was  transferred  to  the
chair  of  obstetrics.  He  was  also  elected  to  the
same  place  in  Vanderbilt  university  in  this  year,
and  became  dean  of  its  medical  department.  Dr.
Menees  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate  in  1857,
and  of  the  Confederate  congress  during  the  civil
war.  He  has  made  numerous  contributions  to
medical  literature.

M  TINIER,  Joseph  Henry  (main-yay),  French
missionary,  b.  in  Louviers  in  1590 ;  d.  in  Fort
Royal,  Martinique,  in  1671.  He  became  a  Domini
can  friar,  and  went  to  St.  Christopher  in  1635  as
a  missionary,  and  afterward  to  Martinique,  where
he  became  superior  of  the  missions  of  his  order.
He  did  much  to  colonize  the  latter  island,  built
churches  and  colleges,  dug  canals,  improved  lands,
and  in  many  ways  contributed  to  its  welfare.  .  He
made  several  trips  to  Europe  to  promote  emigra
tion  to  Martinique,  and  was  successful  also  in  ob
taining  supplies  of  all  kinds.  He  published  "  De
scription  de  1'ile  d'Amerique  appelee  La  Marti
nique "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1650);  "  Dictionnaire  de  la
langue  Carai'be"  (1652) ;  "  Grammaire  de  la  langue
Cara'ibe"  (1652) ;  and  "  Voyage  aux  iles  du  vent
et  sous  le  vent  par  un  missionnaire  de  1'ordre
des  freres  precheurs"  (2  vols.,  1659).

MENKEN,  Adah  Isaacs,  actress,  b.  near  New
Orleans,  La.,  15  June,  1835:  died  in  Paris,  10  Aug.,
1868.  Her  father  was  a  Spanish  Jew,  and  her
mother  a  native  of  Bordeaux.  Her  maiden  name
was  Dolores  Adios  Fuertes.  When  seven  years  of
age  she  made  a  successful  appearance  as  a  dancer
with  her  sister  Josephine.  During  her  early  career
on  the  stage  she  mastered  French  and  Spanish,
and  visited  Havana,  where  she  became  popular,
and  was  known  as  the  "  Queen  of  the  Plaza."  After
playing  in  Texas  and  Mexico  she  returned  to  New
Orleans,  retired  from  the  stage,  and  published  a
volume  of  poems  entitled  "  Memories,"  over  the
signature  of  "  Indigena."  While  in  Galveston,  in
1856,  she  married  Alexander  Isaacs  Menken,  a


musician,  from  whom  she  was  subsequently  di
vorced  in  Nashville,  Tenn.  Returning  to  the  stage,
she  appeared  at  the  Varieties  theatre  in  New  Or
leans  during  the  season  of  1858.  After  playing  in
Louisville  and  Cincinnati,  and  as  leading  lady  on
the  southern  circuit,  she  entered  a  studio  in  Colum
bus,  Ohio,  for  the  purpose  of  studying  sculpture.
On  3  April,  1859,  she  married  in  New  York  city
John  C.  Heenan,  the  pugilist,  but  in  1862  was  di
vorced  from  him  by  an  Indiana  court.  She  made
her  first  appearance  in  New  York  city  in  June,
1859,  played  there  in  1860.  travelled  throughout
the  west  and  south  as  an  actress,  and  returned  to
New  York,  where  she  married  Robert  H.  Newell.
She  sailed  for  California  in  July,  1863,  went  to
England  in  the  following  year,  and  was  immedi
ately  engaged  at  Astley's  theatre,  London,  where
she  played  her  favorite  character,  Mazeppa.  In
1865  she  was  divorced  from  Newell.  In  1866  she
again  visited  New  York,  repeating  her  personation
of  Mazeppa,  but  terminated  her  engagement  ab
ruptly  and  made  a  brief  tour  through  the  west.
On  21  Aug.,  1866,  she  married  James  Barclay,  at
her  residence!  in  New  York  city,  and  the  same  year
again  sailed  for  England.  She  died  in  the  Jewish
faith,  and  her  remains  rest  in  Montparnasse  ceme
tery.  On  her  tomb,  at  her  request,  were  engraved
the"  words  "  Thou  Knowest."  While  in  London  she
published  "  Infelicia,"  a  volume  of  poems  (1867).

MENNA  BARRETO,  Joao  Propicio  (men -
nah-bar-ray'-to),  Brazilian  soldier,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro
in  1809 ;  died  in  S.  Gabriel,  9  Feb.,  1867.  He  was
entered  as  a  cadet  in  the  1st  regiment  of  the  line,
27  July,  1820,  and  soon  was  promoted  major.  Dur
ing  the  rebellion  in  the  city  of  Rio  Janeiro  in
April,  1832,  Maj.  Menna  did  good  service.  He
was  afterward  appointed  commander  of  the  regi
ment  "  Municipal  Permanente."  In  1835,  as  com
mandant  of  the  "  Guarda  Nacional,"  he  served  in
Rio  Grande  do  Sul  in  suppressing  a  revolution,
and  on  30  Sept.,  1846,  he  was  promoted  colonel.
He  became  brigadier,  14  March,  1855.  general,  2
Dec.,  1856,  and  marshal,  2  March.  1864.  In  the
latter  year  he  was  appointed  to  lead  an  expedition
against  Montevideo,  and  he  captured  Paysandu
on  2  Jan.,  1865.  He  received  many  decorations  at
different  times.  In  1866  he  was  appointed  to  com
mand  the  forces  in  S.  Gabriel,  but,  being  in  poor
health,  he  resigned,  and  died  soon  afterward.

MENTELLE,  Francois  Simon,  French  explor
er,  b.  in  Paris  in  1731  ;  d.  in  French  Guiana,  21
Dec.,  1799.  His  knowledge  of  geography  and  as
tronomy  gained  him  professional  employment  at  an
early  age  under  the  French  government,  and  when
it  was  determined  to  make  an  attempt  to  colonize
a  portion  of  Guiana  he  was  ordered  to  accompany
the  first  expedition,  which  landed  at  Cayenne  in
July,  1763.  He  laid  out  the  city  of  Kouron,  but  colo
nist's  arrived  more  quickly  than  houses  could  be
built  for  them,  and  most  of  them  died  of  typhus
fever.  Mentelle  escaped  to  Cayenne,  where  he  was
employed  in  laying  out  streets  and  in  topographi
cal  work.  He  made  several  efforts  to  obtain  per
mission  to  travel  in  central  Guiana,  the  geography
of  which  was  then  little  known  ;  but  he  did  not
succeed  until  1766,  when  he  accompanied  a  detach
ment  that  was  sent  to  aid  the  natives  on  the  right
bank  of  the  Maroni  against  the  Maroon  negroes  of
Surinam.  The  expedition  returned  to  Cayenne  on  13
June,  after  travelling  more  than  150  miles  through
the  interior.  Mentelle  took  every  precaution
to  guard  against  the  loss  of  the  result  of  his  labor,
making  every  evening  two  copies  of  the  notes  that  he
had  taken  during  the  day,  and  placing  them  in  dif
ferent  canoes.  He  drew  a  map  of  this  journey,


300


MERCADO


MERCER


which  is  in  the  archives  of  Cayenne.  In  spite  of
his  services,  he  was  dismissed  in  1777.  and  then  con
ceived  the  idea  of  collecting  the  geographical  ma
terials  relating  to  the  country  that  were  scattered
through  the  archives  of  the  government,  or  were
in  the  hands  of  surveyors  and  engineers,  and  plac
ing  them  in  a  museum  of  which  he  was  to  have  the
care.  Pierre  V.  Malouet,  who  had  been  sent  out
to  regulate  the  affairs  of  Guiana,  obtained  this
post  for  him,  with  a  salary  of  2,000  livres.  The
French  government  refused  him  the  necessary
funds  for  further  explorations,  but  he  continued
his  labors,  and  in  1788  his  services  were  rewarded
with  the  cross  of  St.  Louis.  Besides  his  geographi
cal  work,  he  made,  during  his  stay  in  Guiana,  ob
servations  on  meteorology  and  on  the  tides.  He
edited  the  "  Almanach  de  Cayenne  "  for  more  than
thirty  years,  during  which  his  observations  on  the
tides' were  of  the  greatest  service  to  the  planters  of
Surinam  and  Demerara,  who  were  guided  by  them
in  draining  the  low  lands  and  navigating  the  rivers.
He  was  engaged  at  the  time  of  his  death  in  writ
ing  a  memoir  on  the  possibility  of  founding  French
colonies  in  Guiana.  His  valuable  collection  of
maps  and  manuscripts  was  partly  destroyed  by
the  Portuguese  when  they  seized  Cayenne  in  1809,
but  he  had  sent  copies  of  them  to  Paris  before
his  death,  which  were  placed  in  the  archives  of
the  ministry  of  the  navy.

MERCADO,  Jos6  Maria  (mair-cah'-do),  Mexi
can  patriot,  b.  in  Teul,  Jalisco,  about  1770;  d.  in
San  Bias,  31  Jan.,  1811.  He  was  sent  to  Guadala
jara,  where  he  studied  theology  in  the  seminary,
and  was  ordained  priest  about  1795.  As  parish
priest  of  Ahualulco  his  life  was  passed  quietly  in
retirement,  till  the  proclamation  of  independence
by  Hidalgo  (q.  v.)  roused  him,  and  his  short  but
brilliant  revolutionary  career  began.  When  he
heard  of  the  capture  of  Guanajuato  and  the  battle
of  Monte  de  las  Cruces,  he  rose  with  the  lieutenant
of  militia,  Zea,  against  the  Spanish  authorities  of
Ahualulco  early  in  November,  1810,  and  soon  had
collected  a  small  force.  After  Guadalajara  had
been  captured  by  Jose  Antonio  Torres  and  the
judges  of  the  supreme  court  had  taken  refuge  at
Tepic,  Mercado  conceived  the  project  of  capturing
that  city  and  the  port  of  San  Bias,  and,  authorized  j
by  Torres,  he  marched  against  Tepic  and  sur
rounded  it  on  20  Nov.,  and  the  city  was  surren
dered  at  the  first  summons,  after  the  judges  had
fled.  The  company  of  militia  there  joined  him,
and  after  reorganizing  and  arming  his  forces  he
arrived  before  San  Bias  on  28  Nov.  The  port  sur
rendered  on  1  Dec.,  and  Mercado,  by  conciliatory
measures,  soon  won  the  good  will  of  the  greater
part  of  the  inhabitants.  He  at  once  undertook  to
forward  the  captured  artillery  to  Hidalgo,  who  had
meanwhile  arrived  in  Guadalajara.  Notwithstand
ing  the  immense,  difficulties  of  the  mountain-road
of  300  miles,  he  sent  gradually  forty-five  bronze
cannon,  nearly  every  one  of  which  had  to  be
dragged  by  hundreds  of  Indians  over  the  preci
pices  of  Mochitiltic,  which  were  impassable  for  ox
carts.  When  the  last  four  heavy  pieces  arrived  at
the  precipice,  Mercado  received  the  news  of  Hi
dalgo's  defeat  at  Calderon,  and  the  capture  there
of  the  guns  that  had  been  sent,  and,  after  throwing
the  remainder  over  the  cliffs,  he  returned  to  San
Bias  to  prepare  for  its  defence.  But  meanwhile
the  Royalists,  encouraged  by  the  victory  of  Calle-
jas,  had  tampered  with  his  troops,  and  in  the  night
of  31  Jan.,  1811.  there  was  a  revolt,  and  Mercado.
finding  his  residence  surrounded  by  the  rebels,
jumped  from  the  window  over  a  precipice.  -On  the
following  morning  his  corpse  was  found  at  its  foot,


carried  to  the  market  square,  and  there  publicly
flogged.  Mercado's  father,  although  he  had  taken
no  active  part  in  the  revolution,  was  strangled.

MERCADO,  Tonias,  Spanish  clergyman,  b.  in
Seville,  Spain ;  d.  at  sea  in  1575.  He  was  a  dis
tinguished  canonist  and  theologian.  He  came  in
his  youth  to  Mexico,  visited  Spain  in  1509,  re
sided  for  some  time  in  the  University  of  Salaman
ca,  and  died  on  board  ship  when  returning  to
Mexico.  His  principal  works  are  "  Commentarii
in  Textum  Petri  Hispani,  hoc  est  Summulas"  (Se
ville,  1571),  and  "  In  Dialectic-am  Aristotelis  cum
opusculo  argumentorum."  He  wrote  in  Spanish
"Suma  de  Tratos  y  Contratos"  (Salamanca.  1509;
Seville,  1571),  which  was  frequently  reprinted  in
Italy  and  Spain  during  the  16th  and  17th  centuries.

MERCEIN,  Thomas  Fitz  Randolph,  clergy
man,  b.  in  New  York  city,  27  Nov.,  1825;  d.  in
Sheffield,  Mass.,  15  Sept.,  "1856.  His  father,  Col.
Thomas  R.  Mercein,  was  for  some  time  a  member
of  the  legislature,  and  comptroller  of  the  city.  The
son  was  intended  for  the  ministry  of  the  Presby
terian  church.  He  entered  Columbia  when  he  was
fourteen  years  old,  but  left  in  his  second  year  on
account  of  his  health,  and  subsequently  united
with  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  in  which  he
was  licensed  as  a  preacher,  and  served  eleven  years
as  a  pastor,  chiefly  in  the  state  of  New  York.  Be
sides  numerous  contributions  to  the  periodicals  of
his  denomination,  he  published  "Natural  Good
ness  "  (New  York.  1854) ;  "  The  Wise  Master  Build
er";  and  "Childhood  and  the  Church,"  a  post
humous  work  (1858).

MERCER,  Ann  Jane,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  October,  1817;  d.  there,  5
April,  1886.  She  was  the  daughter  of  John  Ham
ilton,  of  Philadelphia,  and  married  John  C.  Mercer,
a  merchant  in  that  city.  After  the  death  of  her
husband  she  established  in  his  memory  the  Mercer
memorial  home,  at  Atlantic  City,  N.  J.,  for  the
relief  of  invalid  women,  and  by  her  will  she  found
ed  the  John  C.  Mercer  home  for  disabled  clergy
men  of  the  Presbyterian  faith.  For  this  purpose
she  gave  her  furnished  country-seat,  "The  Mount,''
in  Montgomery  county,  Pa.,  and  $100,000  with
which  to  support  it.  Her  will  provides  that  no
clergyman  that  uses  tobacco  in  any  form  shall  be
admitted  to  the  home.

MERCER,  Charles  Fenton,  soldier,  b.  in
Fredericksburg,  Va.,  6  June,  1778;  d.  in  Howard,
near  Alexandria,  Va.,  4  May,  1858.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Princeton  in  1797,  and  commissioned  cap
tain  of  cavalry  the  next  year  by  Gen.  Washington,
in  anticipation  of  war  with  France,  but  subse
quently  studied  law,  and  after  a  tour  abroad  in
1802-'3,  practised  his  profession.  He  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  Virginia  legislature  in  1810-'17,  and
during  the  war  of  1812  was  aide  to  the  governor
and  in  command  of  the  defences  of  Norfolk,  with
the  rank  of  brigadier-general.  He  was  chairman
of  the  committee  on  finances  in  the  legislature  in
1816.  and  introduced  the  bill  for  the  construction
of  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  canal,  of  which  he  be
came  president.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Federalist  in  this  year,  and  returned  till  1840,  a
longer  period  of  continued  service  than  that  of  any
of  his  contemporaries.  He  was  an  active  protec
tionist,  and  an  opponent  of  slavery.  He  visited
Europe  in  1853  and  conferred  with  eminent  men
of  several  countries  in  the  interests  of  abolition.

MERCER,  Hugh,  soldier,  b.  in  Aberdeen,  Scot
land,  about  1720:  d.  near  Princeton,  N.  J.,  12  Jan.,
1777.  He  was  educated  at  the  University  of  Aber
deen,  became  a  physician,  and  was  assistant  sur
geon  in  the  army  of  Prince  Charles  Edward  in


MERCER


MERCHANT


301


c7&<^oJ:_/*
<r

post for several months.


1745.  He  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1747  and
settled  near  what  is  now  the  town  of  Mercersburg,
Pa.  He  served  in  the  French  and  Indian  war  of
1755,  and  volunteered  in  Braddock's  expedition
to  Fort  Duquesne,  being  severely  wounded  in  the
shoulder  at  the  battle  of  Monongahela,  and  wan
dering  alone
through  the
wilderness  to
Fort  Cumber
land,  a  distance
of  100  miles.
He  received  a
medal  from
the  corporation
of  Philadelphia
for  his  courage
on  this  expedi
tion.  In  1758
he  became  lieu
tenant-colonel,
and  accompa
nied  the  army
under  Gen.
John  Forbes  to
Pittsburg,  com
manding  that
He  then  returned  to

practice,  settling  in  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  organ
ized  and  drilled  the  Virgina  militia  in  1775,  and
the  minute-men  the  next  year,  and  was  appointed
colonel  of  the  3d  Virginia  regiment.  At  Washing
ton's  request  he  was  chosen  by  congress  brigadier-
general  in  June,  1776,  with  the  command  of  the
flying  camp.  He  accompanied  the  commander-in-
chief  in  the  retreat  through  New  Jersey,  led  the
column  of  attack  at  Trenton,  and  advised  the
night  march  on  Princeton,  in  which  he  commanded
the  advance.  When  his  men,  who  were  chiefly
militia,  began  to  waver  before  the  enemy,  he  made
an  energetic  attempt  to  rally  them,  and  was  felled
to  the  ground  by  a  blow  from  the  butt  end  of  a
musket.  Although  surrounded  by  the  British,  he
arose,  refused  quarter,  defended  himself  with  his
sword,  and  after  a  brief  struggle,  in  which  he  was
repeatedly  bayoneted,  was  left  for  dead  on  the
field.  He  was  removed  to  a  neighboring  farm
house  soon  after  the  battle,  and,  on  hearing  the
news  of  his  condition.  Washington  despatched  a
flag  of  truce  to  Cornwallis,  requesting  that  his  aide-
de-camp  and  nephew,  Col.  George  Lewis,  be  per
mitted  to  remain  with  Mercer  until  his  death,
which  occurred  after  several  days  of  severe  suffer
ing.  His  funeral  at  Philadelphia  was  attended  by
30.000  people.  The  St.  Andrew's  society  of  Phila
delphia  erected  a  monument  to  his  memory  in
Laurel  Hill  cemetery,  and  congress  made  provision
in  1793  for  the  education  of  his  youngest  son.
Mercer  county.  Ky..  is  named  in  his  honor.

MERCER,  James,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  Hampton  county.  Va..  in  1747:  d.
there  in  June.  1793.  He  was  graduated  at  William
and  Mary  in  1767,  engaged  in  thepre-Revolutionary
movements,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Virginia
house  of  burgesses,  of  all  the  state  conventions,
and  of  the  committee  of  safety.  He  served  in  con
gress  in  1779-'80,  and  was  a  judge  of  admiralty
and  of  the  first  Virginia  court  of  appeals.

MERCER.  Jesse,  clergyman,  b.  in  Halifax
county.  N.  C.,  16  Dec.,  1769:  d.  in  Washington.
Wilke's  co.,  Ga..  6  Sept..  1841.  His  father,  Silas,
removed  to  Georgia  when  Jesse  was  a  child.
Though  with  slight  opportunities  of  early  educa
tion,  at  the  age  of  nineteen  he  was  ordained  as  a
Baptist  minister.  During  a  period  of  more  than


fifty  years  he  was  a  diligent  preacher  in  connection
with  various  churches  of  which  he  was  pastor,  be
sides  repeatedly  traversing  the  state  in  tours  of
evangelization.  In  guiding  the  councils  and  pro
moting  the  interests  of  the  Baptists  of  Georgia  he
was  the  most  potent  man  of  his  generation.  With
an  admirable  balance  of  character  and  mental  en
dowments,  with  a  spirit  equally  progressive  and
conservative,  a  profound  and  effective  preacher,
and  possessed  of  large  wealth  which  he  devoted
generously  to  philanthropic  objects,  he  was  made
to  be  the  leader  of  his  denomination.  He  was  for
years  publisher  and  editor  of  the  first  Baptist  news
paper  in  Georgia,  the  "  Christian  Index."  and  this
journal  he  subsequently  presented  as  a  gift  to  the
Georgia  Baptist  state  convention.  For  eighteen
years  in  succession  he  was  elected  president  of  this
convention.  In  promoting  foreign  and  domestic
missions  he  was  an  untiring  worker,  and  he  was
an  earnest  and  generous  advocate  of  educational
interests.  His  donations,  including  legacies,  to
Mercer  university,  which  was  named  in  his  honor,
amounted  to  more  than  £40,000.  To  other  benevo
lent  objects  he  gave  not  less  than  $20,000.  He  re
ceived  the  honorary  degree  of  D.  D.

MERCER,  Jolin  Francis,  statesman,  b.  in
Stafford  county,  Va.,  17  May.  1759:  d.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa..  30  Aug..  1821.  He  was  graduated  at
William  and  Mary  college  in  1775.  entered  the  3d
Virginia  regiment  as  lieutenant  in  1776,  became
captain  in  1777.  and  was  aide  to  Gen.  Charles  Lee
till  the  battle  of  Monmouth,  when  his  sympathy
with  that  officer  in  his  disgrace  induced  him  to
resign  from  the  army.  He  returned  to  Virgina.
but  soon  afterward  raised  and  equipped,  at  his  own
expense,  a  troop  of  horse,  of  which  he  was  com
missioned  lieutenant-colonel,  and,  joining  Gen.
Robert  Lawson's  brigade,  he  served  with  it  at
Guilford  and  elsewhere  until  it  was  disbanded.
He  then  attached  his  command  to  the  forces  under
Lafayette,  with  whom  he  remained  until  the  sur
render  at  Yorktown.  After  the  war  he  studied
law  with  Thomas  Jefferson,  and  from  1782  till  1785
was  a  delegate  from  Virginia  to  the  Continental  con
gress.  He  married  Sophie,  daughter  of  Richard
Sprigg,  of  West  River,  Md.,  in  1785.  removed  to
'•  Cedar  Park,"  his  wife's  estate,  and  soon  became
a  leader  in  Maryland  politics.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  convention  that  framed  the  U.  S.  constitu
tion,  but  opposed  the  plan  that  was  adopted,  and
withdrew  without  signing  the  document.  He  was
in  congress  in  1792-'4,  served  in  the  legislature  for
several  years,  was  governor  of  Maryland  in  1801-'3.
and  after  several  years  of  retirement  was  again  in
the  legislature.  Gov.  Mercer  was  the  trusted  per
sonal  and  political  friend  of  Jefferson.  He  died
while  on  a  visit  to  Philadelphia  for  medical  advice.
— His  daughter.  Margaret,  b.  in  Annapolis.  Md..
in  1792:  d.  in  Virginia  in  June,  1846,  voluntarily
reduced  herself  from  affluence  to  poverty  by  free
ing  her  slaves  and  sending  them  to  Liberia,  and
she  subsequently  taught  for  twenty  years  in  Vir
ginia.  She  prepared  two  volumes  for  her  pupils,
"  Studies  for  Bible  Classes  "  and  "  Ethics,  a  Series
of  Lectures  to  Young  Ladies."  See  memoir  of
her,  by  Caspar  Morris  (Philadelphia.  1848).

MERCHANT,  Charles  Spencer,  soldier,  b.  in
Albany,  N.  Y..  22  Feb.,  1795;  d.  in  Carlisle.  Pa..  6
Dec.,  1879.  His  father.  George,  was  a  graduate  of
Princeton,  a  paymaster  in  the  army  in  the  war  of
1812-'15,  subsequently  mayor  of  Albany,  and
treasurer  of  the  state  of  New  York.  The  son  was
appointed  to  the  recently  established  U.  S.  military
academy.  7  Sept..  1812.  and  was  the  first  cadet  that
presented  himself  there.  He  was  graduated  in


302


MERCIER


MERCUR


1814,  assigned  to  the  corps  of  artillery,  and  during
the  war  with  Great  Britain  was  engaged  in  garri
son  and  recruiting  service.  He  was  promoted  1st
lieutenant,  20  April,  1818,  and  with  thirty  soldiers
escorted  Gen.  James  Miller  to  Eastport,  Me.,  where
the  British  garrison  of  Fort  Sullivan  was  relieved,
and  Merchant  was  left  in  command.  At  the  reor
ganization  of  the  army,  on  1  June,  1821,  he  was
retained  as  1st  lieutenant  in  the  2d  artillery,  and
on  20  April,  1828,  received  the  brevet  of  captain
for  faithful  service  for  ten  years  in  one  grade.
During  the  disturbances  on  the  borders  of  Canada
in  1838-'41  he  was  stationed  at  northern  frontier
posts,  and  during  the  latter  part  of  the  war  with
Mexico  he  was  in  command  of  Fort  Brown,  on  the
Rio  Grande.  On  14  Feb.,  1849,  he  was  promoted
major  of  the  3d  artillery.  He  was  with  his  regi
ment  in  December,  1853,  on  board  the  steamer
"  San  Francisco  "  when  she  was  wrecked  off  Cape
Hatteras,  and  suffered  from  the  effects  for  several
years.  On  10  June,  1857,  he  was  promoted  lieu
tenant-colonel  of  the  3d  artillery,  which  he  rejoined
in  California,  remaining  there  until  1861.  On  27
Aug.  of  that  year  he  was  promoted  colonel  of  the
4th  artillery,  and  he  was  subsequently  placed  in
command  of  Fort  Washington,  on  the  Potomac,
until  he  was  retired  from  active  service,  1  Aug.,
1863.  Notwithstanding  his  retirement,  he  remained
on  active  duty  at  Beoloe's  island.  New  York  har
bor,  and  on  courts-martial  until  1869.  On  13
March,  1865,  he  received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-
general  "  for  long  and  faithful  service  in  the
army."  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  the  senior
officer  of  the  army  in  date  of  original  commission,
and  president  of  the  Association  of  graduates  of
West  Point.— His  son  Charles  George,  soldier,  b.
in  Portsmouth,  N.  II.,  16  March,  1821 ;  d.  in  East
Pascagoula,  Miss.,  4  Sept.,  1855,  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1843,  and  assigned
to  the  8th  infantry.  He  was  made  2d  lieuten
ant,  9  May  1846.  brevet  1st  lieutenant  "for  gallant
and  meritorious  conduct  in  the  battle  of  Molino
del  Rev,"  8  Sept.,  1847,  brevet  captain  for  Chapul-
tepec,  13  Sept.,  1847,  and  1st  lieutenant,  2  Aug.,
1848.  His  death  was  caused  by  a  wound  that  he
received  in  Indian  hostilities  in'Florida. — Another
son,  Clarke,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,
20  Sept.,  1836,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  naval
academy  in  1857,  and  promoted  successively
passed  midshipman,  25  June.  1860,  master,  24  Oct.,
1860,  lieutenant,  18  April,  1861,  and  lieutenant-
commander,  3  March,  1865.  In  the  early  part  of
the  civil  war  he  was  stationed  at  the  Washington
navy-yard  and  attached  to  the  "  Pensacola,"  and
during  the  latter  part  was  acting  executive  offi
cer  of  the  "  Roanoke  "  in  James  river.  Just  as
the  war  was  closing  he  was  ordered  to  the  naval
academy  as  executive  officer  of  the  "  Constitution  "
and  "  Santic."  He  resigned  on  10  Aug.,  1865,  and
engaged  in  mercantile  business  in  Philadelphia.

MERCIER,  Honore,  Canadian  member  of  par
liament,  b.  in  St.  Athanase,  Quebec.,  15  Oct.,  1840.
He  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
Lower  Canada  in  1867.  He  was  editor  of  '*Le
Courrier  de  St.  Hyacinthe  "  from  1862  till  1864,  and
also  in  1866,  and,  after  sitting  in  the  Dominion  par
liament  for  Rouville  from  1872  till  1874,  was  elected
to  the  legislative  assembly  of  Quebec  as  solicitor-
general  in  the  Joly  government  in  May,  1879,  and
held  this  portfolio  till  the  resignation  of  the  gov
ernment  in  October  of  the  same  year.  He  was  re-
elected  in  1881  by  acclamation,  and  again  in  De
cember,  1886,  and,  on  the  resignation  of  the  Tail-
Ion  administration,  formed  an  administration  and
became  attorney-general  in  January,  1887.


MERCIER,  Louis  Charles  Antoine,  French
engineer,  b.  in  Melun  in  1744:  d.  in  Rouen  in
1812.  He  was  the  son  of  a  director  of  the  mint,
entered  the  marine  guards  when  scarcely  fifteen
years  old,  and  was  employed  for  several  years
in  Canada  and  Martinique.  When  the  war  of
American  independence  began  he  asked  permis
sion  to  serve  as  a  volunteer,  and,  coming  in  1776
to  this  country,  was  employed  as  an  artillery
officer,  directing  the  batteries  during  the  siege  of
Savannah  by  Count  d'Estaing  in  1779.  He  was
reinstated  as  major  in  the  French  army,  and,  after
being  employed  for  several  months  to  rebuild  the
fortifications  of  the  island  of  St.  Eustache,  returned
again  to  the  American  continent  in  1780  and
took  part  under  Lafayette  in  the  Virginian  cam
paign,  being  wounded  at  the  head  of  his  regiment
at  Yorktown.  After  the  conclusion  of  peace  in
1783  he  was  appointed  director  of  the  fortifications
of  Santo  Domingo.  He  afterward  became  assist
ant  commander  of  the  artillery  in  the  navy-yard
of  Brest,  but  during  the  reign  of  terror  he  came
to  Louisiana  and  was  a  professor  of  mathematics
in  New  Orleans  till  1803,  when  he  was  commis
sioned  by  the  first  consul  to  study  the  water-front
of  the  colony,  and  forward  plans  for  the  protec
tion  of  the  coast.  The  cession  of  Louisiana  to  the
United  States  brought  the  mission  to  an  end.  but
Mercier  had  meanwhile  become  interested  in  it,
and,  having  been  left  a  small  fortune  by  a  relative,
continued  it  at  his  own  expense.  He  devoted  five
years  to  the  exploration  of  the  country  as  far
north  as  Oregon,  west  to  California,  and  east  to
Texas,  sailed  for  900  miles  on  Mississippi  anil  Mis
souri  rivers,  made  a  thorough  study  of  the  hy
drography  of  the  country  that  is  watered  by  the
Lafourche.  Atchafalaya,  Black,  and  Washita  rivers,
and  also  took  barometric  levels  along  Perdicco
river,  the  former  boundary  of  Louisiana.  He  pre
sented  to  the  U.  S.  authorities  in  1807  plans  for
the  drainage  of  flooded  lands  in  the  delta  of  the
Mississippi.  Returning  to  France  in  1808,  he  set
tled  in  Rouen.  He  published  "  Memoire  stir  les
vapeurs  de  1'atmosphere  le  long  du  cours  du  Mis-
sissipi "  (Paris,  1808);  "Carte  du  bassin  du  Mis-
sissipi "  (1808) ;  "  Systeme  hydrographique  de  la
Louisiane"  (Rouen,  1809);  "Carte  du  delta  du
Mississipi  "  (1810) ;  "  Etudes  topographiques,  geo-
graphiques,  hydrographiques,  geologiques  et  geo-
desiques  sur  la  Louisiane"  (1811);  and  "Tableau
du  climat  de  la  Louisiane,  et  de  son  influence  sur
les  Europeens  et  les  Creoles  "  (1812).

MERCUR,  Ulysses,  jurist,  b.  in  Towanda,
Bradford  co.,  Pa.,  12  Aug.,  1818;  d.  in  Walling-
ford,  Delaware  co.,  Pa.,  6  June,  1887.  He  was  a
son  of  Henry  and  Mary  Watts  Mercur.  During
his  early  life  he  worked  on  his  father's  farm  and
afterward  spent  three  years  in  his  brother's  store
as  a  clerk.  He  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  college
in  1841  with  the  first  honors  of  his  class,  studied
law  under  Thomas  T.  McKennan  and  Edward
Overton,  was  admitted  to  the  Bradford  county  bar,
and  soon  achieved  a  high  reputation.  In  18"61  he
was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Lincoln  ticket.
When  David  Wilmot  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator,  he
resigned  as  president  judge  of  the  13th  district
and  Mr.  Mercur  was  appointed  as  his  successor.
At  the  next  election  he  was  chosen  for  ten  years,
but  he  resigned  in  1865  and  was  four  times  succes
sively  elected  to  congress.  He  was  active  in  the
legislation  of  the  war  and  of  the  reconstruction
period.  During  the  eighth  year  of  his  term  in  the
house  he  was  chosen  a  justice  of  the  supreme
court  of  Pennsylvania,  and  he  resigned  from  con
gress,  2  Dec.,  1872.  On  1  Jan.,  1883,  he  became  un-


MEREDITH


MEREDITH


303


der  the  constitution  chief  justice,  which  post  he  held
at  the  time  of  his  death.  His  judicial  opinions,  in
the  Pennsylvania  state  reports,  from  1873  till  1887,
are  distinguished  by  learning,  sound  judgment,
and  clear  and  forcible  language.

MEREDITH,  Samuel,  financier,  b.  in  Phila
delphia  in  1740;  d.  in  Belmont,  his  seat  in  Luzerne
county.  Pa.,  10  March,  1817.  His  father,  Rees
(1705-'77),  was  a  native  of  Radnorshire,  Wales,
and  one  of  the  most  influential  colonists  of  his
day.  Chancing  to  meet  Washington  at  the  coffee
house  in  Philadelphia  when  the  latter  was  an  un
known  youth,  he  entered  into  conversation  with
him,  and,  being  pleased  with  his  demeanor,  he  in
vited  him  to  his  house  and  was  afterward  his  warm
friend.  The  son  became  a  member  of  the  Penn
sylvania  colonial  legislature.  He  entered  the  ser
vice  as  major  of  the  3d  Pennsylvania  battalion  in
1775,  was  engaged  actively  in  various  battles,  and
was  made  brigadier-general  for  gallant  service's.
He  and  his  brother-in-law,  George  Clymer,  the
signer,  each  gave  £10,000  in  silver  to  carry  on
the  war.  Gen.  Meredith  was  exiled  from  Phila
delphia  on  its  occupation  by  the  British.  He
was  a  member  of  the  old  congress  in  1787-'8,
and  was  first  treasurer  of  the  United  States  from
1789  till  1801,  when  he  resigned  in  order  to  look
after  his  personal  estates.  On  entering  upon
the  office  of  treasurer,  he  advanced  $20,000,  and
subsequently  $120,000,  to  the  government,  and  he
was  never  reimbursed.

MEREDITH,  Solomon,  soldier,  b.  in  Guilford
county,  N.  C.,  29  May,  1810 ;  d.  in  Cambridge  City,
Ind.,  21  Oct.,  1875.  At  the  age  of  nineteen  he
went  to  Wayne  county,  Ind.,  and  by  manual  labor
earned  enough  to  give  himself  an  education.  In
1840  he  removed  to  Cambridge  City.  He  was
chosen  sheriff  of  his  county  in  1834  and  1836,
thrice  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1846-'8,  and  in
1849  became  LT.  S.  marshal  for  the  district  of  In
diana.  In  1854  he  was  again  chosen  to  the  legis
lature.  In  July,  1861,  he  became  colonel  of  the
19th  Indiana  regiment,  which  saw  its  first  service
in  Virginia,  and  lost  half  its  effective  force  at
Gainesville,  where  Col.  Meredith  was  wounded.
He  was  promoted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
on  6  Oct.,  1862,  and  commanded  what  was  known
throughout  the  war  as  the  iron  brigade.  Under
his  leadership  this  brigade  forced  a  crossing  of
the  Rappahannock  in  April,  1863,  receiving  special
thanks  in  general  orders,  took  part  in  the  battle
of  Chancellorsville,  and  opened  the  battle  of  Get
tysburg,  where  Gen.  Meredith  was  wounded  again
and  disabled  till  November,  1863.  He  was  ordered
to  the  command  of  Cairo,  111.,  early  in  1864,  and
in  September  to  a  similar  post  in  Paducah,  Ky.,
which  he  retained  till  the  close  of  the  war.  On
14  Aug.,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  major-general  of
volunteers.  In  1867-'9  he  was  surveyor-general  of
Montana,  and  he  then  retired  to  "  Oakland  farm  "
near  Cambridge  City,  Ind.,  where  he  devoted  him
self  to  raising  fine  stock,  and  dispensed  a  gener
ous  hospitality.  He  was  also  a  pioneer  in  im
proved  methods  of  agriculture.  Gen.  Meredith
was  six  feet  six  inches  in  height,  of  commanding
presence,  and  a  ready  speaker.  He  was  active  in
securing  the  passage  of  the  present  Indiana  school
laws,  and  as  financial  agent  of  the  Indiana  cen
tral  railroad  did  much  for  the  success  of  that
enterprise.  His  three  sons  were  all  in  the  Na
tional  army  during  the  civil  war,  and  two  lost
their  lives  in  the  service.

MEREDITH,  Sir  William  Collis,  Canadian
jurist,  b.  in  Dublin.  Ireland,  23  May,  1812.  He  is
the  son  of  Rev.  Thomas  Meredith,  L).  D.,  rector  of


Ardtrea,  County  Tyrone.  lie  studied  law,  emi
grated  to  Canada,  and  was  called  to  the  bar  of
Montreal  in  1836,  becoming  queen's  counsel  in
1844.  He  was  also  a  judge  of  the  superior  court
for  the  province  of  Quebec  from  1849  till  1859.
and  of  the  court  of  queen's  bench  for  the  same
province  from  1859  till  1866.  He  was  chief  jus
tice  of  the  superior  court  from  1866  till  1884,  when
he  retired.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.
from  Lennoxville  university,  province  of  Quebec,
in  1854,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Laval  university
in  1880.  He  was  knighted  in  1886.

MEREDITH,  William  Morris,  cabinet  offi
cer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  8  June,  1799 ;  d.  there,
17  Aug.,  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Univer
sity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1812,  studied  law,  and
about  1820  began
practice.  He  was
in  the  legislature  in
1824-'8,  president  of
the  select  council
of  Philadelphia  in
1834-'49,  and  a
member  of  the  State
constitutional  con
vention  of  1837.  He
became  secretary  of
the  U.  S.  treasury
in  1849,  and  held
office  until  the  death
of  President  Taylor.
He  was  attorney-
general  of  Pennsyl
vania  in  1861-'?,
and  president  of  the
State  constitutional
convention  in  1873.  As  a  lawyer,  Mr.  Meredith
occupied  for  many  years  the  foremost  rank  in  his
native  state,  and  was  constantly  engaged  in  impor
tant  cases  in  the  supreme  court  of  Pennsylvania,
and  that  of  the  United  States.  As  a  ready  and
able  legal  debater,  he  had  few  superiors  in  this
country. — His  brother,  Sullivan  Amory,  soldier,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  5  July,  1816  ;  d.  in  Buffalo,
N.  Y.,  27  Dec.,  1874,  was  educated  at  William  and
Mary.  He  twice  visited  China,  and  in  1848  went
to  California.  When  the  civil  war  began  he  was
in  business  in  Philadelphia.  On  25  April,  1861,
he  was  commissioned  colonel  of  the  10th  Pennsyl
vania  regiment,  and  superintended  the  drilling,
equipment,  and  forwarding  of  over  30,000  troops.
He  took  part  in  Patterson's  campaign  in  the  Shen-
andoah  valley,  and  on  his  return  organized  and
was  commissioned  colonel  of  the  56th  regiment.
In  the  winter  of  1861-'2  he  garrisoned  Fort  Al
bany.  The  following  April  he  was  assigned  to
McDowell's  corps,  with  which  he  served  up  to  the
second  battle  of  Bull  Run,  where  he  was  severely
wounded.  For  his  gallantry  in  this  engagement
he  was  promoted  to  brigadier-general  of  volun
teers,  29  Aug.,  1862.  When  partly  recovered,  he
was  appointed  commissioner  for  the  exchange  of
prisoners.  In  1864  he  was  ordered  to  St.  Louis,
and  served  under  Gen.  Rosecrans  until  24  Aug.,
1865,  when  he  was  mustered  out.  Gen.  Meredith
contributed  a  series  of  letters  to  the  Buffalo  "  Com
mercial  Advertiser"  in  1868,  controverting  the
statements  of  the  Confederate  commissioner  Rob
ert  Ould,  in  charging  upon  Gen.  Grant  a  responsi
bility  for  the  barbarities  of  the  Confederate  au
thorities  to  captured  National  soldiers.

MEREDITH,  William  Ralph,  Canadian  legis
lator,  b.  in  Westminster.  Ont.,  31  March,  1840.
He  was  educated  at  London,  Ont..  grammar-school,
and  at  the  law  department  of  the  University


304


MERIAM


MERRIAM


of  Toronto,  called  to  the  bar  in  1861,  and  opened
a  law-office  in  London.  He  was  appointed  city
solicitor,  elected  a  bencher  of  the  Law  society
of  Ontario  in  1871,  and  queen's  counsel  in  1876.
In  1872  he  was  chosen  to  represent  London  in  the
Ontario  legislature,  and  he  has  been  returned  at
every  subsequent  general  election.  In  politics  he
is  a  supporter  of  the  policy  of  Sir  John  A.  Mac-
donald.  He  has  long  advocated  compulsory  vot
ing,  and  is  a  leader  (1888)  of  the  opposition.

MERIAM,  Ebenezer,  meteorologist,  b.  in  Con
cord,  Mass.,  20  June,  1794;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
19  March,  1864.  He  removed  in  early  manhood  to
Kentucky,  where  he  engaged  in  the  manufacture
of  saltpetre  and  other  mineral  products  of  the
Mammoth  cave,  and  subsequently  was  a  dry-goods
merchant  in  Zanesville,  Ohio.  About  1888  he
settled  in  New  York  city,  where  he  acquired  wealth
in  the  manufacture  of  soap  and  candles.  He  then
devoted  himself  to  meteorological  research,  and
was  the  originator  of  the  theory  of  cycles  of  at
mospherical  phenomena,  upon  which  he  published
articles  that  attracted  the  attention  of  scientists  at
home  and  abroad.  He  began  in  1841,  at  his  own  ex
pense,  the  publication  of  "  The  Municipal  Gazette,"
a  scientific  paper,  and  was  a  contributor  to  the  sci
entific  columns  of  most  of  the  New  York  city  jour
nals,  and  to  a  statistical  almanac  (1858).  also  print
ing  many  pamphlets.  He  spent  all  his  fortune  in
the  cause  of  science  and  benevolence.

MERIAN,  Marie  Sibylle  (may-ree-ong),  natu
ralist,  b.  in  Frankfort,  Germany,  2  April,  1647;  d.
in  Amsterdam,  13  Jan.,  1717.  She  was  a  daugh
ter  of  Matthew  Merian,  the  Swiss  engraver,  and
in  1665  married  Andre  Graff,  an  artist  of  Nurem
berg.  She  was  early  noted  for  her  knowledge
of  botany  and  entomology,  and  attained  great
reputation  as  a  naturalist.  She  went  to  Surinam
with  her  daughter  in  1699  and  returned  in  1701,
bringing  with  her  a  very  large  collection  of  draw
ings  of  the  insects,  shells,  and  plants  of  that  colony.
After  her  return  she  published  "  Metamorphosis
Insectarum  Surinamensium ''  (Amsterdam,  1705),
which  was  followed  after  her  death  by  "  Dissertatio
de  Generatione  et  Metamorphosibus  Insectorum
Surinamensium  "  (1719).  She  had  previously  issued
in  Latin  other  works  which  were  afterward  pub
lished  together  in  French  under  the  title  "  Histoire
des  insectes  de  1'Europe"  (1730).  Both  works  ap
peared  in  French  under  the  title  "  Histoire  gene-
rale  des  insectes  de  Surinam  et  de  toute  1'Europe  "
(3  vols.,  Paris,  1771).  Many  of  the  plates  in  these
works  were  her  own  work  and  possess  great  merit.
Some  of  her  beautiful  designs  on  vellum  are  in
the  British  museum. — Her  daughters,  JEANNE  MA
RIE  HELENE  and  DOROTHEE  MARIE  HEXRIETTE,  as
sisted  their  mother.  The  former  was  sent  to  Suri
nam  on  a  second  expedition  in  1702.

MERINO,  Ignacio  (may-ree'-no),  Peruvian  art
ist,  b.  in  Piura  in  1819.  "in  early  life  he  showed
great  talent  for  art,  and,  after  being  thoroughly  in
structed  in  drawing,  went  in  1837  to  Paris,  where
he  finished  his  studies  under  the  direction  of  the
Spanish  painter,  Manuel  Silvela.  In  1840  he  re
turned  to  his  native  country,  where  he  was  appoint
ed  by  the  government  director  of  the  National
academy  of  design  and  painting  in  Lima.  In  1851
he  returned  to  Paris,  where  he  established  his  studio
and  has  since  remained,  exhibiting  frequently  in  the
salon.  He  is  noted  for  his  rich  coloring,  especially
in  his  sunsets.  His  works  include  "Columbus  be
fore  the  Council  of  the  Indies,"  which  forms  one  of
the  chief  ornaments  of  the  National  museum  of
Lima,  "The  Reading  of  the  Testament,"  "The
Vengeance  of  Carrazo,"  and  "  Hamlet."


MERIWETHER,  David,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia
in  1755;  d.  near  Athens,  Ga.,  16  Nov.,  1822.  He
entered  the  Revolutionary  army  as  a  lieutenant  and
served  in  New  Jersey,  and  afterward  in  the  siege  of
Savannah,  where  he  was  taken  prisoner.  In  1785
he  settled  in  Wilkes  county,  Ga.,  which  he  repre
sented  several  times  in  the  legislature,  and  he  was
afterward  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  to  fill
a  vacancy,  serving  from  6  Dec.,  1802,  till  3  March,
1807.  He  was  a  warm  supporter  of  Jefferson,  who
appointed  him  in  1804  a  commissioner  to  treat  with
the  Creek  Indians.  He  was  also  associated  with
Andrew  Jackson  and  Gov.  Joseph  McMin,  of  Ten
nessee,  in  negotiating  a  treaty  with  the  Cherokees.

MERIWETHER,  David^  senator,  b.  in  Louisa
county,  Va.,  30  Oct.,  1800.  He  removed  to  Ken
tucky,  was  educated  in  a  country  school,  and  in
1818  engaged  in  the  fur-trade.  He  early  entered
politics  as  a  Democrat,  and  between  1832  and  1883
w'as  thirteen  times  a  member  of  the  Kentucky
legislature,  becoming  speaker  of  the  house  in  1859.
He  was  in  the  Constitutional  convention  of  1849,
sat  in  the  U.  S.  senate  by  appointment  of  the  gov
ernor,  on  the  death  of  Henry  Clay,  from  15  July
till  20  Dec.,  1852.  and  was  governor  of  New  Mexico
territory  from  1853  till  1857.

MERIWETHER,  Lee,  author,  b.  in  Columbus,
Miss.,  25  Dec..  1862.  His  mother,  Elizabeth  A  very
Meriwether.  is  the  author  of  numerous  tales,  includ
ing  "  The  Master  of  Red  Leaf,"  called  "  the  south
ern  '  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin.'  "  The  son  was  educated
in  the  public  schools  of  Memphis,  Tenn.,  and  at
the  age  of  eighteen  established,  with  an  elder
brother,  the  "  t  ree-Trader."  The  next  year  he  set
out  on  a  walking-tour  through  Europe  for  the
purpose  of  studying  the  condition  of  workingmen
and  the  effect  of  protective  tariffs.  He  was  em
ployed  by  the  U.  S.  bureau  of  labor  to  prepare  a
report  on  the  "  Condition  of  European  Labor,"
which  was  included  in  the  "  Annual  Report "  for
1886.  Since  completing  that  work  he  has  been
retained  in  the  service  to  gather  information  con
cerning  labor  in  the  United  States.  He  is  the
author  of  "A  Tramp  Trip:  How  to  see  Europe  on
Fifty  Cents  a  Day"  (New  York,  1887).

MERKLIN,  Leon  Charles,  linguist,  b.  in  New
Orleans,  La.,  in  1740;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  in  1797.
He  was  the  son  of  a  merchant,  and  followed  the
same  profession  for  several  years,  and,  having  made  a
fortune,  bought  a  large  estate  nearSaverne,  Alsace.
He  was  elected  to  the  states-general  in  1789,  and
re-elected  to  the  legislative  assembly.  He  is  known
by  several  treatises  on  the  North  American  Indian
dialects,  which  he  pretended  to  have  learned  in
trading  with  the  Indians.  They  have  been  severely
criticised  as  inaccurate,  but  possess  interest.  They
include  "  Considerations  generates  sur  la  formation
des  idiomes  paries  par  les  Indiens  de  1'Amerique
du  Nord  "  (Paris,  1780) ;  "  Expose  du  systeme  gram
matical  des  langues  Algonquines"  (1783);  and
"  Considerations  sur  le  systeme  phonetique  des
Lenni-Lenapes  "  (1784).

MERRIAM, George,  publisher,  b.  in  Worcester,
Mass.,  20  Jan.,  1803 :  d.  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  22
June,  1880.  The  Merriam  family  were  printers,
book-makers,  and  booksellers  in  Worcester  county
in  the  latter  part  of  the  18th  century.  George
worked  on  his  father's  farm  in  West  Brookfield
until  he  was  fifteen  years  of  age,  then  entered  his
uncle's  printing-office,  and  on  reaching  his  majority
became  a  partner.  In  1831  he  removed  to  Spring
field  with  his  brother  Charles,  and  established  in
1832  the  publishing  house  of  G.  and  C.  Merriam.
Their  earliest  publications  were  law-books,  editions
of  the  Bible,  and  school-books.  After  the  death  of


MERRICK


MERRILL


305


Noah  Webster,  the  lexicographer,  the  Merriams
purchased  the  right  of  future  publication  of  Web
ster's  dictionary,  many  successive  editions  of  which
they  have  since  issued. — His  brother  Charles,  pub
lisher,  b.  in  West  Brookfield,  Mass.,  21  Nov.,  1806 ;  d.
in  Springfield,  Mass.,  9  July,  1887,  learned  printing
at  an  early  age.  He  was  active  in  benevolent  works
and  contributed  $5,000  and  numerous  books  for
the  establishment  of  a  public  library  in  Spring
field.  He  bequeathed  $50,000  to  missionary,  Bible,
and  other  religious  societies.

MERRICK,  James  Lynian,  missionary,  b.  in
Monson.  Mass.,  11  Oct.,  1803  ;  d.  in  South  Amherst,
Mass.,  18  June,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst
in  1830,  studied  in  Princeton  theological  seminary,
and  was  graduated  at  Columbia  theological  semi
nary,  S.  0.,  in  1833.  He  was  ordained  as  a  Presbyte
rian  evangelist  at  Charleston  in  1834  and  appointed
missionary  to  Persia,  where  he  labored  in  Tabreez,
Shiraz,  and  Oroomiah  until  1845.  He  then  re
turned  to  this  country,  and  from  1849  till  1864  had
charge  of  a  Congregational  church  in  South  Am
herst.  From  1852  till  1857  he  was  instructor  in
oriental  literature  in  Amherst  college.  During
the  civil  war  he  gave  a  bounty  to  every  soldier
that  enlisted  in  his  own  parish,  and  he  bequeathed
his  entire  property  to  the  four  institutions  in  which
he  received  his  education  to  endow  four  Persian
scholarships.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Pilgrim's
Harp,"  poems  (Boston,  1847) ;  "  The  Life  and  Re
ligion  of  Mohammed,"  translated  from  the  Persian
Hyat-ul-Kuloob  (1850);  Keith's  "Evidences  of
Prophecy,"  translated  into  Persian  (Edinburgh,
1846) ;  "'Genealogy  of  the  Merrick  Family  "  (1850) ;
and  '•  A  Treatise  on  the  Orthography  of  the  English
Language,  with  a  New  Alphabet  of  Forty  Letters,"
which  was  not  published.  He  also  left  manu
script  translations  into  Persian.

MERRICK,  Plinv,  jurist,  b.  in  Brookfield,
Mass.,  2  Aug.,  1794;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  1  Feb.,
1867.  His  ancestor,  Thomas,  came  to  this  country
from  England  in  1630  and  settled  in  Springfield.
Pliny  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1814,  after
which  he  studied  law  with  Levi  Lincoln  and  prac
tised  in  Worcester  and  in  Bristol  county.  He  was
district  attorney  for  Worcester  in  1824-'43,  and
was  made  justice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in
1843  and  again  in  1851.  In  1844  he  was  judge  of
the  municipal  court,  and  from  1853  till  1864  of  the
Massachusetts  supreme  court,  removing  to  Boston
in  1856.  He  was  also  president  of  the  Worcester
and  Nashua  railroad  company.  In  1849  he  was
senior  counsel  in  the  defence  of  Prof.  WTebster  on  his
trial  for  the  murder  of  Dr.  George  Parkman.
From  1852  till  1856  he  was  an  overseer  of  Harvard,
from  which  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in
1853.  He  bequeathed  a  large  sum  for  the  establish
ment  of  schools  of  a  high  grade  in  Worcester.

MERRICK,  Samuel  Yaughan,  manufacturer,
b.  in  Hallowell,  Me.,  4  May,  1801 ;  d.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  18  Aug.,  1870.  '  In  1816  he  left  school
and  went  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  entered  the
counting-house  of  his  uncle.  He  subsequently
studied  engineering,  and  about  1835  established  at
Philadelphia  the  Southwark  iron-foundry,  which
became  the  finest  work  of  the  kind  in  this  coun
try.  Among  other  important  constructions  he
built  the  iron  light-houses  that  were  erected  along
the  Florida  reefs,  some  of  them  the  largest  in  the
world :  and  the  machinery  for  the  U.  S.  ships
"  Mississippi,"  •'  Princeton,"  "  San  Jacinto,"  and
"  Wabash."  Mr.  Merrick  took  a  deep  interest  in
public  affairs.  He  was  active  in  introducing  illu
minating  gas  into  Philadelphia,  to  further  which
measure  he  became  a  member  of  the  city  councils,
VOL.  iv. — 20


and  in  1834  he  was  sent  by  the  councils  to  Europe
to  examine  into  the  methods  of  manufacturing
gas  there.  His  report  led  to  the  construction  of
the  Philadelphia  gas-works,  the  building  of  which
he  superintended.  He  was  at  one  time  president
of  the  Pennsylvania  railroad,  and  of  the  Catawissa
railroad,  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Franklin
institute,  and  a  member  of  the  American  philo
sophical  society  from  1833  until  his  death.

MERRICK",  William  Dnhnrst,  statesman,  b.
in  Annapolis,  Md.,  25  Oct.,  1793;  d.  in  Washing
ton,  D.  C.,  5  Feb.,  1857.  He  served  as  captain  in
the  war  of  1812,  and  was  a  member  of  the  legisla
ture.  He  served  in  the  U.  S.  senate  from  5  Jan.,

1838,  till  3  March,  1845,  having  been  chosen  as  a
Whig,  was  a  member  of  the  Constitutional  conven
tion  of  1850,  and  again  served  in  the  legislature.
He  was the  author  of a  cheap  postage scheme,
and  held  local  offices  in  Maryland. — His  son,  Will
iam  Matthews,  jurist,  b.  in  Charles  county,  Md.,
1  Sept.,  1818,  received  a  liberal  education,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Baltimore  in

1839.  He  settled  in  Frederick,  Md.,  in  1844,  and
in  1845  was  appointed  deputy  attorney-general  for
that  county,  serving  five  years.  In  1854  he  removed
to  Washington,  D.  C.,  and  was  appointed  associate
judge  of  the  U.  S.  circuit  court  for  the  district  of
Columbia,  serving  until  this  court  was  abolished  in
1863. He  then  retired  to  Maryland,  where  he  prac
tised  law. In  1866-'7  he  was  senior  professor  of
law  in  Columbian  college,  Georgetown. He  was  a
member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention  of
1867,  and  was  elected  to  the  Maryland  legislature
in 1870. He  was  then  chosen  to  congress  as  a
Democrat,  serving  from  4  March,  1871,  till  3  March,
1873. On  4  May,  1885,  he  was  appointed  associate
justice  of  the  supreme  court of  the  District  of
Columbia,  and  is  now  (1888)  professor  of  law  in  the
Georgetown  university,  D.  C. — Another  son,  Rich
ard  Thomas,  lawyer,  b.  in  Charles  county,  Md.,
25  Jan.,  1826 ;  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C.,  23  June,
1885,  raised  a  company,  which  he  commanded  in  the
Mexican  war,  although  he  was  under  age,  after
which  he  practised  law  and  served  in  the  legisla
ture. He  then  went  to  Chicago,  where  he  formed  a
law-partnership  and  was  a  delegate  from  Illinois  to
the  Democratic  national  convention  of  1860,  sup
porting  Stephen  A.  Douglas. In  1864  he  removed
to  Washington,  D.  C.,  where  during  the  following
twenty  years  he  stood  high  in  his  profession.  After
the  war  he  was  a  Democratic  candidate  for  dele
gate  to  congress  from  the  District  of  Columbia  un
der  the  territorial  form  of  government. He  was
also  engaged  in  the  defence  of  President  Johnson
in  the  impeachment  trial  in  1868 ;  in  1876-'7  was
one  of  the  counsel  before  the  electoral  commission,
and  afterward  in  prosecuting  the  Star-route  cases.
He  was  a  brilliant  debater  and  public  speaker,  and
during  the  exciting presidential  canvass  of  1884
took  an  active  part  in  the  western  states  in  the  in
terest  of  the  Democratic  ticket. He  was  lecturer
on  constitutional  law  in  Georgetown  university.

MERRILL,  Ayres  Phillips,  physician,  b.  in
Pittsfield,  Mass.,  17  April,  1793  :  d.  in  New  York
city,  3  Nov.,  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  Fairfield,
N.Y.,  medical  college  in  1819.  and  at  once  ap
pointed  surgeon's  mate  in  the  8th  infantry  regi
ment  in  the  regular  army.  He  was  promoted  as
sistant  surgeon,  1  June,  1821,  but  resigned  on  21
Sept.,  1823,  and  settled  at  Natchez,  Miss.  In  1850
he  removed  to  Memphis,  Tenn.,  and  was  active  in
organizing  the  medical  college  of  that  city,  in
which  he  occupied  the  chair  of  the  theory  and
practice  of  medicine.  He  also  edited  the  Memphis
"Medical  Recorder."  In  1864  he  went  to  New


306


MERRILL


MERRILL


York  city,  practising  there  until  his  death.  He
wrote  chiefly  on  yellow  fever,  scurvy,  epidemic
diseases,  mercury,  and  internal  use  of  chloroform.

MERRILL,  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rowley,
Essex  co.,  Mass.,  18  March,  1705  ;  d.  in  Sedgwick,
Hancock  co.,  Me..  3  June,  1833.  After  serving
three  years  in  the  Revolutionary  army  he  entered
Dartmouth,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1789.  He
then  studied  theology  and  was  licensed  to  preach
in  1791.  His  first  sermon,  in  Sedgwick,  Me.,  pro
duced  a  revival  in  which  nearly  100  persons  were
converted.  After  laboring  there  nearly  six  months
he  visited  other  places  with  similar  results.  In
1793  he  returned  to  Sedgwick  and  became  pastor
of  a  newly  organized  Congregational  church,
which  in  1805  attained  to  the  largest  membership
of  any  religious  body  in  Maine,  numbering  189
communicants.  Afterward  Mr.  Merrill,  having
changed  his  theological  views,  organized  a  Baptist
church  with  a  majority  of  his  former  congrega
tion,  of  which  he  was  pastor  till  his  death,  with
the  exception  of  the  years  1814-'21,  when  he  held
a  charge,  at  Nottingham,  Me.  He  was  a  founder
and  efficient  friend  of  Waterville  college,  serving
as  trustee  for  twelve  years  after  its  organization.
He  was  also  elected  to  the  legislature  and  was
subsequently  a  member  of  the  governor's  council,
accepting  that  office  in  order  to  serve  more  effi
ciently  the  cause  of  education.  He  published
"Eight  Letters  on  Open  Communion  (1805);
"  Letters  Occasioned  by  the  Rev.  Samuel  Worces
ter's  Two  Discourses  "  (1807) ;  "  Mode  and  Sub
jects  of  Baptism  Examined,  with  a  Miniature  His
tory  of  Baptism  "  (1812) ;  "  Balaam  Disappointed,
a  Thanksgiving  Sermon  at  Nottingham  West "
(1815) :  and  other  occasional  discourses.

MERRILL,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Peacham,
Caledonia  co.,  Vt.,  8  Sept.,  1798 :  d.  there,  21  July,
1850.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1821
and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1825.
After  his  ordination  in  April,  1828,  he  was  called
to  the  Presbyterian  church  at  Urbana.  Ohio,  where
he  was  assistant  pastor  from  1827  till  1835,  and
pastor  from  1835  till  1841.  He  then  returned  to
Peacham,  where  he  remained  until  his  death.  Mr.
Merrill  contributed  to  several  periodicals  and  pub
lished  three  occasional  discourses.  A  volume  of
his  sermons,  with  a  sketch  of  his  life,  was  issued
by  Thomas  S.  Pearson  (Windsor,  1855).

MERRILL,  Moses  Emery,  soldier,  b.  in  Bruns
wick,  Me.,  3  Sept.,  1803 ;  d.  near  Molino  del  Rey,
Mexico,  8  Sept.,  1847.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy,  1  July,  1826.  assigned  to
the  5th  infantry,  and  was  on  frontier  duty  till
1845.  He  had  been  promoted  1st  lieutenant  in
1833  and  captain  in  1837.  Capt.  Merrill  took  part
in  the  military  occupation  of  Texas  in  1845-'6  and
in  the  Mexican  war,  being  engaged  at  Palo  Alto,
Resaca  de  la  Palma,  Monterey,  the  siege  of  Vera
Cruz,  and  the  capture  of  San  Antonio.  He  was
killed  at  Molino  del  Rey  while  leading  the  assault
ing  column  in  its  attack  on  the  enemy's  works. —
His  son,  William  Emery,  military  engineer,  b.
in  Port  Howard,  Brown  co.,  Wis.,  11  Oct.,  1837,
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1859  and  assigned  to  the  engineer  corps.  He
served  for  nearly  a  year  at  the  U.  S.  military  acade
my  as  assistant  professor  of  engineering,  acted  as
assistant  engineer  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  in
March  and  April,  1862,  and  was  chief  engineer  of
the  Army  of  Kentucky  from  12  Oct.,  1862,  till  25
May.  1863,  and  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland
from  22  Aug.  to  17  Sept,  of  the  latter  year.  He
took  part  in  all  the  more  important  engagements
of  those  armies  till  the  close  of  the  war.  He  was


brevetted  captain  for  gallantry  in  an  engagement
before  Yorktown,  Va.,  promoted  captain,  3  March,
1863,  and  made  colonel  of  the  veteran  volunteer
engineers,  2  July,  1864,  which  corps  he  had  organ
ized  and  with  which  he  had  been  engaged  in  forti
fying  important  points  on  the  lines  of  military
railroads  in  Tennessee,  Alabama,  and  Georgia.  He
was  brevetted  major,  lieutenant-colonel,  and  colonel
for  "  faithful  and  meritorious  services  "  at  the  bat
tles  of  Chickamauga,  Lookout  Mountain,  and  Resa
ca,  respectively.  He  was  promoted  major.  7  March,
1867,  and  lieutenant-colonel,  20  Feb.,  1883.  Since
the  close  of  the  war  he  has  served  as  chief  engineer
on  the  staff  of  Lieut.-Gen.  Sherman  and  on  im
portant  duty  with  his  corps  in  the  improvement
of  rivers  and  in  surveys  in  the  west.  In  1878  he
was  ordered  to  visit  Europe  to  obtain  information
respecting  the  construction  of  movable  dams,  and
other  professional  subjects.  He  has  since  been  sta
tioned  at  Cincinnati  in  charge  of  improvements  in
the  Ohio,  Alleghany,  Monongahela,  and  Muskin-
gum  rivers.  He  has  published  "  Iron-Truss  Bridges
for  Railroads''  (New  York,  1870)  and  "Improve
ment  of  Non-Tidal  Rivers"  (Washington,  1881).
MERRILL.  James,  lawyer,  b.  in  Peacham,  Vt.,

8  May,  1790  ;  d.  in  New  Berlin,  Pa.,  29  Oct.,  1841.
He was graduated at Dartmouth in 1812 and
moved  to  York,  Pa.,  with  Thaddeus  Stevens  and
John  Blanc-hard,  where  he  read  law,  and  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1815. He  settled  in  1816  in
New  Berlin,  Union  co.,  Pa.,  where  he  resided  until
his death. He  was for many  years  one of the
most  eloquent  and  popular  lawyers  in  that  part  of
the  state. As  senatorial  delegate  he  attended  the
Constitutional  convention  of  1836,  and  it  is  said
that  to  him  more  than  to  any  other  man  in  the  con
vention  the  people  of  Pennsylvania  are  indebted
for  its  wisest  provisions. In  the  debates  he  was
the  advocate  of  the  present  peculiar  judicial  sys
tem  of  Pennsylvania,  by  which  equity  is  adminis
tered  through  common  law  forms,  and  as  the  con
servative  adherent  to  those  principles  in  the  con
stitution  of 1790  for  which  it  was proposed to
substitute the  rapidly  growing  doctrines  of the
pro-slavery  thinkers. He  also  urged  the  insertion
of  a  provision  that  would  give  to  colored  men  the
political  franchise. — His  son,  Lewis,  soldier,  b.  in
New  Berlin,  Pa.,  28  Oct.,  1834,  left  the  class  of  1852
at  Lewisburg  university,  Pa.,  to  enter  the  U.  S.
military  academy,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1855,
and  was  appointed  lieutenant  to  the  1st  dragoons.
After  frontier  service  he  was  detached  to  muster
in  and  organize  volunteer  troops,  and  in  August,
1861,  was  made  colonel  and  chief  of  cavalry  on  the
staff  of  Gen.  John  C.  Fremont. He  organized  a
regiment  of  Missouri  volunteer  cavalry,  of  which
he  was  appointed  colonel,  and  the  regiment  was
called  Merrill's  Horse. He  led  a  brigade  in  the
Army  of  the  Southwest  to  December,  1861,  and  the
following  year  took  the  field  in  operations  against
the guerillas  of  western  and northern  Missouri.
He  commanded  the  district  of  north  Missouri  in
July,  1863,  when  he  was  assigned  to  the  command
of  a  brigade  of  cavalry  in  the  Army  of  Arkansas.
He  participated  with  them  and  as  commander  of
the  cavalry  division  in  the  action  near  Little  Rock,

9  Sept.,  1863,  and  in  the  battle  and  capture  of  Lit
tle  Rock,  and  led  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  driving
them  successively  in  a  series  of  engagements  from
every  position  and  capturing  more  than  400  pris
oners. On  10  Sept.,  1862,  he  had  been  promoted
brevet  major  for  "  gallant  and  meritorious  service
against  rebel  forces  in  north  Missouri,"  and  on  10
Sept.,  1863,  he  was  made  brevet  lieutenant-colonel
for  "  gallant  and  meritorious  service  in  fhe  battle


MERRILL


MERRIMON


307


of  Little  Rock."  In  the  following  year,  while  in
command  of  the  West  division  cavalry  bureau,  he
organized  and  commanded  a  brigade  of  cavalry  in
the  campaign  against  Price's  invasion  of  Missouri,
participating  in  the  action  near  Franklin,  Mo.  In
January,  1865.  he  was  transferred  to  the  Army  of
the  Cumberland  and  assigned  to  the  command  of
a  brigade  of  cavalry  in  northwest  Georgia  and
northern  Alabama.  On  5  March,  1865,  he  was  pro
moted  brevet  colonel  for  services  against  the  forces
under  Gen.  Wofford  in  the  operations  that  termi
nated  in  his  surrender,  and  on  13  March,  1865,  he
was  brevetted  brigadier-general  for  "  gallant  and
meritorious  service  during  the  war."  He  then  re
turned  to  his  regiment,  and  in  1866  was  made  in
spector-general  of  the  Department  of  the  Platte
and  subsequently  judge-advocate  of  that  depart
ment.  He  was  promoted  major  in  1868,  and  while
serving  on  the  frontier  was  assigned  by  his  brevet
rank  to  the  command  of  a  military  district  in
South  Carolina,  embracing  a  territory  in  which  the
Ku-klux  outrages  were  most  frequent.  In  return
for  his  services  he  received  the  thanks  of  the  war
department  and  of  his  department  commander  for
"  great  work  and  ability  in  mastering  and  break
ing  up  the  Ku-klux  conspiracy,"  and  those  of  the
legislature  of  South  Carolina  for  "  conspicuous
ability "  in  the  performance  of  his  duties.  In
1875-'6  he  was  again  called  on  for  similar  duty  in
command  of  the  Red  River  district  of  Louisiana.
Gen.  Merrill  was  retired  from  active  service  on
surgeon's  certificate  of  disability  in  1886  after  sev
eral  years  of  frontier  duty.

MERRILL,  Selah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Canton
Centre,  Hartford  co.,  Conn.,  2  May,  1837.  He  en
tered  Yale,  but  left  before  graduation,  and  was
subsequently  given  the  degree  of  A.  M.  by  that  in
stitution  "  for  special  services  in  biblical  learning."
He  prepared  for  the  ministry  in  New  Haven  theo
logical  seminary,  was  ordained  as  an  evangelist  in
1864,  and  subsequently  preached  at  Chester,  Mass.,
Le  Roy,  N.  Y.,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  and  Salmon
Falls,  N.  H.  He  was  chaplain  of  the  49th  U.  S.
colored  infantry  at  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  in  1864-'5,
and  from  1868  till  1870  studied  in  Germany.  From
1874  till  1877  he  was  in  the  Holy  Land  as  archae
ologist  of  the  American  Palestine  exploration  so
ciety.  He  was  U.  S.  consul  in  Jerusalem  from
1882  till  1886,  and  while  there  finally  settled  the
location  of  the  second  wall  of  the  city,  on  which
the  site  of  Calvary  depends.  He  has  visited  Pales
tine  three  times  and  made  there  the  largest  col
lection  of  birds,  animals,  coins,  utensils  of  different
kinds,  and  various  natural  objects  that  has  yet
been  brought  together.  He  is  a  member  of  the
Society  of  biblical  literature  and  exegesis  and  of
the  British  society  of  biblical  archaeology.  He  re
ceived  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Iowa  college  in
1875,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Union  in  1884.  Dr.
Merrill  has  written  numerous  articles  for  the
"  Bibliotheca  Sacra  "  and  other  periodicals  on  bib
lical  geography,  the  cuneiform  inscriptions,  and
other  oriental  topics,  and  has  published  "  East  of  the
Jordan  "  (New  York,  1881  ;  new  ed.,  1883) ;  "  Gali
lee  in  the  Time  of  Christ"  (Boston,  1881 ;  London,
1885-'6) ;  parts  of  "  Picturesque  Palestine  "  (New
York,  1882-'3) ;  "  Greek  Inscriptions  collected  in
the  Years  1875-'77  in  the  Country  East  of  the
Jordan"  (1885);  and  "Reports  on  the  Country
East  of  the  Jordan,"  in  the  "  Fourth  Statement  o'f
the  American  Palestine  Exploration  Society "
(1887).  Several  of  his  reports  on  "  Fruit  Culture
in  Palestine,"  "  The  Climate  of  Palestine,"  the
"  Condition  of  the  Laboring  Classes  and  of  Wages  "
in  that  country,  and  on  other  topics,  have  also  ap


peared  in  the  consular  monthly  reports  that  are
published  by  the  U.  S.  government.

MERRILL,  Stephen  Mason,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Jefferson  county,  Ohio,  16  Sept.,  1825.  He  en
tered  the  Ohio  conference  of  the  M.  E.  church  in
1864  as  a  travelling  preacher,  became  editor  of
the  "  Western  Christian  Advocate "  in  1868,  and
was  consecrated  bishop  in  1872.  Ohio  Wesleyan
university  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1868,
and  Northwestern  university  that  of  LL.  D.  in
1886.  His  piiblications  include  "  Christian  Bap
tism"  (Cincinnati,  1876);  "New  Testament  Idea  of
Hell "  (1878) ;  "  Second  Coming  of  Christ  "  (1879) ;
"  Aspects  of  Christian  Experience  "  (1882) ;  "  Di
gest  of  Methodist  Law  "  (1885) ;  and  "  Outlines  of
Thought  on  Probation  "  (1886).

MERRILL,  Thomas  Abbot,  clergyman,  b.  in
Andover,  Mass.,  18  Jan.,  1780 ;  d.  in  Middlebury,
Vt.,  25  April,  1855.  He  was  graduated  at  Dart
mouth  in  1801,  taught  for  two  years  in  Hanover,
N.  H.,  and  in  August,  1803,  was  chosen  tutor  in
Dartmouth.  The  following  year  he  accepted  the
senior  tutorship  in  Middlebury  college.  As  he  had
meantime  studied  theology,  he  was  licensed  to
preach  in  January,  and  ordained  in  December,
1805,  having  received  a  call  to  fill  the  vacant  pul
pit  of  the  Congregational  church  at  Middlebury,
where  he  remained  till  1842.  He  took  an  active
part  in  the  organization  of  the  Vermont  domestic
missionary  society,  of  which  he  was  chosen  secre
tary,  holding  the  office  until  1821,  when  he  de
clined  a  re-election.  He  was  also  a  founder  of  the
Vermont  peace  society  in  1837,  and  president  of
the  Peace  convention  in  1853.  He  was  nine  times
moderator  of  the  Congregational  general  conven
tion,  and  in  1810  was  appointed  register  of  that
body.  After  he  left  his  pastorate  he  served  two
years  as  treasurer  of  Middlebury  college,  and  sup
plied  the  pulpit  of  the  church  at  Weybridge  until
1854.  In  1837  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Middlebury.  He  published  "  An  Election  Ser
mon  *'  (1806) ;  "  A  Sermon  before  the  Domestic
Missionary  Society"  (1833);  and  "A  History  of
Middlebury,  Vt."  (1841).

MERRIMAN,  Mansfield,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Southington,  Conn.,  27  March,  1848.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Sheffield  scientific  school  of  Yale,
as  a  civil  engineer,  in  1871,  and  in  1873  entered
the  U.  S.  corps  of  engineers  as  assistant  engineer.
In  1875  he  returned  to  Sheffield  as  instructor  of
civil  engineering,  and  in  1876  received  the  degree
of  Ph.  D.  for  advanced  studies.  He  was  called  to
the  chair  of  civil  engineering  in  Lchigh  university
in  1878,  which  professorship  he  still  (1888)  holds.
In  1880  he  became  an  acting  assistant  of  the  U.  S.
coast  and  geodetic  survey,  and  for  five  years  had
charge  of  the  primary  triangulation  of  Pennsyl
vania.  Prof.  Merriman  is  a  member  of  the  Ameri
can  society  of  civil  engineers,  the  American  philo
sophical  society,  and  other  scientific  bodies  in
the  United  States  and  Europe.  He  has  pub
lished  "  Theory  of  Continuous  Bridges  "  (New  York,
1876) ;  "  Elements  of  the  Method  of  Least  Squares  "
(London,  1877) :  "  The  Figure  of  the  Earth,  an  In
troduction  to  Geodesy  "  (New  York,  1881) :  "  Text-
Book  on  the  Method  of  Least  Squares"  (1884);
and  "The  Mechanics  of  Materials"  (1885).

MERRIMON,  Augustus  Sunnnerfield,  sena
tor,  b.  in  Buncombe  county  (now  Transylvania),
N.  C.,  15  Sept.,  1830.  He  was  the  son  of  a  Method
ist  clergyman,  and  the  eldest  of  ten  children.  He
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1852,  be
came  solicitor  to  several  counties  in  his  circuit,  and
in  1861  solicitor  for  the  district.  In  1860  he  was
elected  to  the  legislature.  At  the  beginning  of  the


308


MERRITT


MERRITT


agitation  that  led  to  the  civil  war  Mr.  Merrimon
took  a  decided  stand  for  the  Union,  but  the  procla
mation  of  President  Lincoln  calling  for  75,000
men  decided  him  to  join  the  Confederate  army,  in
which  for  a  short  time  he  was  attached  to  the  com
missary  department  as  captain.  In  i860  he  was
chosen  judge  of  the  superior  courts  by  the  legisla
ture,  and  as  such  held  the  first  regular  sessions  on
his  circuit  under  circumstances  of  considerable
peril,  a  police  force  having  to  be  organized  in  sev
eral  counties  by  the  sheriff  to  preserve  the  peace.
When  Gen.  Edward  R.  S.  Canby,  in  command  of
the  U.  S.  forces,  issued  military  orders  to  the
courts.  Judge  Merrimon  resigned  his  commission.
In  1872  he  was  nominated  for  governor,  but  was
defeated  by  a  small  majority.  He  was  chosen  U.  S.
senator  in  the  following  December,  and  served
from  1873  till  1879.

MERRITT,  Anna  Lea,  artist,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa..  13  Sept.,  1844.  Her  maiden  name  was
Anna  Massey  Lea.  She  was  twenty-one  years  of
age  before  she  turned  her  attention  to  painting,
and  subsequently  studied  under  Prof.  Heinrich
Hoffmann,  of  Dresden,  and  Henry  Merritt,  of  Lon
don,  whom  she  married  in  April,  1877.  In  1871
she  went  to  London  to  reside,  and  the  same  year
exhibited  "  A  Scene  on  the  Grand  Canal,  Venice,"
and  "  Portrait  of  a  Young  Lady."  Of  her  pictures
since  exhibited,  "  Eve  Overcome  by  Remorse  "  has
attracted  the  most  attention.  She  was  represented
at  the  Philadelphia  centennial  exhibition,  and  re
ceived  a  diploma  and  medal.  After  the  death  of
her  husband,  Henry  Merritt.  an  artist  and  author,
she  published  a  memorial  of  him  entitled  "  Henry
Merritt's  Art  Criticism  and  Romance,  with  Recol
lections  and  Twenty-three  Etchings "  (London,
1879).  To  supply  a 'portrait  of  her  husband  she
studied  the  art  of  etching,  which  led  to  her  adopt
ing  it  as  a  profession.  She  has  also  etched  "  Two
Portraits  of  Mary  Wolstonecraft,"  "  View  on  the
Thames,"  "  Portrait  of  Sir  Gilbert  Scott,"  and  "  El
len  Terry  as  Ophelia."  She  has  exhibited  at  the
London  academy  "The  Pied  Piper  of  Hamelin"
(1872) ;  "  St.  Cecilia  "  and  "  A  Bacchante  "  (1875) ;
"A  Girl  with  Doves"  (1876);  "Camilla"  (1883);
and  various  portraits.  At  present  she  resides  in
London,  but  frequently  visits  New  York  city  and
Philadelphia,  where  she  has  painted  a  number  of
portraits.  She  is  a  relative  of  Henry  C.  Lea  (q.  v.).

MERRITT,  Edwin  Atkins,  consul,  b.  in  Sud-
bury,  Vt.,  26  Feb.,  1828.  He  was  thrown  on  his
own  resources  at  an  early  age,  and  removed  in
1841  to  St.  Lawrence  county,  N.  Y.,  and  became  a
surveyor.  After  holding  local  offices  he  was  elected
to  the  lower  branch  of  the  legislature  as  a  Repub
lican  in  1859,  and  re-elected  in  1860.  At  the  be
ginning  of  the  civil  war  he  became  quartermaster
of  the  60th  New  York  regiment,  served  with  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  in  Sherman's  Georgia
campaign  acted  as  commissary  of  subsistence.  On
1  Jan.,  1865,  he  was  made  quartermaster-general  of
the  state  of  New  York,  and  he  superintended  the
Soldiers'  home  in  New  York  city.  He  also  estab
lished  free  agencies  for  the  collection  of  bounties,
back  pay,  and  pensions  that  were  due  New  York
volunteers.  In  1869-'70  he  was  naval  officer  of  the
port  of  New  York.  In  1875  he  was  the  unsuccess
ful  Republican  candidate  for  state  treasurer.  In
December,  1877,  he  became  surveyor  of  the  port  of
New  York,  and  in  1878  he  was  appointed  collector
in  place  of  Chester  A.  Arthur.  He  was  U.  S.  con
sul-general  in  London  in  1881-'5.

MERRITT,  Timothy,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bark-
hamsted,  Litchfield  co.,  Conn.,  in  October,  1775;
d.  in  Lynn,  Mass.,  2  May,  1845.  He  began  preach


ing  in  1794,  and  served  as  a  clergyman  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  various  parts  of
New  England.  While  at  Maiden,  Mass.,  in  1831,
he  was  an  editor  of  "Zion's  Herald,"  published  in
Boston,  and  from  1832  till  1835  he  resided  in  New
York  city  as  assistant  editor  of  "  The  Christian
Advocate  and  Journal."  While  in  Boston  he  es
tablished  a  monthly  entitled  "A  Guide  to  Chris
tian  Perfection."  Mr.  Merritt  was  an  able  writer,
an  eloquent  preacher,  an  accomplished  debater,
and  occupied  a  high  place  among  the  Methodist
ministers  of  his  time.  He  atoned  for  early  de
ficiencies  by  subsequent  vigorous  intellectual  dis
cipline.  He  published  "  Christian  Manual  "  (New
York,  1824);  "Memoir  of  Miss  S.  H.  Bunting"
(1833);  "Convert's  Guide  and  Preachers  Assist
ant  "  (1841) ;  "  Discussion  against  Universal  Salva
tion";  "  On  the  Validity  and  Sufficiency  of  Infant
Baptism  "  ;  and  "  Lectures  and  Discourses  on  Uni
versal  Salvation,"  with  Rev.  Wilbur  Fiske,  D.  I).

MERRITT,  Wesley,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
city,  16  June,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy,  1  July,  1860,  assigned  to
the  dragoons, and  promoted  1st  lieutenant,  13  May,
1861,  and  captain,  5  April,  1862.  He  took  part  in
Gen.  George  Stoneman's  raid  toward  Richmond  in
April  and  May,  1863,  and  was  in  command  of  the
reserve  cavalry  brigade  in  the  Pennsylvania  cam
paign  of  the  same  year,  being  commissioned  briga
dier-general  of  volunteers  in  June.  For  gallant
and  meritorious  services  during  the  battle  of
Gettysburg  he  was  brevetted  major.  Still  in  com
mand  of  his  brigade,  he  took  part  in  the  various
engagements  in  central  Virginia  in  1863-'4,  and
was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel  in  the
regular  army,  and  major-general  of  volunteers,  for
gallantry  at  the  battles  of  Yellow  Tavern,  Hawes's
Shop,  and  Winchester  respectively.  On  13  March,

1865,  he was brevetted brigadier  -  general and
major-general  in  the  regular  army  for  bravery  at
the  battle  of  Five  Forks,  and  his  services  during
the  final  Virginia  campaign,  and  on  1  April  was
commissioned  major-general  of  volunteers. After
the  war  he  was  employed  chiefly  on  frontier  duty
until  1882,  when  he  was  placed  in  charge  of  the
U.  S.  military  academy  at  West  Point. In  June,
1887,  he  was  ordered  to  Fort  Leavenworth. He
became  lieutenant-colonel  of the  9th cavalry  in

1866,  colonel  of  the  5th  cavalry  in  1876,  and  in
1887  became  brigadier-general.

MERRITT,  William,  navigator,  b.  in  Eng
land  about  1640;  d.  in  1708.  He  arrived  in  New
York  about  1671  in  command  of  a  ship,  and  after
ward  became  a  merchant.  He  was  made  lieuten
ant  of  Stephen  Cortlandt's  company  in  March,
1681,  elected  a  member  of  the  common  council  in
1684,  and  commissioned  quartermaster  in  July  of
the  latter  year.  From  1679  till  1682,  in  1685,  1687,
and  again  in  1691,  he,  with  others,  farmed  the  ex
cise.  In  1687  he  served  as  alderman,  and  in  May,
1689,  he  was  appointed  one  of  a  committee  to
provide  materials  for  the  fortification  of  the  city.
During  the  occupation  of  the  gubernatorial  office
by  Jacob  Leisler,  Alderman  Merritt  and  his  son,
John,  were  arrested  by  that  official  apparently  for
having  received  at  his  house  "five  armed  stran-

fers."  During  his  confinement  of  twenty-one  days
lerritt  used  every  effort  to  obtain  permission  to
visit  his  dying  grandchild,  but  the  request  was  not
granted.  He  was  again  alderman  from  1690  till
1695,  and  served  as  a  member  of  the  general  as
sembly  in  1691.  He  was  commissioned  major  in
Gov.  Benjamin  Fletcher's  expedition,  and  reached
Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  with  the  city  detachment,  18
Feb.,  1693.  lie  was  appointed  justice  in  New  York


MERRY


MESNARD


309


city,  12  May,  1694,  and  served  as  mayor  from  the
end  of  that  year  till  1698.  On  19  March,  1695,  he
and  other  members  of  the  Church  of  England  pe
titioned  for  leave  to  buy  land  whereon  to  erect  a
church,  and  he  was  one  of  those  that  had  charge
of  the  building  of  Trinity  church.  He  and  other
"managers  of  the  building,"  on  16  July,  1696,
asked  that  "the  money  collected  for  ransoming
Christian  slaves  be  paid  over  to  them,  as  some  of
said  Christians  are  dead,  and  others  have  escaped."
Merritt  and  his  son  were  the  first  vestrymen  of
Trinity,  having  been  chosen  in  1697.  In  1700  he
was  commissioned  colonel  of  Abraham  De  Peyster's
regiment.  About  this  time  he  removed  to  Orange
county,  X.  Y.,  where  he  was  registered  in  1702  as
a  justice.  The  last  recorded  event  in  his  history  is
that  he  returned  to  his  original  vocation,  as  he
was  appointed  pilot  of  her  majesty's  ship  "  Lowe-
staff  e"  on  24  April,  1706.

MERRY,  Ann,  actress,  b.  in  Bristol,  England,
30  May,  1769  ;  d.  in  Alexandria,  Va.,  28  June,  1808.
She  was  the  daughter  of  John  Brunton,  an  actor
and  manager  of  the  Norwich  theatre.  In  February,
1785,  Miss  Brunton  first  appeared  at  the  theatre  in
Bath  as  Euphrasia  in  "The  Grecian  Daughter,"
which  was  followed  by  other  leading  parts,  and  on
17  Oct.  of  the  same  year  she  made  her  debut  at
Co  vent  garden  theatre  in  London  as  Horatio  in
"  The  Roman  Father."  Here  she  attained  great
distinction,  and  by  many  was  rated  second  only  to
Mrs.  Siddons.  In  1792  Miss  Brunton  married
Robert  Merry,  known  in  literature  as  "  Delia  Crus-
ca,"  a  lieutenant  in  the  horse-guards,  who  was  an
amateur  playwright  and  a  man  of  letters.  He  had
rapidly  run  through  his  patrimony,  but  at  that
time  still  figured  in  fashionable  circles.  She  at
once  retired  from  the  threatre,  and  went  with  her
husband  to  Paris,  but  when  their  means  were  en
tirely  exhausted  she  wished  to  return  to  her  for
mer  occupation.  Family  considerations  on  the
Kirt  of  Mr.  Merry  prevented  her  return  to  the
ondon  stage,  but  an  offer  that  was  made  through
Thomas  Wignell,  of  the  Philadelphia  theatre,  was
readily  accepted.  The  couple  arrived  in  New  York
city,  19  Oct.,  1796.  Mrs.  Merry  renewed  her  career
at  the  playhouse  in  Philadelphia  on  5  Dec.  of  the
same  year  as  Juliet  in  "  Romeo  and  Juliet."  From
1797  until  1808  she  performed  with  undirninished
success  in  the  large  citiss  of  the  Union.  Mr.
Merry  died  in  1798,  and  in  1803  his  widow  married
Thomas  Wignell,  who  died  soon  afterward.  In
1806  she  became  the  wife  of  William  Warren.
Among  her  important  roles  were  Calista  in  "  The
Fair  Penitent,"  Alica  in  "Jane  Shore,"  Isabella
in  •'  The  Fatal  Dowry,"  and  Monominia  in  "  The
Orphan."  She  was  the  first  actress  of  eminence
that  crossed  the  Atlantic,  and  easily  held  her  own
against  all  rivalry.  His  sister,  Louisa  Brunton,
with  whom  she  is  sometimes  confounded,  was  a
distinguished  performer  on  the  London  stage  in
later  years,  and  became  Countess  of  Craven.

MERVINE,  William,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Penn
sylvania  in  1790 ;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  15  Sept.,  1868.
He  entered  the  navy,  and  was  made  midshipman,
16  Jan.,  1809,  lieutenant,  4  Feb.,  1815,  commander,
12  June,  1834,  and  captain,  8  Sept.,  1841.  He  was
placed  on  the  retired  list,  21  Dec.,  1861,  promoted
commodore,  16  July,  1862,  and  rear-admiral,  25
July,  1866.  He  spent  twenty-five  years  in  active
duty  afloat,  four  years  in  performing  shore  service,
and  the  remainder  of  the  time  on  furlough  or
awaiting  orders.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war,  although  seventy  years  of  age,  he  reported
promptly  for  duty,  and  did  good  service  during  the
first  year  of  the  war,  but  his  health  was  inadequate


to  the  heavy  duties  of  that  period,  and  he  reluctant
ly  submitted  to  be  retired.

"  MERY,  Gaston  Etienne,  explorer,  b.  in  Baton
Rouge,  La.,  in  1793  ;  d.  in  Pau,  France,  in  October,
1844.  He  was  the  son  of  a  wealthy  Creole  whose
ancestors  had  settled  in  Louisiana  a  century  before,
and  received  his  early  education  in  Xew  Orleans,
but  finished  his  studies  in  Paris,  where  he  was
graduated  in  law,  returning  in  1813  to  his  native
city.  Having  quarrelled  with  his  father,  he  joined
Jean  Lafitte  (q.  v.),  who  took  him  into  his  con
fidence,  and  gave  him  charge  of  his  correspond
ence  and  accounts.  When  Com.  Paterson  invaded
Grande  Terre  in  1814,  Mery  directed  the  flight  of
Lafitte  and  his  companions  through  the  swamps
and  bayous  of  the  interior,  which  he  knew  well,
and  a  few  months  later,  when  the  British  proposed
to  Lafitte  that  he  should  co-operate  with  the  ex
pedition  against  New  Orleans,  he  recommended
to  the  latter  a  more  patriotic  course,  and  fought
under  Gen.  Jackson  in  the  battle  of  8  Jan.,  1815.
Although  wounded  during  the  action,  he  rejoined
Lafitte  at  Barataria  bay,  and  continued  to  conduct
the  corsair's  transactions  till  1817,  when  the  estab
lishment  in  Grand  Terre  was  abandoned.  He  then
returned  to  New  Orleans,  and,  the  death  of  his
father  occurring  a  few  months  later,  he  found  him
self  with  an  independent  fortune.  He  then  went
to  Texas,  lived  for  some  time  in  the  Champ  d'asile
that  was  founded  by  Baron  Lallemand  (q.  v.)  and
other  French  exiles,  and  afterward  removed  to
Mexico,  but  was  driven  away  by  the  civil  wars,  and
went  to  California,  where  he  explored  the  country
for  several  months.  He  afterward  visited  the
eastern  states,  resided  several  years  in  Philadelphia,
where  he  married,  and  held  from  1831  till  1833  the
office  of  French  consular  agent.  In  1835  he  came
to  New  York  and  tried  to  organize  a  French
packet  company,  to  ply  between  that  port  and
Bordeaux ;  but,  failing  in  the  scheme,  he  returned
to  New  Orleans,  and  in  1839  went  to  France  in  the
hope  of  restoring  his  impaired  health.  He  pub
lished  "  La  legende  du  corsaire  Lafitte "  (Tours,
1841) ;  "  Observations  sur  le  commerce  des  Etats-
Unis,"  in  which  the  author  dwells  upon  the  advan
tages  of  the  establishment  of  packet  lines  between
Europe  and  the  United  States  (Paris.  1842) :  and  •'  La
politique  americaine  et  les  Indiens"  (Pau,  1843).

MESLIN,  Etienne  Edouard^may-lang).  French
explorer,  b.  in  Marseilles  in  ITol ;  d.  in  Paris  in
1812.  He  was  employed  on  scientific  missions  in
the  West  Indies  and  South  America  between  1779
and  1791,  and  published,  among  other  works,  "  Sta-
tistique  de  l'ile  de  Tabago  "  (Paris,  1781) :  "  Histoire
de  la  domination  francaise  a  l'ile  Grenade  et  aux
Grenadilles  "  (1784) ;  "  Journal  d'un  voyage  a  tra-
vers  le  royaume  de  la  Nouvelle  Espagne  "  (1794) ;
"  La  race  Latine  dans  1'Amerique  du  Sud  "  (1799) ;
and  "  La  domination  espagnole  dans  1'Amerique  du
Sud,  etudiee  au  point  de  vue  de  la  race  Indienne  "
(2  vols..  1804).

MESNARD,  Henry  Etienne  (may-nar),
French  adventurer,  b.  in  Rouen  in  1603 ;  d.  in
Martinique  in  1663.  He  was  captain  of* a  merchant
ship  making  yearly  trips  from  Rouen  to  South
America,  and  established  in  1637  a  factory  at  the
mouth  of  Orinoco  river.  Perceiving  the  commer
cial  advantages  that  would  be  obtained  if  France
should  take  formal  possession  of  the  country,  he
interested  several  merchants  of  Rouen  in  the  pro
ject,  and  with  their  support  formed  in  1643  the  So
ciety  of  Cape  North,  which  received  from  Louis
XIII.  a  grant  of  the  country  between  the  Orinoco
and  the  Amazon.  Mesnard  immediately  organized
an  expedition,  and,  sailing  from  Dieppe,  11  Sept.,


310


MESQUITA


MESY


1643,  arrived  at  Cayenne  island  on  25  Nov.  He
appointed  as  governor  of  the  new  colony  Poncet  de
Bretigny,  a  veteran  officer,  and  built  a  fort.  Dur
ing  Mesnard's  absence  in  France  in  quest  of  sup
plies  the  colonists  revolted,  murdered  Bretigny,
and  elected  Huct  de  Navarre  (q.  v.)  to  take  his
place.  On  his  return  to  the  colony,  Mesnard  re
fused  to  sanction  the  election,  but,  being  unable  to
depose  Huct,  built  a  fort  on  Bird  island,  and,  re
turning  to  France,  dissolved  the  company  and
transferred  the  franchise  to  a  new  society,  "  La
compagnie  des  12  seigneurs."  Huet  had  meanwhile
resigned  his  command,  but  Mesnard,  experiencing
many  difficulties,  reinstated  him.  Mesnard  sold
out  in  1657,  and  tried  to  form  an  establishment  on
the  west  coast  of  Martinique,  where  he  was  killed
during  the  troubles  of  1663.

MESQUITA,  Jos6  Francisco  de  (mes-kee'-tah),
Marquis  de  BOMFIN,  Brazilian  philanthropist,  b.  in
Congonhas  do  Campo,  11  Jan.,  1790;  d.  in  Rio  Ja
neiro,  11  Dec.,  1872.  He  contributed  largely  to  the
commercial  fund  that  John  VI.  destined  for  the
foundation  of  the  Academy  of  fine  arts,  aided  in
establishing  the  first  bank  of  Brazil  in  1818,  and  also
founded  the  Sinking-fund  bank.  In  1822  he  aided
in  the  establishment  of  Brazilian  independence  by
his  money  and  influence.  lie  made  large  bequests
to  the  Santa  Casa  da  Misericordia  hospital  of  Rio
Janeiro,  that  of  Minas  Geraes,  and  other  charita
ble  institutions,  besides  gifts  to  many  poor  people,
widows,  and  orphans  of  the  municipality  of  Rio
Janeiro  and  his  native  province.

MESQUITA,  Salvador  de,  Brazilian  poet,  b.
in  Rio  Janeiro  in  1646;  d.  in  Rome,  Italy,  in  the
beginning  of  the  18th  century.  He  went  to  Rome
for  study,  took  holy  orders,  and  attained  high  re
pute  as  a  Latin  scholar.  His  reputation  as  a  poet
was  established  by  his  sacred  drama  "  Sacrificium
Jephtte "  (Rome,  1680).  His  best  tragedies  are
"  Demetrius,"  "  Perseus,"  and  "  Prusias  Bithyni "
(Rome,  1690  to  1700).

MESSEIN,  Charles  Francis  Bailly  de,  R.  C.
bishop,  b.  in  Canada  in  1741  ;  d.  in  Quebec  in  1794.
He  received  his  early  education  in  Canada,  but
finished  his  theological  studies  in  France.  Here
he  met  Lord  Dorchester,  afterward  governor-gen
eral  of  Canada,  who  was  so  much  struck  with  his
ability  that  he  invited  him  to  England  to  become
tutor  to  his  children.  On  his  arrival  in  Canada
he  was  sent  as  missionary  to  the  Micmac  Indians,
and  was  also  appointed  grand  vicar  of  New  Bruns
wick,  Cape  Breton,  and  Prince  Edward  island.
He  was  afterward  named  cure  of  Pointe-aux-Trem-
bles,  near  Quebec.  In  1789  he  was  consecrated  co
adjutor  bishop  of  Quebec,  notwithstanding  the  op
position  of  the  clergy  and  people,  with  whom  he
was  unpopular  on  account  of  his  attachment  to
the  English  interest.  After  his  consecration  he
insisted  on  sharing  the  episcopal  authority  with
Bishop  Hubert,  titular  bishop  of  Quebec.  The
latter  refused  to  allow  him  to  take  any  part  in  the
administration  of  the  diocese.  De  Messein  then
returned  to  Pointe-aux-Trembles,  and  in  1790
published  a-  letter  in  the  "  Gazette  de  Quebec,"  in
which  he  gave  strong  expression  to  his  dissatisfac
tion.  This  letter  was  followed  by  another,  in
which  he  attacked  bitterly  the  administration  of  |
Bishop  Hubert,  and  demanded  the  abolition  of
most  of  the  holidays  observed  by  Canadian  Catho
lics.  When  an  effort  was  made  by  the  govern
ment  to  establish  an  undenominational  univer
sity  in  Quebec,  and  endow  it  out  of  the  prop
erty  of  the  Jesuits,  the  movement  was  warmly
supported  by  De  Messein,  but  resisted  by  the  rest
of  the  clergy,  and  their  hostility  to  him  was  in


creased  by  the  letters  that  he  wrote  in  1791  in  its
favor.  He  had  formed  a  small  party  among  the
priests,  and  succeeded  in  forcing  Bishop  Hubert
to  issue  a  pastoral  the  same  year  abolishing  sev
eral  festivals,  some  of  which  were  ordered  to  be
restored  the  following  year  by  the  pope.  His
health  was  broken  by  these  controversies,  and  the
failure  that  attended  most  of  his  plans.

MESSINUER,  Robert  Hinckley,  poet,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  in  1811;  d.  in  Stamford,  Conn.,
1  Oct.,  1874.  He  was  educated  in  the  Boston
Latin-school,  and  entered  mercantile  life  in  New
York  city,  where  he  resided  many  years.  His
poems  were  written  between  1827  and  1832,  and
appeared  in  the  New  York  "  American."  The
principal  one,  "Give  me  the  Old,"  suggested  by  the
famous  saying  of  Alphonso  of  Castile,  "  Old  wine
to  drink,  old  wood  to  burn,  old  books  to  read,  and
old  friends  to  converse  with,"  was  published  in
that  journal  on  26  April,  1838.  It  may  be  found
in  Griswold's  "Poets  and  Poetry  of  America"
(Philadelphia,  1842).  Mr.  Messinger.  who  was  a
friend  of  Fitz-Greene  Halleck,  subsequently  resided
in  New  London,  N.  H.

MESSER,  Asa,  educator,  b.  in  Methuen,  Mass.,
in  1769;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  11  Oct.,  1836.  He
was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1790,  and  in  the  next
year  chosen  tutor  there.  After  six  years  of  service
in  this  post  he  was  advanced  in  1796  to  the  profes
sorship  of  learned  languages.  In  1799  he  was  trans
ferred  to  the  chair  of  mathematics  and  natural
philosophy,  and  on  the  resignation  of  Jonathan
Maxcy  in  1802  was  appointed  president  of  the  col
lege.  In  this  office  he  remained  until  1826,  when
he  resigned.  After  his  retirement  he  was  elected
by  the  citizens  of  Providence  to  several  important
civil  offices.  He  was  ordained  to  the  Baptist  min
istry  in  1801,  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Harvard  in  1820,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  the  Uni
versity  of  Vermont  in  1812.  Dr.  Messer's  publi
cations  consisted  of  several  discourses,  orations,
and  baccalaureate  addresses.

MESSLER,  Abraham,  clergyman,  b.  in  White-
house,  N.  J.,  15  Nov.,  1800;  d.  in  Somerviile,  N.  J.,
12  June,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1821,
and  at  the  New  Brunswick  seminary  in  1824,  and
preached  in  Montville,  N.  J.,  Ovid,  N.  Y.,  and
North  street,  New  York  city.  He  was  pastor  of
the  Reformed  Dutch  churches  in  Pompton  Plains
and  in  Montville  from  1829  till  1832.  and  became
subsequently  pastor  of  the  churches  of  this  denomi
nation  in  Raritan  and  Somerviile,  N.  J.  Rutgers
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1843,  and  he  was
elected  a  trustee  of  that  college  in  1845.  His  pub
lications  include  "Fruits  of  Early  Pietv"  (New
York,  1838);  "St.  Paul's  Gratitude  to  Onesipho-
rus  "  (1839) ;  "  Sermon  on  the  Death  of  President
Lincoln"  (1865);  "Eight  Memorial  Sermons,  and
Historical  Notes  of  Churches  in  Somerset  County,
N.  J."  (1873);  "Life  and  Public  Services  of  Ex-
Governor  Vroom  "  (1874) ;  "Centennial  History  of
Somerset  County  "  (1878) ;  and  numerous  contribu-
tions^to  religious  magazines.

MESY,  Augustin  de  Saffray  de,  seventh  gov
ernor  of  New  France,  d.  in  Canada  in  1665.  He
was  chosen  governor  by  Bishop  Laval  (q.  v.)  with
the  permission  of  the  king,  and  entered  upon  the
duties  of  his  office  in  1663.  He  opposed  all  the
colonial  authorities,  including  the  bishop  and  the
governor  of  Montreal,  De  Maisonneuve,  whom  he
removed.  He  was  recalled  by  the  king,  but  died
before  the  arrival  of  his  successor.  During  the  two
years  of  his  administration  the  sovereign  council
was  created,  courts  of  justice  established,  and  the
Seminary  of  Quebec  founded.


METCALFE


311


METCALF,  Mason  Jerome,  inventor,  b.  in
Fairfax,  Me.,  16  Oct.,  1807 ;  d.  in  Monmouth,  Me.,
23  July,  1883.  When  a  boy  he  removed  to  Zanes-
ville,  Ohio,  with  his  father,  who  was  a  teacher.
Afterward  he  returned  to  Litchfield,  Me.,  was  edu
cated  in  the  academy  at  Monmouth,  and  settled
there.  lie  was  for  several  years  a  manufacturer  of
.stencils  in  Boston,  Mass.,  alternately  residing  in
Monmouth,  where  he  owned  and  operated  three
mills.  His  most  important  invention  was  a  method
of  producing  letter-stencils  by  means  of  dies,  which
he  was  the  first  to  practise  and  bring  into  use.  Up
to  that  time  such  stencils  had  been  made  entirely
with  chisels.  He  also  invented  a  form  of  fence,
often  made  of  slabs  from  saw-mills,  which  by  rea
son  of  its  simplicity  and  cheapness  came  widely  into
use,  and  may  still  be  seen  on  many  farms  at  the
west.  His  other  inventions  included  a  fan-wheel
for  ventilation.  He  made  many  experiments  with
models  for  flying-machines,  all  of  them  involving
the  use  of  a  fan-wheel  or  propeller.  He  held  that
men  would  fly,  by  the  use  of  spiral  wheels,  as  soon
as  an  engine  could  be  invented  that  was  at  once
sufficiently  light  and  powerful.  He  also  experi
mented  with  a  plough  that  was  designed  to  turn
up  the  soil  and  pulverize  it  at  the  same  time  by
means  of  a  revolving  cylinder  with  curved  teeth.
None  of  his  inventions  were  ever  patented. — His
son,  Lorettus  Sutton,  editor,  b.  in  Monmouth,
Kennebec  co.,  Me.,  17  Oct.,  1837,  was  educated  at
Monmouth  academy,  in  the  Boston  public  schools,
and  by  private  tutors.  He  early  became  a  contribu
tor  to  periodicals,  and  at  one  time  was  editor  and
proprietor  of  five  newspapers  near  Boston.  In  1876
he  became  connected  with  '•  The  North  American
Review,"  and  from  1880  till  1885  he  performed  the
editorial  duties  of  that  publication.  In  March,
1886,  he  issued  the  first  number  of  the  "  Forum,"
published  in  New  York,  a  monthly  magazine  for
the  discussion  of  current  questions,  which  he
founded  and  still  edits  (1888).

METCALF,  Ralph,  governor  of  New  Hamp
shire,  b.  in  Charlestown,  N.  H.,  21  Nov.,  1798;  d.
in  Claremont,  N.  H.,  26  Aug.,  1858.  He  worked
on  a  farm  until  1816,  and  was  graduated  at  Dart
mouth  in  1823,  after  which  he  studied  law,  which
he  practised  in  Newport  in  1826.  He  was  secre
tary  of  state  for  several  years,  afterward  held  a
clerkship  in  Washington  in  1838-'40,  was  register
of  probate  for  Sullivan  county  in  1845,  and  chair
man  of  the  committee  for  compiling  the  laws  of
the  state  in  1852.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New
Hampshire  house  of  representatives  in  1852-'3,  and
governor  of  the  state  in  1855-'6.

METCALF,  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Provi
dence,  R.  L,  19  Aug.,  1829 ;  d.  in  Winchester,  Mass.,
30  June,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1851,  and  at  Harvard  divinity-school  in  1854.
From  this  year  till  1857  he  was  pastor  of  a  Uni
tarian  church  in  Bath,  Me.,  and  in  1858  he  preached
in  a  Unitarian  church  in  Detroit,  Mich.  In  1860-'5
he  was  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  in  Mead-
ville,  Pa.,  and  from  1866  till  1881  held  charge  of  a
Unitarian  society  in  Winchester,  Mass.  He  was
the  author  of  the  "  Letter  and  Spirit "  (Boston,
1870)  and  "  The  Abiding  Memory,"  sermons  from
1866  till  1881,  with  a  brief  memoir  (1883).

METCALF,  Theron,  jurist,  b.  in  Franklin,
Mass.,  16  Oct.,  1784;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  12  Nov.,
1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1805.  In  1839
he  was  appointed  reporter  of  the  Massachusetts  su-

Sreme  court,  and  he  sat  on  the  bench  of  that  court
rom  24  Feb.,  1848,  till  1865. Brown  gave  him  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1844,  and  Harvard  the  same  in
1848. His  annotations  were  considered  valuable


for  their  philosophical  investigation  and  discrimi
nating  analysis.  Judge  Metcalf  gave  to  Brown  a
set  of  fifty  volumes  of  ordination  sermons  that  he
had  collected.  His  publications  include  "A  Digest
of  the  Cases  decided  in  the  Supreme  Judicial  Court
of  Massachusetts  from  1816  to  1823,  including  the
Five  last  Volumes  of  Tyng's  and  the  first  of  Octa-
vius  Pickering's  Reports  "  (Boston,  1825) ;  "  Reports
from  1840  till  1849  "  (13  vols.,  1840-'51) ;  the  first
volume  of  "  Digest  of  Decisions  of  Courts  of  Com
mon  Law  and  Admiralty  in  the  United  States "
(1840) :  and  a  "  Supplement  to  the  Revised  Statutes
of  Massachusetts  till  1844,"  with  Luther  S.  Gushing
(1844).  He  edited  "  The  General  Laws  of  Massa
chusetts  till  1822,"  by  Asahel  Stearns  and  Lemuel
Shaw  (2  vols.,  1823) ;' George  Maule  and  William
Selwyn's  "  Reports  "  ;  Russell  on  "  Crimes  "  ;  Star-
kie  on  "  Evidence  " ;  and  Yelverton's  "  Reports."
Judge  Metcalf  contributed  able  articles  to  the
"  American  Jurist "  on  the  "  Law  of  Contracts."
and  delivered  an  oration  at  Dedham,  4  July,  1810,
and  an  address  before  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society
of  Brown  in  1832.

METCALFE,  Charles  Theophilus,  Baron,
British  statesman,  b.  in  Calcutta,  India,  30  Jan.,
1785  ;  d.  in  Malshanger,  near  Baringstoke.  England,
5  Sept.,  1846.  He  was  the  second  son  of  Theophi
lus  Metcalfe,  of  Berkshire,  an  officer  in  the  army,
who  afterward  became  a  director  of  the  East  India
company,  and  was  made  a  baronet  in  1802.  Charles
was  taken  to  England  by  his  parents  in  infancy,  edu
cated  at  Eton,  and  at  the  age  of  fifteen  sent  to  In
dia  as  a  writer  in  the  East  India  company's  service.
In  1801  he  was  appointed  assistant  to  the  British
resident  at  the  court  of  Dowlut  Row  Sindia,  at
Oojein,  in  1811  resident  at  Delhi,  in  1819  political
secretary  at  Calcutta,  and  in  1820  resident  at  Hy
derabad.  In  1823  he  succeeded  to  the  baronetcy,
on  the  death  of  his  brother,  in  1827  became  a
member  of  the  supreme  council  of  India,  and  in
February,  1835,  after  he  had  for  some  time  been
governor  of  Agra,  he  provisionally  succeeded  Lord
William  Bentinck  in  the  governor-generalship,  the
duties  of  which  he  discharged  till  28  March,  1836.
In  the  latter  year  the  grand  cross  of  the  bath  was
conferred  upon  him,  and  in  1844  he  was  raised  to
the  peerage.  He  was  appointed  governor  of  Ja
maica  in  1839,  and  shortly  afterward  succeeded  in
removing  the  difficulties  that  followed  upon  the
passage  of  the  Negro  emancipation  act.  In  1842
illness  compelled  him  to  resign  the  governorship,
in  which  he  was  succeeded  by  Lord  Elgin.  The
legislature  of  Jamaica  subsequently  ordered  his
statue  to  be  erected  in  the  public  square  of  Spanish
Town.  He  was  then  appointed  governor-general
of  Canada  and  sworn  into  office  at  Kingston,  29
March,  1843.  Although  he  was  experienced  in  the
administration  of  colonial  governments,  it  cannot
be  claimed  that  he  was  altogether  successful  in
Canada.  He  could  not  divest  himself  of  the  idea
that  he  ought  to  be  the  moving  power  in  the  state.
His  appointment  to  office  of  persons  that  were
politically  opposed  to  the  administration,  without
consulting  his  ministers,  was  regarded  as  extremely
arbitrary,  and  not  in  accordance  with  the  princi
ples  of  responsible  government,  which  had  been
recently  established  in  Canada.  An  incurable  dis
ease,  from  which  he  had  long  suffered,  forced  him
to  resign  in  November,  1845,  after  which  he  re
turned  to  England.  His  epitaph,  written  by  Lord
Macaulay,  terms  him  "  a  statesman  tried  in  many
high  offices  and  difficult  conjunctures,  and  found
equal  to  all."  See  "  The  Life  and  Correspondence
of  Charles,  Lord  Metcalfe,"  by  John  William  Raye
(new  ed.,  2  vols.,  London,  1858).


312


METCALPE


MIANTONOMO


METCALFE.  Henry,  inventor,  b.  in  New  York
city,  29  Oct.,  1847.  He  is  the  son  of  Dr.  John  T.
Metcalfe,  a  well-known  physician  of  New  York  city.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1868  and  served  in  the  ordnance  bureau  in  Wash
ington,  D.  C.,  until  1869.  Prom  1870  till  1875  lie
was  assistant  ordnance  officer  at  Springfield  ar
mory,  Mass.  He  was  made  1st  lieutenant  on  23
June,  1874,  and  in  1876  prepared  the  ordnance
department  exhibit  for  the  centennial  exhibition.
Since  1886  he  has  been  instructor  of  ordnance  and
gunnery  in  the  U.  S.  military  academy.  He  in
vented  the  first  detachable  magazine  that  was  used
with  military  small  arms,  and  has  published  "  The
Cost  of  Manufactures  "  (New  York,  1885).

METCALFE,  Samuel  L.,  physician,  b.  near
Winchester,  Va.,  21  Sept.,  1798;  d.  in  Cape  May,
N.  J.,  17  July,  1856.  He  removed  with  his  par
ents  to  Shelby  county,  Ky.,  in  early  life,  and  in
1819  entered  Transylvania  university,  Lexington,
where  in  1823  he  received  the  degree  of  M.  D.
He  practised  in  New  Albany,  Ind..  and  later  in
Mississippi,  but  in  1831  went  to  England.  On
his  return  he  made  a  geological  tour  through
eastern  Tennessee,  North  Carolina,  and  Virginia.
For  several  years  thereafter  he  resided  in  New
York  city  and  devoted  himself  to  writing  scientific
books,  also  contributing  to  the  "  Knickerbocker
Magazine"  under  the  initial  "  M."  In  1835  he
again  visited  England  in  order  to  give  his  atten
tion  to  scientific  research,  and  during  this  visit  he
was  solicited  to  become  a  candidate  for  the  Grego
rian  chair  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  but  de
clined.  He  then  returned  to  the  United  States
and  devoted  his  energies  to  publishing  his  books.
Dr.  Metcalfe  was  the  author  of  "  Narratives  of
Indian  Warfare  in  the  West"  (Lexington,  1821);
"  New  Theory  of  Terrestrial  Magnetism  "  (New
York,  1833) ;  and  "  Caloric :  its  Agencies  in  the
Phenomena  of  Nature  "  (2  vols.,  London,  1843  ;  2d
ed.,  Philadelphia,  1853).

METCALFE,  Thomas,  governor  of  Kentucky,
b.  in  Fauquier  county,  Va.,  20  March,  1780;  d.  in
Nicholas  county,  Ky.,  18  Aug.,  1855.  His  parents,
who  were  poor,  emigrated  to  Kentucky  and  set
tled  in  Fayette  county.  After  a  few  months  in  a
country  school  the  son  worked  with  a  stone-cutter,
devoting  his  leisure  to  study.  He  served  in  the
war  of  1812,  and  in  1813  commanded  a  company
with  credit  at  the  battle  of  Fort  Meigs.  While  he
was  absent  on  this  campaign  he  was  elected  to  the
legislature,  in  which  he  served  three  years.  He  was
afterward  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Henry  Clay
Democrat,  serving  from  6  Dec.,  1819,  till  1  June,
1828,  when  he  resigned.  From  1829  till  1833  he
was  governor  of  Kentucky.  He  was  a  member  of
the  state  senate  in  1834,  and  president  of  the  board
of  internal  improvement  in  1840.  Gov.  Metcalfe
was  appointed  U.  S.  senator  in  place  of  John  J.
Crittenden,  resigned,  serving  from  3  July,  1848,
till  3  March,  1849,  when  he  retired  to  his  farm  be
tween  Maysville  and  Lexington.  He  was  a  friend
and  follower  of  Henry  Clay,  and  often  boasted  of
his  early  labors  as  a  stone-mason,  delighting  in
being  called  the  "  Old  Stone  Hammer."

MEYER,  Bernhard  (mire),  German  missionary,
b.  in  Erfurt  in  1537 ;  d.  in  Liege  in  1609.  He  be
came  a  Jesuit,  was  attached  for  several  years  to  the
missions  of  Cuba,  went  in  1571  to  New  Spain,  where
he  learned  the  Aztec  and  Maya  languages,  and
afterward  became  president  of  an  Indian  com-
mandery  in  Yucatan,  which  he  held  for  twelve
years.  His  humane  policy  toward  the  Indians  was
in  striking  contrast  with  their  cruel  treatment  by
the  Spaniards,  and  as  he  forwarded  a  protest  to


the  holy  see  against  the  dealings  of  the  latter  in
the  New  World,  the  authorities  asked  for  his  re
lief,  and  his  superiors  sent  him  back  to  Germany
in  1599.  Meyer  settled  in  Liege,  and,  with  the  ma
terials  that  he  had  collected  in  the  New  World,
wrote  a  history  of  the  Spanish  domination  in
America;  but,  his  intention  having  become  known,
great  pressure  was  exerted  on  the  general  of  the
Jesuits,  who  forbade  the  publication  of  the  work.
Meyer  hesitated  to  obey,  and  application  was  made
to  the  prince  bishop  of  Liege,  who  ordered  the  ar
rest  of  the  courageous  missionary.  During  the  lat-
ter's  imprisonment  in  a  convent  his  manuscripts
and  papers  were  forwarded  to  Rome,  and  what  be
came  of  them  is  not  known.  He  published  "  Origi-
nes  gentis  Aztecorum  "  (Liege,  1601)  and  "  Epistola
ad  pra'positum  generalem  Societatis  Jesu,  qua  sta-
tum  in  provincia  Nova)  Espania)  exponit  "  (1602).

MEYER,  Hermanns,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bremen,
Lower  Saxony,  27  July,  1733;  d.  near  Poinpton,
N.  J..  27  Oct.,  1791.  He  was  educated  at  the  Latin-
school  and  gymnasium  in  Bremen,  and  at  the  theo
logical  academy  of  Groningen.  Having  received
a  call  to  the  Dutch  church  of  Kingston,  N.  Y.,  he
was  ordained  on  31  March,  1763,  and  sailed  for
New  York  with  Rev.  John  R.  Ilardenbergh.  In
1764  he  was  compelled  by  the  civil  authorities  to
take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  Great  Britain.  He
found  the  church  divided  by  the  old  quarrel  of  the
Coetns  and  Conferentie  parties  as  to  whether  ordi
nation  should  take  place  in  this  country  or  in  Hol
land.  He  sympathized  with  the  former  in  favor  of
a  ministry  trained  in  America,  and  his  pungent
preaching  caused  dissatisfaction.  The  ecclesiasti
cal  difficulties  culminated  in  his  suspension  from
active  duties  by  an  illegal  body  of  Conferentie
ministers  in  1766,  and  for  nearly  seven  years  he
remained  in  Kingston,  preaching  to  his  adherents
in  private  houses.  He  was  a  member  of  the  con
vention  of  1771,  which  reunited  his  church,  and
in  1772  he  removed  to  New  Jersey  as  pastor  at
Pompton  and  Totowa  (now  Paterson).  The  gen
eral  synod  elected  him  to  two  chairs  in  their  theo
logical  institution — that  of  Hebrew  in  1784,  and
that  of  lector  in  divinity  in  1786,  which  he  held
until  his  death.  In  1789  he  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Queen's  (now  Rutgers)  college.  He  left
in  manuscript  a  Latin  translation  of  the  Psalms  of
David,  with  commentaries  and  emendations.

MIANTONOMO,  sachem  of  the  Narragan setts,
d.  in  September,  1643.  He  was  the  nephew  of
Canonicus,  with  whom  he  was  associated  in  the
government  of  the  tribe,  and  whom  he  succeeded
in  1636.  Fearing  that  Sassacus  might  attempt  a
reconciliation  and  an  alliance  with  Canonicus  and
Miantonomo,  the  governor  of  Massachusetts  sent
a  solemn  embassage  to  the  Narragansett  court,
which  was  received  and  entertained  royally.  After
being  feasted  an  audience  was  granted  in  the  state-
house  of  poles  covered  with  mats,  and  on  hearing
the  message  Miantonomo  replied  that  he  willing
ly  embraced  peace  with  the  English.  Soon  after
ward  the  governor  was  visited  by  Miantonomo
with  a  retinue  of  twenty  chiefs.  They  were  con
ducted  from  Roxbury  to  Boston  by  a  military  es
cort  and  received  with  state  and  ceremony,  the
magistrates  and  clergy  being  convened  for  the  oc
casion.  He  proposed  the  entire  destruction  of  the
Pequots,  and  made  a  treaty  with  the  English  by
which  neither  party  could  make  peace  with  that
tribe  without  the  consent  of  the  other.  He  main
tained  friendly  relations  with  Massachusetts,  and
in  1636,  with  his  uncle,  deeded  to  Roger  Williams
land  for  his  colony  at  the  head  of  Narragansett
bay,  where  Providence  now  stands.  The  sachems


MIANTONOMO


MICHAUX


313


also  deeded  to  John  Clarke  and  William  Codding-
ton  in  1638  the  island  of  Aquidneck.  Miantono-
mo  held  his  councils  and  had  his  fort  on  "•  Tono-
my  hill,"  so  called  from  an  abbreviation  of  his
name.  This  was  the  site  of  a  small  redoubt  dur
ing  the  Revolution,  and  is  more  than  a  mile  from
Newport.  In  1037  he  aided  in  fighting  the  Pe-
quots,  but  in  1638  he  and  Uncas,  sachem  of  the
Mohegans,  entered  into  an  agreement  not  to  make
war  without  first  appealing  to  the  English.  Mian-
tonomo  was  cited  in  1642,  upon  mere  rumor  of
intended  hostilities,  to  appear  at  Boston  before  the
governor  and  council.  He  promptly  obeyed,  declar
ing  his  innocence,  and  calling  upon  the  English  to
produce  his  accusers.  None  appearing,  he  was  dis
missed  with  honor.  "  fie  was  very  deliberate  in
his  answers,"  says  Hubbard,  il  showing  a  good  un
derstanding  in  the  principles  of  justice  and  equity,
as  well  as  a  seeming  ingenuity  withal.  But  though
his  words  were  smoother  than  oil,  yet,  as  many
conceived,  in  his  heart  were  drawn  swords.  It  was
observed  also  that  he  would  never  speak  but  when
some  of  his  counsellors  were  present,  that  they
might,  as  he  said,  bear  witness  of  all  his  speeches
at  their  return  home."  Gov.  John  Winthrop,  in  his
"Journal,"  testifies  to  the  respect  in  which  the
ability  of  this  chief  was  held.  The  rivalry  between
the  Mohegans  and  Narragansetts  finally  produced
its  natural  result.  Miantonomo  marched  against
Uncas  with  600  warriors,  and  was  met  by  the  latter
with  400  men,  at  Great  Plains,  below  Norwich.
When  Uncas  saw  Miantonomo's  superior  number,
he  sent  a  messenger  to  him,  saying :  "  Let  us  two
fight  single-handed.  If  you  kill  me,  my  men  shall
be  yours ;  if  1  kill  you,  your  men  shall  be  mine."
Miantonomo  refused,  and  while  the  Narragan
setts  were  awaiting  the  result  of  the  conference
Uncas  fell  on  his  face,  as  a  signal  for  his  warriors,
who  suddenly  attacked  the  Narragansetts  and  put
them  to  flight.  Miantonomo.  encumbered  with  a
coat  of  mail  that,  he  had  obtained  from  the  Eng
lish,  was  taken  and  conducted  to  Shantock,  where
he  was  treated  with  kindness,  but,  fearing  that  the
Narragansetts  would  attempt  a  rescue,  he  was  sur
rendered  to  the  English  at  Hartford.  The  com
missioners  of  the  United  colonies,  at  their  meeting
in  Boston,  referred  his  case  to  an  ecclesiastical  tri
bunal  composed  of  five  of  the  principal  ministers
of  the  colonies.  Influenced  by  the  representations
of  Uncas,  they  returned  him  to  that  chief  for  exe
cution  without  torture.  Uncas  conducted  him  to
the  spot  where  he  was  captured,  and,  while  he  was
unsuspicious  of  the  impending  danger,  a  brother  of
Uncas,  at  a  sign  from  that  chief,  buried  his  hatchet
in  the  head  of  their  captive.  Uncas  cut  a  piece
from  the  shoulder  of  the  slain  sachem  and  ate  it,
saying :  "  It  is  very  sweet ;  it  makes  my  heart
strong."  Miantonomo  was  buried  where  he  was
slain,  and  the  place  has  since  been  called  "  Sachem's
plain."  In  revenge  the  Narragansetts,  led  by  his
brother,  Pessacus,  invaded  the  Mohegan  country
in  1645  and  drove  Uncas  into  his  fortress  at  Shan
tock.  The  latter  was  aided  by  the  English,  and  the
Narragansetts  raised  the  siege  and  returned  to
their  own  country.  It  is  said  by  some  historians
that  Miantonomo,  having  called  together  a  great
number  of  sachems,  gave  them  gifts  and  made  the
following  speech:  "We  must  be  one  as  the  Eng
lish  are,  otherwise  we  shall  all  be  gone  shortly,
for  you  know  our  fathers  had  plenty  of  deer-skins  ;
our  plains  were  full  of  deer,  as  also  our  woods,  and
of  turkeys,  and  our  lakes  full  of  fish  and  fowl.  But
these  English  have  gotten  our  land,  they  with
scythes  cut  down  the  grass,  and  with  axes  fell  the
trees.  Their  cows  and  horses  eat  the  grass,  and


their  hogs  destroy  our  clam-banks,  and  we  shall  all
be  starved.  Then  it  is  best  for  you  to  do  as  we,
for  we  are  all  the  sachems  from  east  to  west,
bothMoqua-

koesand  Mo-  - '  ^^^^in'i^i%;^4iii^r!5ft

hawks  join-  ^^H

ing  with  us,  .^MB
and  we  are
resolved  to
fall  upon
them  all  at
one  appoint
ed  day."
The  spot
where  Mian
tonomo  was
buried  is
near  Green
ville,  on  She-
tucket  river.

A  pile  of  stones  was  placed  on  his  grave,  and  for
many  years  members  of  his  tribe  came  every  spring
to  mourn  there,  each  adding  a  stone  to  the  mound.
After  their  visits  ceased,  the  proprietor  of  the  land,
ignorant  of  the  sepulchre,  used  these  stones  for  the
foundation  of  a  barn.  In  1841  a  monument  was
erected  on  the  spot  by  the  people  of  Greenville.  It
is  a  block  of  granite  eight  feet  high  and  five  feet
square  at  the  base,  bearing  an  inscription,  as
seen  in  the  accompanying  illustration. — His  son,
Canonchet,  was  fearless,  bloody,  and  cruel.  The
Narragansetts  under  him  espoused  the  cause  of
King  Philip.  In  1676,  having  been  surprised  and
captured,  his  life  was  offered  him  on  condition  of
making  peace  with  the  English,  but  he  spurned
the  proposition.  When  informed  that  he  was  to
be  put  to  death,  he  said  :  "  I  like  it  well.  I  shall
die  before  my  heart  is  soft,  and  before  I  have  spoken
a  word  unworthy  of  Canonchet."

MICCONOPY,  Indian  chief,  b.  about  1786 ;  d.
in  Fort  Gibson,  Ark.,  in  January,  1849.  He  was
head  chief  of  the  Serninole  Indians,  and  command
ed  in  person  at  Maj.  Francis  L.  Dade's  defeat  on
28  Dec.,  1835,  and  also  with  Osceola  (q.  v.)  at  the
Ouithlacoochie  in  1836,  but  was  opposed  to  the
war,  and  surrendered  in  December,  1837.  His
name  signifies  "  pond  king."

MICHjELlUS,  Jonas,  clergyman,  b.  in  1577;
d.  in  Holland  after  1638.  He  was  educated  at  the
University  of  Leyden,  and  was  settled  as  a  clergy
man  in  Holland  in  1612-'16,  in  San  Salvador  in
1624-'5,  and  in  Guinea  in  1626-'7.  He  came  to
New  Amsterdam  in  1628,  and  was  thus  the  first
minister  of  the  Dutch  Reformed  church  in  this
country.  He  organized  a  consistory,  and  admin
istered  the  sacraments,  but  returned  to  Holland
in  a  few  years,  probably  before  the  arrival  of  his
successor,  Rev.  Everardus  Bogardus,  in  1633.  His
wife  died  in  New  Amsterdam  shortly  after  his  ar
rival.  The  classis  of  Amsterdam  wished  to  send
Michaelius  back  to  this  country  in  1637,  but  he  did
not  return.  It  was  long  supposed  that  Bogardus
was  the  first  Reformed  church  clergyman  in  this
country,  but  the  precedence  of  Micha?lius  was  es
tablished  by  a  letter  from  him  to  Rev.  Adrian
Smoutius,  dated  New  Amsterdam,  11  Aug.,  1628,
which  was  recently  found  in  the  Dutch  archives  at
the  Plague.  In  this  letter  he  describes  the  de
graded  state  of  the  natives,  and  proposes  to  edu
cate  their  children  without  trying  to  redeem  the
parents.  Michaelius's  letter  is  printed  in  an  ap
pendix  to  Mary  L.  Booth's  "  History  of  the  City  of
New  York  "  (New  York,  1859).

MICHAUX,  Andre  (me-sho),  French  botanist,
b.  in  Satory,  near  Versailles,  France,  7  March.


314


MICIIAUX


MICHEL


1746 ;  d.  in  Madagascar  in  November,  1802.  He
studied  botany,  and  visited  different  countries  in
Europe  and  Asia  with  the  view  of  increasing  his
knowledge  of  this  science.  On  his  return  from
Asia  in  1785  he  was  commissioned  by  the  French
government  to  establish  a  nursery  in  the  neigh
borhood  of  New  York  for  the  cultivation  of  trees
and  shrubs,  which  he  was  afterward  to  forward  to
France,  where  they  were  to  be  naturalized  at  Ram-
bouillet.  He  lauded  in  New  York  on  1  Sept.,  and,  af
ter  establishing  his  nursery  in  Bergen  county,  N.  J.,
travelled  through  New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  and
Maryland,  and  sent  his  first  cargo  to  France  in  the
follo'wing  year.  In  1787  he  formed  a  similar  es
tablishment  near  Charleston,  S.  C.,  sailing  up  Sa
vannah  river  and  its  tributaries  with  Indian
guides.  The  influence  which  he  always  exercised
over  the  Indians  was  of  great  help  to  him  in  all  his
explorations.  He  crossed  the  Alleghanies,  returned
to  Charleston  in  July,  1788,  and  in  the  beginning
of  1789  spent  some  months  in  Florida.  He  then
visited  the  Bahamas  and  Lucayes  islands,  which,
with  Hudson  bay,  were  to  be  the  limits  of  his  ex
plorations  in  North  America.  After  his  return  to
Charleston  he  made  a  careful  exploration  of  the
Carolina  mountains.  Meanwhile  the  French  revo
lution  had  begun  and  Michaux  ceased  to  receive
remittances  from  the  government,  but  he  did  not
abandon  his  project  of  visiting  Hudson  bay,  and
readily  found  merchants  to  advance  funds  for  the
purpose  on  the  security  of  his  property  in  France.
He  started  in  April,  1792,  and,  after  inspecting  his
garden  in  New  Jersey,  reached  Quebec  on  10  June.
Thence  he  sailed  up  the  St.  Lawrence  in  bark  ca
noes  and  ascended  Chicoutimi  (now  Saguenay)
river,  reaching  Lake  Mistissinny,  but  his  guides  re
fused  to  follow  him  any  farther  and  he  was  obliged
to  retrace  his  steps.  He  returned  to  Philadelphia,
8  Dec.,  1792.  The  two  gardens  that  Michaux  had
established  had  already  done  much  for  the  im-

S-overaent  of  arboriculture  in  the  United  States,
e  now  laid  before  the  Philosophical  society  of
Philadelphia  a  plan  of  travel  and  discovery  in  the
west,  which  was  favorably  received,  especially  by
Thomas  Jefferson,  and  everything  was  ready  for
its  execution  when  the  French  ambassador  charged
Michaux  with  a  mission  relative  to  the  occupation
of  Louisiana.  This  was  afterward  given  up.  He
went  again  to  Charleston  early  in  1794.  After
making  a  difficult  journey  of  1,200  miles  through
Kentucky,  he  sailed  for  France  in  August,  1796.
The  vessel  was  wrecked  off  the  coast  of  Holland,
•and  Michaux  lost  everything  except  his  collections.
He  was  received  with  great  honor  by  the  French
government  and  by  scientific  men,  but  this  did  not
compensate  him  for  the  loss  of  his  nurseries  at
Rambouillet,  which  had  been  ruined  by  neglect.
Out  of  60,000  plants  that  he  had  sent  from  America
only  a  few  remained.  He  set  about  repairing  the
loss,  but  the  government  gave  him  little  help,  and
he  devoted  his  time  to  preparing  his  materials  for
publication.  In  1800  he  accompanied  an  expedi
tion  to  New  Holland,  and  landed  at  Madagascar,
where  the  zeal  with  which  he  set  about  clearing
ground  for  a  nursery  produced  an  attack  of  fever,
of  which  he  died.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  in
tended  to  return  to  the  United  States  to  complete
his  discoveries.  His  works  are  "  Ilistoire  des
chenes  de  1'Amerique  septentrionale  "  (Paris,  1801).
The  "  mindium  "  of  Jussieu,  belonging  to  the  Cam
panula  family,  is  called  the  "  Michauxia  "  by  some
botanists  in  honor  of  Michaux. — His  son,  Fran-
<jois  Andr6,  botanist,  b.  in  Versailles.  France,  in
1770 ;  d.  in  France,  23  Oct.,  1855,  studied  botany
and  forestry  under  the  direction  of  his  father,  and


took  the  diploma  of  doctor  of  medicine.  He  was
sent  by  the  minister  of  the  interior  in  1802  to  study
the  forests  of  America  that  had  already  been  ex
plored  by  his  father,  and  travelled  through  a  great
part  of  the  United  States,  publishing,  on  his  re
turn,  "  Voyage  a  1'ouest  des  monts  Alleghanys "
(Paris,  1804;  English  translation,  London,  1805).
He  then  collected,  in  a  work  that  laid  the  founda
tion  of  his  reputation  as  a  botanist,  the  results  of
his  observations  on  different  trees  of  North
America  under  the  title  "  Ilistoire  des  arbres  fo-
restiers  de  1'Amerique  du  Nord  "  (4  vols.,  1810-'13),
of  which  an  English  translation,  "  North  American
Silva,"  also  appeared  (4  vols.,  1817-'19 ;  '3  vols.,
translated  by  Hillhouse,  with  notes  by  John  J.
Smith,  Philadelphia,  1830) ;  three  supplementary
volumes  were  added  by  Thomas  Nuttall  (q.  v.)
(1842-'9),  and  the  whole  work  is  now  published  in
five  volumes.  He  also  wrote  "  Mernoires  sur  la
naturalisation  des  arbres  forestiers  de  I'Amerique
Septentrionale  "  (1805) ;  "  Notice  sur  les  iles  Ber-
mudes,  particulierement  sur  File  St.  George "  in
volume  viii.  of  the  "Annales  des  sciences  natu-
relles"  (1806);  also,  in  connection  with  C.  L.  Rich
ard,  a  "  Flora  Boreali-Americana  "  (1803).  He  was
a  member  of  several  societies  of  the  natural  sci
ences  in  the  United  States.

MICHEL,  I)ieudonn6 Gabriel  Lncien,  French
missionary,  b.  in  Dunkerque  in  1605  ;  d.  in  Quebec,
Canada,  in  1669.  He  professed  with  the  Recollets,
who  then  shared  with  the  Jesuits  the  privilege  of
establishing  missions  in  Canada,  and  went  to  that
country  about  1628.  He  was  employed  for  several
years  in  the  Huron  missions,  and  tried  his  utmost
to  protect  those  mild  and  indolent  Indians  against
the  ferocious  Iroquois.  He  went  so  far  as  to  ap
ply  to  the  Canadian  company  for  officers  that  he
might  form  disciplined  companies  of  Ilurons,  but
the  influence  of  the  Jesuits,  who  desired  the  ruin
of  the  work  of  their  only  rivals  in  missionary
fields,  prevented  the  success  of  the  scheme.  In
1636  the  Ilurons  were  hopelessly  defeated  by  the
Iroquois,  and  several  missionaries,  including  Fa
ther  Jean  de  Breboeuf,  the  head  of  the  Jesuit
missions,  were  taken  prisoners  and  afterward  cru
elly  murdered.  Michel  escaped  by  adopting  the
dress  of  an  Indian,  and,  accompanying  the  Ilurons
in  their  flight  from  the  peninsula  of  Upper  Canada
to  St.  Joseph  island,  where  they  determined  to  set
tle,  rebuilt  his  mission  there.  He  was  appointed
in  1643,  by  Gov.  Charles  de  Montmagny,  a  mem
ber  of  the  conseil  souverain  of  the  city  of  Montreal,
which  the  latter  had  founded  a  few  months  before,
and  he  became  also,  in  1650,  superior  of  the  Re-
collet  missions.  In  1656,  when  he  was  secretary  to
the  new  governor,  Marquis  de  Lauzun,  he  advised
the  reconstruction  of  Fort  Sorel  at  the  entrance  of
Richelieu  river.  After  becoming  nearly  blind,  he
was  made,  in  1667,  vicar  of  the  chapel  that  is  now
known  as  the  Church  of  Notre  Dame  de  Recou-
vrance  in  Quebec.  He  published  in  the  "  Mer-
cure  Frangais"  three  open  letters  that  attracted
attention  and  caused  much  discussion,  as  the  au
thor  contended  that  the  land  policy  that  was  fol
lowed  in  Canada  would  cause  the  loss  of  the  coun
try  to  France.  He  also  attacked  the  Jesuits  with
great  vehemence.  These  letters  are  entitled  "  Let-
tres  d'un  missionnaire  ou  sont  contenucs  les  institu
tions  et  les  discours  des  sauvages  de  la  Nouvelle
France  du  Nord.  suivies  d'un  traite  de  leur  Ian-
gage  "  (1665) ;  "  Des  nations  des  sauvages  qui  habi-
tent  la  Nouvelle  France  du  Nord  et  des  missions
qui  ont  etc  etablies  parmi  eux  "  (1666) ;  and  "  Dia
logue  d'un  missionnaire  avec  un  gentilhomme  au
service  de  Nos  Seigneurs  de  la  compagnie  du  Cana-


MICHEL


MICHLER


315


da  on  Nouvelle  France  du  Nord  sur  le  systeme
4igraire "  (1607).  The  Jesuits  replied  bitterly  to
his  attacks,  accusing  Father  Michel  of  having  be-
oome  imbued  with  Protestant  doctrines,  and  en
tered  a  formal  accusation  of  heresy  against  him,
but  his  sudden  death  saved  him  from  the  effects  of
their  resentment.  Michel's  letters  have  not  been
reprinted  in  book-form,  owing,  probably,  to  the
opposition  of  the  Jesuits.  They  are  very  interest
ing,  as  they  give  details  regarding  both  the  In
dians  and  the  internal  dissensions  among  the  Jesu
its  and  Recollets  in  Canada.

MICHEL,  Jacques  Leonard,  surnamed  LE
BASQUE  (me-shell),  French  buccaneer,  b.  in  Orthez
in  1020 ;  d.  in  Tortugas  in  1(577.  He  served  in  the
French  army,  rose  to  the  rank  of  captain,  and  after
ward  entered  the  service  of  the  Company  of  the
West  Indies.  In  1054  he  was  lieutenant-governor
of  Tortugas,  but  resigned  and  armed  a  ship,  with
which  he  made  war  against  the  Spaniards.  Either
alone,  or  in  association  with  other  privateers,  he
pillaged  the  coasts  of  Santo  Domingo,  Cuba,  Porto
Rico,  Venezuela,  and  of  the  Gulf  of  Darien,  and
became  such  a  terror  to  the  Spanish  that  they  sur
named  him  the  Dreadful.  Uniting  his  forces  in
1000  with  those  of  L'Olonnais,  they  stormed  and
plundered  Cape  Leogane  on  the  western  coast  of
Santo  Domingo,  and  afterward  took  Maracaibo  and
San  Antonio  de  Gibraltar  in  Venezuela,  where  they
secured  a  booty  of  $1,600.000.  Michel  afterward
devastated  the  coasts  of  Honduras  and  pillaged
the  city  of  Porto  Caballo  in  1673.  but  was  so  severe
ly  wounded  during  that  expedition  that  he  was  no
longer  able  to  continue  his  war  against  the  Span
iards.  He  died  with  the  reputation  of  being  the
most  humane  buccaneer  of  his  time.

MICHEL,  William  Middleton,  physician,  b.
in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  22  Jan.,  1822.  He  was  edu
cated  in  his  native  city  and  in  Paris,  France,  and
was  graduated  at  the  Medical  college  of  South
Carolina  in  1847.  In  1848  he  founded  at  Charles
ton  the  Summer  medical  institute,  which  he  con
ducted  till  1801.  He  was  editor  of  the  "  Confed
erate  States  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal"  in
1803-'4,  has  been  president  of  the  State  medical
society,  and  now  (1888)  holds  the  chair  of  physi
ology  and  histology  in  South  Carolina  medical
college.  Dr.  Michel  is  a  member  of  various  medi
cal  societies  in  the  United  States  and  abroad,  and
has  contributed  largely  to  the  literature  of  his  pro
fession,  and  has  made  several  valuable  discoveries
in  embryology.  He  also  theoretically  predicted
the  functions  of  the  rod  and  cone  layer  of  the
retina  before  they  were  demonstrated  in  Germany.
He  has  made  researches  on  the  "  Development  of
the  Opossum,"  his  report  of  which  to  the  American
association  for  the  advancement  of  science  led  to  a
discussion  between  him  and  Louis  Agassiz.

MICHELIN,  Henry  Etienne  (meesh-lang),
West  Indian  historian,  b.  in  Jeremie,  Hayti,  in
1726;  d.  in  Cape  Frangais  in  1795.  lie  received
his  early  education  in  Santo  Domingo,  but  finished
his  studies  in  Paris,  and  obtained  an  appointment
in  the  colonial  administration  at  Cape  Frangais,
devoting  his  leisure  time  to  historical  researches.
He  published  "  Histoire  des  bouccaniers  ou  fli-
bustiers  de  1'ile  de  la  Tortue  "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1769) ;
"  Histoire  des  conquetes  et  de  la  domination  des
Frangais  en  Amerique"(2  vols.,  1774);  "Histoire
de  1'ile  de  Saint  Domingue"  (1770);  "Tableau
statistique  de  la  population,  du  commerce  et  des
industries  dans  la  partie  Frangaise  de  1'ile  de  Saint
Domingue,  compare  avec  les  releves  officiels  pour
la  partie  Espagnole "  (2  vols.,  1785) ;  and  several
less  important  works.


MICHELSON,  Albert  Abraham,  physicist,
b.  in  Strelno,  Poland.  19  Dec.,  1852.  He  was
graduated  at  San  Francisco  high-school  in  1869,
and  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1873,  and  held
the  rank  of  ensign  until  1877.  when  he  was  pro
moted  master.  In  September,  1881,  he  resigned
from  the  navy  to  become  professor  of  physics  at
the  Case  school  of  applied  science  in  Cleveland.
Ohio.  Prof.  Michelson's  reputation  depends  large
ly  upon  his  series  of  investigations  on  the  velocity
of  light.  His  researches  at  the  U.  S.  naval  acade
my  during  1878-'80  resulted  in  his  experimental
determination  of  that  velocity  as  186,305  miles  a
second.  His  later  investigations  have  been  pub
lished  as  "  The  Relative  Motion  of  the  Earth  and
Luminiferous  Ether"  (1881);  "A  New  Sensitive
Thermometer  "  (1882) :  "  Interference  Phenomena
in  a  New  Form  of  Refractometer  "  (1882);  "A
Method  for  Determining  the  Rate  of  Tuning-
Forks  "  (1883) :  "  Velocity  of  Light  in  Carbon  Di-
sulphide  and  of  Red  and  Blue  Light  in  Same  "
(1885) ;  "  Influence  of  Motion  of  this  Medium  on  the
Velocity  of  Light "  (1886) ;  "  On  a  Method  for  mak
ing  the"  Wave  Lengths  of  Sodium  Light  the  Abso
lute  and  Practical  Standard  of  Length  "  (1887).  The
degree  of  Ph.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Western
Reserve  university  in  1885,  and  by  Stevens  institute
of  technology  in  1886.  He  is  a  member  of  various
scientific  societies,  was  elected  vice-president  of
the  American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science  in  1887,  and  will  have  charge  of  the  section
on  physics  at  the  Cleveland  meeting  in  1888.

MICHIE,  Peter  Smith  (my'-key),  engineer,  b.
in  Brechin,  Scotland,  24  March,  1839.  He  came  to
this  country  in  early  life,  and  was  graduated  at
Woodward  high-school,  Cincinnati,  in  1857,  and  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1863,  where  he  stood
second  in  his  class.  He  was  assigned  to  the  en
gineer  corps  as  1st  lieutenant,  and  served  as  assist
ant  engineer  in  the  operations  against  Charleston,
S.  C.,  in  1863-'4,  as  chief  engineer  of  districts  in
the  Department  of  the  South,  and  as  assistant  and
then  chief  engineer  of  the  Army  of  the  James.  He
was  brevetted  captain  and  major,  28  Oct.,  1864,
for  services  in  the  campaign  of  that  year  against
Richmond,  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  1  Jan.,
1865,  "  for  meritorious  services  in  1864,"  and  lieu
tenant-colonel,  9  April,  1865,  for  the  campaign
that  ended  in  Lee's  surrender.  He  was  promoted
captain,  23  Nov.,  1865,  and  since  1867  has  served
on  the  staff  of  instruction  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  first  as  assistant  in  the  departments  of
engineering  and  chemistry,  and  after  14  Feb.,
1871,  as  professor  of  natural  and  experimental
philosophy.  From  June  till  November,  1870,  he
served  oil  a  commission  that  visited  Europe  to
collect  information  on  the  fabrication  of  iron  for
defensive  purposes.  Prof.  Michie  has  been  a  mem
ber  of  the  board  of  overseers  of  the  Thayer  school
of  civil  engineering  of  Dartmouth  since  1871.
Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  Ph.D.  in  1871,
and  Dartmouth  that  of  M.  A.  in  1873.  He  has
published  "  Wave  Motion,  relating  to  Sound  and
Light"  (New  York,  1882);  "Life  and  Letters  of
Emery  Upton"  (1885);  "Analytical  Mechanics"
(1886) ;  and  "  Hydromechanics  "  (West  Point,  1887).

MICHLER, 'Nathaniel,  soldier,  b.  in  Easton,
Pa,,  13  Sept.,  1827 ;  d.  in  Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y.,
17  July,  1881.  His  great-grandfather.  John  Wolf
gang,  a  Moravian  minister,  came  to  this  country
in  1743.  Nathaniel,  after  studying  at  Lafayette,
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1848,  assigned  to  the  corps  of  topographical  engi
neers,  and  served  on  the  Mexican  boundary  survey
in  1851-'7.  He  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant,  19


316


MIDDLESWARTH


MIDDLETON


May,  1856,  and  in  1857-'60  was  chief  engineer  in
charge  of  surveys  of  the  proposed  ship-canal  from
the  Gulf  of  Darien  to  the  Pacific.  After  his
promotion  to  captain.  9  Sept.,  1861,  he  was  chief
topographical  engineer  successively  of  the  de
partments  of  the  Cumberland  and  the  Ohio,  and
the  Armies  of  the  Ohio  and  the  Cumberland.
He  was  transferred  to  the  regular  engineer  corps
on  3  March,  1863,  promoted  major,  22  April,  1864,
and  was  engaged  on  the  defensive  works  connected
with  the  Wilderness  campaign,  the  siege  of  Peters
burg,  and  the  subsequent  actions  of  the  Army  of
the  Potomac.  He  received  the  brevet  of  lieuten
ant-colonel,  1  Aug.,  1864,  and  those  of  colonel  and
brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army  on  2  April,
1865,  for  services  at  Petersburg  and  throughout
the  war.  Afterward  he  served  on  various  engi
neering  boards,  was  superintendent  of  public  build
ings  in  the  District  of  Columbia  in  1867-'71,  and
then  had  charge  of  river  and  harbor  improvements
on  the  Pacific  coast  and  in  the  states  of  New  York
and  New  Jersey.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  held
the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  to  which  he  had
been  promoted  on  16  Oct..  1877.

MIDDLESWARTH,  Ner,  congressman,  b.  in
New  Jersey  about  1780 ;  d.  in  Beavertown,  Pa.,  2
June,  1865.  At  the  beginning  of  the  century  he
removed  to  Pennsylvania,  and  settled  in  what  is'now
Snyder  county,  penniless,  friendless,  and  without
education.  He  served  in  the  war  of  1812,  after
which  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature  for  many
years,  and  also  served  as  its  speaker.  He  had  much
influence  in  local  politics,  was  a  Democrat  until
1829,  and  then  became  an  anti-Mason.  He  was  after
ward  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  serving  from  5
Dec.,  1853,  till  3  March,  1855.  He  was  opposed  to
liberal  progress  and  to  education.  His  speeches
in  congress  consisted  of  brief,  terse  sentences,  and
commanded  profound  attention.

MIDDLETON,  Christopher,  navigator,  b.  in
England:  d.  24  Jan.,  1770.  He  sailed  from  Eng
land  in  May,  1741,  and.  after  spending  the  winter
at  the  entrance  of  Churchill  river  in  Hudson  bay,
went  to  Wager  river  and  penetrated  to  88°  west
longitude.  Afterward  he  steered  to  the  north
west  and  reached  Repulse  bay,  which  he  named  in
consequence  of  being  prevented  by  ice  from  mak
ing  further  progress.  On  9  Aug.  he  returned  to
England,  where  a  violent  controversy  took  place
between  him  and  Arthur  Dobbs,  a  gentleman  of
fortune,  at  whose  instance  Middleton  had  under
taken  the  expedition.  Further  researches  vindi
cated  Middleton,  and  he  was  presented  with  a  medal
and  elected  a  member  of  the  Royal  society.

MIDDLETON,  Edward,  colonist,  b.  in  Twick
enham,  England;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  about
1685.  He  inherited  large  property  in  England,
but  removed  from  London  to  Barbadoes,  and
thence  with  his  brother  Arthur  in  1678  to  Caro
lina,  soon  after  the  founding  of  that  colony,  where
they  received  large  grants  of  land  in  Berkeley
county.  Edward  took  an  active  part  in  the  af
fairs  of  the  province  and  was  a  member  of  the
grand  council  under  the  lords-proprietors,  1678-'80,
which  office  was  also  held  by  his  brother  Arthur
in  1683.  In  1683-'4  he  was  one  of  the  assistant
judges  of  the  province.  He  evinced  decided  re
publican  tendencies  and  opposed  the  governors  in
favor  of  popular  rights  and  privileges.  His  coun
try-place,  known  as  the  "  Oaks,"  on  Goose  creek,  is
still  remarkable  for  a  fine  avenue  of  live-oaks  that
are  said  to  have  been  planted  by  him.— His  son,  Ar
thur,  governor  of  South  Carolina,  b.  in  South
Carolina  in  1681  ;  d.  there,  7  Sept.,  1737,  was  edu
cated  in  England.  In  1704  he  was  a  member  of


the  commons  house,  voted  for  the  establishment
of  the  Church  of  England  in  the  colony,  and  was
one  of  the  commissioners  that  were  appointed  to
carry  out  the  act.  In  1711  he  was  appointed  naval
officer  for  South  Carolina,  and  from  1711  till  1717
was  a  member  of  the  council  of  the  province  and
afterward  speaker  of  the  commons.  In  1715  he
was  sent  as  commissioner  to  Virginia  to  solicit  the
aid  of  that  province  in  the  Yemassee  war.  and  later
was  sent  to  England  to  seek  relief  from  the  crown.
He  was  active  in  the  movement  for  the  transfer  of
the  colony  from  the  government  of  the  lords  to
that  of  the  crown,  and  in  1719  headed,  as  president
of  the  popular  convention,  the  revolution  that
threw  off  the  proprietary  government.  In  1721  he
was  made  president  of  council,  and  from  1725  till
1731  he  was  governor  of  the  colony,  and  thereafter
remained  president  of  the  council  until  his  death.
He  was  a  bold  supporter  of  the  royal  author
ity,  and  "  equally  careful  to  promote  loyalty  to
the  king  as  the  freedom  and  safety  of  his  fellow-
subjects."  His  administration  was  marked  by  war
and  by  negotiations  with  the  Spanish  in  Florida
and  the  French  in  Louisiana. — Arthur's  youngest
son,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  1719 ;  d.  in  Beaufort,
S.  C.,  17  Dec.,  1766,  was  a  member  of  the  commons
house  for  St.  James  parish  until  his  marriage,
when  he  removed  to  Granville  county.  In  1752  he
sat  as  member  from  St.  Bartholomew's,  and  after
ward  until  his  death  for  St.  Helena  or  Prince
Williams.  In  1750  he  was  a  captain  in  the  Berke
ley  county  regiment.  He  passed  the  years  1753
and  1754  travelling  in  Europe.  In  1759  he  com
manded  the  gentlemen  volunteers  in  an  expedition
into  the  mountains  of  the  Cherokee  country.  In
1760  he  Was  made  colonel  of  the  regiment  of
South  Carolina  provincials,  in  which  William
Monltrie,  Francis  Marion,  Isaac  linger,  and  other
Revolutionary  officers  began  their  military  career.
He  commanded  this  regiment  in  the  campaign
against  the  Cherokees  and  in  the  battle  of  Etchoee.
A  controversy  as  to  rank  between  Col.  Grant,  of
the  English  army,  who  commanded  the  regulars,
and  himself,  intensified  by  the  subsequent  events
of  the  campaign,  led  to  a  personal  encounter  and
duel.  Col.  Middleton's  conduct  in  this  matter  was
highly  approved  by  public  opinion,  and  his  popu
larity  rose  to  a  great  height. — His  only  son.  Will
iam,  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  for  St.  He
lena. — The  eldest  son  of  Arthur,  William,  poli
tician,  b.  in  South  Carolina  in  1710 ;  was  a  member
of  the  commons  and  in  1742  speaker  of  that  body.
In  1742  he  was  appointed  to  the  council.  In  1750
he  was  an  incorporator  of  the  Charleston  library
society.  In  1754  he  resigned  his  seat  in  council
and  removed  to  his  estates  in  Suffolk,  England.  In
1756  he  was  appointed  agent  for  the  colony,  which
office  he  declined.  In  1774  he  headed  the  Carolin
ians  in  England  who  petitioned  parliament  against
the  Boston  port  bill,  and  was  an  active  sympathizer
and  abettor  of  the  American  movement. — Will
iam's  eldest  son,  Sir  William  Middleton,  bart.,
continued  the  family  in  England. — His  youngest
son,  John,  returned  to  Carolina  and  fought
through  the  Revolutionary  war  on  the  American
side  as  an  officer  in  Lee's  legion. — The  second  son
of  Arthur,  Henry,  b.  in  South  Carolina  in  1717;
d.  in  Charleston,  13  June,  1784,  was  early  elected
to  the  commons,  and  was  speaker  of  that  body  in
1745-'7,  and  represented  St.  George's  in  1754-'5.  In
the  latter  year  he  was  a  commissioner  of  Indian
affairs  and  was  appointed  to  the  council,  of  which
body  he  was  a  member  until  1770,  when  he  re
signed.  In  1774  he  was  sent  as  a  delegate  to  the
Continental  congress,  and  in  October  was  made


MEDDLETON


MIDDLETOX


317


president  of  that  body.  In  1775-'6  he  was  also
president  of  the  Provincial  congress  of  South  Caro
lina,  received  the  public  thanks  of  that  body,  and
was  re-elected  by  it  a  delegate  to  the  Continental
congress.  He  was  a  member  of  the  council  of
safety,  and  by  his  position,  wealth,  and  powerful
family  connection  did  much  to  turn  the  balance  in
Carolina  in  favor  of  the  American  party.  In  1776
he  was  prevented  by  ill  health  from  returning  to
congress,  where  his  place  was  filled  by  his  eldest
son,  Arthur.  He  was  a  large  and  successful  plant
er,  owning  about  50,000  acres  and  800  slaves,  and  he
was  constant  in  his  efforts  to  improve  the  agricul
ture  and  commerce  of  the  colony. — Henry's  eldest
son,  Arthur,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of  Independ
ence,  b.  in  Middleton  Place,  on  Ashley  river,  S.  C.,
26  June,  1742;  d.  in  Goose  Creek,  S.  C.,  1  Jan.,

1787.  He  was
educated  at  Har
row  and  West
minster  schools
and  graduated  at
Cambridge.  Af
ter  travelling  two
years  through  Eu
rope,  he  returned
to  South  Caro
lina  in  1763,  and
in  1764  married
Mary,  daughter
of  Walter  Izard.
Thefollowingyear
he  was  elected  to
the  commons,  and
for  many  years  he
continued  to  rep
resent  one  or  oth
er  of  the  parishes
of  St.  George's  and  St.  Helena.  He  went  to  Eng
land  in  1768.  and.  returning  in  1771,  became  one  of
the  leaders  of  the  American  party  in  South  Carolina.
In  1775  he  was  a  member  of  the  Provincial  con
gress  and  of  the  council  of  safety.  He  succeeded
his  father  as  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  con
gress  in  1776,  and  signed  the  Declaration  of  Inde
pendence  for  South  Carolina.  In  1778  he  was
chosen  governor  of  the  state,  but  declined.  He
was  active  in  the  defence  of  Charleston  in  1780.
His  homestead,  being  on  the  British  line  of  march,
was  exposed  to  their  depredations,  and,  although
the  buildings  were  spared,  his  valuable  collection
of  paintings  was  wantonly  mutilated.  On  the  fall
of  the  city  he  was  carried  as  a  political  prisoner  to
St.  Augustine  and  afterward  confined  in  the  "Jer
sey  "  prison-ship.  Upon  his  exchange  in  1780  he
served  in  congress  until  the  close  of  the  war.  After
witnessing  the  distress  that  was  occasioned  by  the
oppressive  measures  of  Lord  Cornwallis,  he  sub
mitted  to  congress  a  resolution  :  '•  That  Lord  Corn
wallis  should  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  a  barba
rian,  who  had  violated  all  the  rules  of  modem
warfare,  and  had  been  guilty  of  innumerable  cases
of  wanton  cruelty  and  oppression ;  and.  further,
that  he,  the  said  Lord  Cornwallis,  should  not  be
comprehended  in  any  exchange  of  prisoners  which
should  take  place  between  the  British  government
and  that  of  the  United  States."  He  served  in  the
state  senate  and  was  instrumental  in  restoring  or
der  and  peace  after  the  Revolutionary  struggles.
Mr.  Middleton  was  a  stenographer  and  wrote  down
many  of  the  debates  in  which  he  took  part.  His
speeches  were  short  and  terse,  and  he  wrote  several
effective  political  essays  under  the  signature  of
"  Andrew  Marvell." — Arthur's  eldest  son.  Henry,
governor  of  South  Carolina,  b.  at  Middleton


Place  in  1771 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  14  June,
1846,  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  from  1801
till  1810,  and  governor  of  South  Carolina  from
1810  till  1812.  He  was  afterward  a  representative
in  congress,  serving  from  4  Dec.,  1815,  till  3  March,
1819,  and  minister  to  Russia  from  6  April,  1820,
till  3  Aug.,  1830.  He  possessed  attractive  man
ners,  maintained  a  generous  hospitality  at  Mid
dleton  Place,  and  was  a  centre  of  social  life  in
South  Carolina.  He  left  a  large  family.  His  sons,
Arthur,  John  Izard,  Edward,  and  Williams,  all
served  either  their  state  or  in  the  United  States  in
diplomatic,  naval,  or  political  life. — Another  son
of  Arthur,  John  Izard,  author,  b.  at  Middleton
Place,  S.  C.,  in  1785 ;  d.  in  Paris.  France,  in  No
vember,  1849,  was  educated  at  the  University  of
Cambridge,  England,  and  resided  in  Italy  and
France.  In  1810  he  married  the  daughter  of  M,
Falconet,  a  banker  of  Naples,  and  was  received  on
intimate  terms  in  the  circles  of  Mme.  de  Stae'l  and
Mme.  Recamier.  His  work  on  "  Grecian  Remains
in  Italy,"  etc.,  was  the  first  contribution  made  by
an  American  to  the  knowledge  of  classical  an
tiquity  (London,  1812). — Henry's  son,  Arthur,  b.
in  South  Carolina,  20  Oct.,  1795;  d.  in  Naples,
Italy,  9  June,  1853,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1814.  He  was  eight  years  secretary  of  legation  in
Spain,  and  married  in  Rome  the  Countess  Benti-
voglio. — Another  son  of  Henry.  Henry,  author,  b.
in  Paris,  France,  16  March,  1797;  d.  in  Washing
ton,  D.  C.,  15  March,  1876,  was  educated  by  private
tutors  at  Middleton  Place,  S.  C..  and  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy.  He  was  graduated  in  1815  and
assigned  to  the  corps  of  engineers,  serving  in  the
construction  of  defences  of  the  Savannah  river,
Ga.,  until  his  resignation  from  the  army  on  15
July,  1816.  In  1819  he  entered  the  Litchfield,
Conn.,  law-school,  and  in  1820  went  to  Edinburgh
to  continue  his  studies.  Here  he  formed  a  friend
ship  with  Dugald  Stewart  and  Mrs.  Grant,  of  Lag-
gan.  In  1822  he  returned  to  the  United  States
and  was  admitted  to  the  bars  of  Charleston  and
Philadelphia,  but  did  not  practise  his  profession,
his  taste  for  philosophy  dominating  any  active
pursuit.  He  was  interested  in  political  economy
and  wrote  much  in  favor  of  free-trade.  In  1832-'3
he  opposed  nullification,  publishing  an  essay  on
the  "  Prospects  of  Disunion."  He  was  the  author
of  "  The  Government  and  the  Currency,"  of  which
Edgar  A.  Poe  said :  "  Nothing  so  good  on  the  same
subject  has  yet  appeared  in  America  "  (New  York,
1850) :  '•  Economical  Causes  of  Slavery  in  the
United  States  and  Obstacles  to  Abolition  "  (Lon
don,  1857) ;  "  The  Government  of  India,  as  it  has
been,  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  be  "  (1858) ;  and
"  Universal  Suffrage  in  the  Various  Conditions
and  Progress  of  Society." — Another  son  of  Henry,
John  Izard,  author,'  b.  at  Middleton  Place,  3
Feb.,  1800;  d.  in  Summerville,  S.  C..  12  Jan.,
1877,  entered  South  Carolina  college  at  an  early
age,  but  was  graduated  with  the  highest  honor
at  Princeton  in  1819.  He  became  a  large  rice-
planter  in  Prince  George.  S.  C.,  representing  that
parish  in  the  state  legislature  from  1832  till  1840.
In  1848  he  was  speaker  of  the  house.  He  was
a  member  of  the  conventions  of  1832  and  1850,
and  in  1860  with  his  brother  Williams  signed  the
South  Carolina  ordinance  of  secession.  He  was
ruined  by  the  civil  war,  and  spent  his  last  years  in
retirement. — Another  son  of  Henry,  Edward,  na
val  officer,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  11  Dec.,  1810;
d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  27  April,  1883,  was  edu
cated  in  Europe  and  appointed  from  South  Caro
lina  to  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1828.  He  be
came  passed  midshipman  in  1834,  and  served  on


318


MIDDLETON


MIPFLIN


the  "  Constitution,"  of  the  Mediterranean  squad
ron,  from  1835  till  1838,  and  in  the  Brazil  squad
ron  from  1839  till  1842.  After  being  commis
sioned  lieutenant,  2  March,  1841,  he  served  on  the
store-ship  "  Lexington  "  in  1843-'4,  in  the  home
squadron,  the  navy-yard,  Philadelphia,  and  the
Mediterranean  squadron.  He  was  executive  officer
of  the  sloop  "  Decatur,"  of  the  Pacific  squadron,  in
1854-'6,  operating  against  a  combination  of  hostile
Indians  in  Washington  and  Oregon  territories.
On  16  April,  1856,  he  was  made  commander  and
assigned  the  sloop  "  Decatur,"  and  he  commanded
steam  sloops  in  the  Pacific  squadron  from  1861  till
1865.  He  became  captain  on  24  April,  1863,  was
on  special  duty  in  New  York  in  1866,  held  charge
of  the  navy- yard,  Mare  island,  Cal.,  in  1867-'8,  and
commanded  the  steam  sloop  "  Pensacola,"  of  the
Pacific  squadron,  in  the  latter  year.  He  was  made
commodore  on  26  Nov.,  1868,  and  had  charge  of
the  navy-yard,  Pensacola,  Fla.,  from  1  June,  1870,
till  8  March,  1873.  He  was  retired  on  11  Dec.,
1872,  and  made  rear-admiral,  15  Aug.,  1876.

MIWDLETON,  Sir  Frederick  Dobson,  British
soldier,  b.  in  Belfast.  Ireland,  4  Nov.,  1825.  His
father,  Gen.  Charles  Middleton,  a  Scottish  High
lander,  saw  much  service  in  India.  The  son  was
educated  at  the  Royal  military  college  at  Sand
hurst,  from  which  he  obtained  his  commission  with
out  purchase,  30  Dec.,  1842.  He  served  as  ensign
in  the  58th  regiment  in  New  South  Wales,  Norfolk
island,  and  in  New  Zealand  against  the  Maoris  in
1845-'6.  lie  subsequently  saw  service  in  India  and
Burmah,  and  again  in  India  during  the  mutiny  of
1857-'8,  where  he  was  five  times  mentioned  in  de
spatches,  and  recommended  for  the  Victoria  cross
for  conspicuous  bravery.  He  received  the  brevet
of  major,  and  served  as  brigade-major  to  the  field
force  in  Oude.  He  was  with  the  29th  regiment  in
England  from  1859  till  1861,  subsequently  at  Gib
raltar  and  at  Malta  till  November,  1862,  when  he
returned  to  England  and  passed  through  the
Hythe  school  of  musketry  and  the  Staff  college,
and  obtained  a  first-class  certificate  at  the  former.
He  rejoined  the  29th  regiment  in  Canada  in  1868,
became  lieutenant-colonel  in  March,  1869,  and  held
various  appointments  in  the  service  until  the  re
moval  of  the  imperial  troops  from  Canada.  In
July,  1870,  he  became  superintending  officer  of
garrison  instruction  to  the  forces,  in  1875  was  pro
moted  to  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  in  July,  1884,
was  appointed  general  in  command  of  the  militia
of  Canada.  As  such  he  commanded  the  field  force
that  was  engaged  in  suppressing  the  rebellion  in
the  northwest  provinces  in  1885,  and  in  recogni
tion  of  his  services  received  a  grant  of  $20,000
from  the  Dominion  government  and  the  honor  of
knighthood  from  the  queen.

MIDDLETON,  Peter,  physician,  b.  in  Scot
land  ;  d.  in  New  York  in  1781.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  and  came  to  New
York,  where  he  was  one  of  the  most  eminent  medi
cal  men  in  the  middle  of  the  18th  century.  In
1750  he  assisted  Dr.  John  Bard  in  making  the  first
dissection  on  record  in  this  country.  In  1767  he
aided  in  establishing  a  new  medical  school  in  New
York,  in  which  he  was  professor  of  pathology  and
physiology  from  1767  to  1776.  and  of  chemistry  and
materia  medica  from  1770  till  1776.  This  was  in
corporated  with  Kings  (now  Columbia)  college,  of
which  he  was  governor  from  1770  till  1780.  He
received  the  degree  of  M.  D.  from  this  school  in
1768.  He  published  a  letter  on  the  "  Croup  "  in
the  "Medical  Repository"  (vol.  ix.),  and  "Histori
cal  Inquiries  into  the  Ancient  and  Present  Sys
tem  of  Medicine"  (1769).


MIEGE,  John  Baptist  (mee-ayzh),  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Chevron,  Savoy,  18  Sept.,  1815 ;  d.  in  Wood
stock,  Md.,  20  July,  1884.  He  became  a  member  of
the  Society  of  Jesus  in  1836,  and,  after  teaching  for
several  years  in  the  Jesuit  novitiate  in  Milan,  he
finished  his  theological  course  in  the  college  of  the
order  in  Rome.  He  was  ordained  priest  in  1847,
and  in  1848  obtained  leave  to  go  on  the  Ameri
can  mission.  He  arrived  in  the  United  States  in
the  following  year,  and  was  appointed  pastor  of
St.  Charles's  church,  St.  Louis,  but  several  months
afterward  was  made  professor  in  the  Jesuit  novi
tiate  at  Florissant.  He  subsequently  held  the  chair
of  moral  theology  in  the  University  of  St.  Louis.
In  1850  he  was  nominated  vicar-apostolic  of  the
Indian  territory  east  of  the  Rocky  mountains.  He
sent  an  earnest  remonstrance  to  Rome  against  his
appointment,  but  in  the  following  year  he  received
a  formal  command  to  submit,  accompanied  by  a
promise  that  he  would  not  be  required  to  separate
himself  from  the  Jesuit  order.  He  was  consecrat
ed  bishop  of  Messena  on  25  March,  1851,  in  St.
Xavier's  church,  St.  Louis,  by  Archbishop  Kenrick.
The  vicariate  contained  between  5,000  and  6,000
Roman  Catholic  Indians  with  a  few  hundred  white
settlers.  He  resided  at  the  Pottawatomie  mission,
and  shortly  afterward  built  an  industrial  school
for  the  Osages.  which  he  placed  under  the  care  of
the  Sisters  of  Loretto,  and  provided  priests  and
churches  for  some  of  the  other  tribes.  In  1853  he
went  to  Rome  to  lay  the  condition  of  his  vicariate
before  the  pope.  He  also  took  part  in  a  general
congregation  of  the  Jesuits  in  that  city,  as  procu
rator  for  the  order  in  the  United  States.  In  1855
he  moved  to  Leavenworth,  where  a  small  Roman
Catholic  congregation  had  formed.  In  the  follow
ing  two  years  several  new  churches  were  built,  and
priests  came  from  other  parts  to  his  aid.  The
Benedictine  order  was  introduced,  and  founded  a
college  in  Atchison.  In  1857  Nebraska  was  sepa
rated  from  the  jurisdiction  of  Bishop  Miege,  and
his  authority  then  only  extended  over  the  territory
of  Kansas.  The  Sisters  of  Charity  opened  an
academy,  a  hospital,  and  an  asylum  under  his  aus
pices  in  Leavenworth,  and  other  religious  orders
established  institutions  in  the  vicariate.  When  he
resigned  his  charge  in  1874  the  state  contained  48
priests  and  71  churches,  with  a  Roman  Catholic
population  of  35,000.  He  resided  for  some  time  in
the  University  of  St.  Louis,  but  was  afterward
transferred  to  Woodstock,  to  which  he  returned
after  founding  a  college  in  Detroit  in  1877.

MIERS,  John,  British  botanist,  b.  in  England,
25  Aug.,  1789;  d.  there,  17  Oct.,  1879.  He  spent
many  years  in  exploring  South  America,  and  pub
lished,  among  other  works,  "  Travels  in  Chili  and
La  Plata  "  (London,  1826) ;  "  Illustrations  of  South
American  Plants"  (1846-'57);  and  "Contributions
to  Botany  "  (1851-'71) ;  also  many  monographs.

MIFFLIN,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1744;  d.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  20  Jan..  1800.
He  was  graduated  at  Philadelphia  college  in  1760,
entered  a  counting-house,  travelled  in  Europe  in
1765,  and  on  his  return  engaged  in  commercial
business  in  partnership  with  a  brother.  In  1772
and  1773  he  was  a  representative  in  the  legislature,
and  in  1774  was  one  of  the  delegates  sent  to  the
Continental  congress,  and  served  on  important
committees.  When  the  news  came  of  the  fight  at
Lexington  he  eloquently  advocated  resolute  action
in  the  town-meetings,  and  when  troops  were  en
listed  he  was  active  in  organizing  and  drilling  one
of  the  first  regiments,  and  was  made  its  major,
thereby  severing  his  connection  with  the  Quaker
society,  in  which  he  was  born  and  reared.  Gen.


MIPFLIN


MIFFLIN


319


Washington  chose  him  as  his  first  aide-de-camp,
with  the  rank  of  colonel,  soon  after  the  establish
ment  of  his  headquarters  at  Cambridge.  While
there  he  led  a  force  against  a  British  detachment.
In  July,  1775,  he  was  made  quartermaster-general
of  the  army,  and,  after  the  evacuation  of  Boston

by  the  enemy,  was
commissioned  as
brigadier  -  general,
19  May,  1776.  He
was  assigned  to  the
command  of  a  part
of  the  Pennsylva
nia  troops  when  the
army  lay  encamped
before  New  York,
and  enjoyed  the
particular  confi
dence  of  the  com
mander  -  in  -  chief.
His  brigade  was  de
scribed  as  the  best
disciplined  of  any  in
the  army.  Inthere-
treat  from  Long  Isl
and  he  command
ed  the  rear-guard,

and  through  a  blunder  received  the  order  to  cover
the  retreat  before  all  of  the  troops  had  embarked,
but,  after  marching  his  men  to  the  ferry,  regained
the  lines  before  the  enemy  discovered  that  the  post
was  deserted.  In  compliance  with  a  special  resolve
of  congress,  Mifflin  resumed  the  duties  of  quarter
master-general.  In  November,  1776,  he  was  sent
to  Philadelphia  to  represent  to  congress  the  critical
condition  of  the  army,  and  to  excite  the  patriotism
of  the  Pennsyl  vanians.  After  listening  to  him,  con
gress  appealed  to  the  militia  of  Philadelphia  and
the  nearest  counties  to  join  the  army  in  New  Jer
sey,  sent  to  all  parts  of  the  country  for  re-enforce
ments  and  supplies,  and  ordered  Mifflin  to  remain
in  Philadelphia  for  consultation  and  advice.  He
organized  and  trained  the  three  regiments  of  asso-
ciators  of  the  city  and  neighborhood,  sending  a
body  of  1,500  to  Trenton.  In  January,  1777,  ac
companied  by  a  committee  of  the  legislature,  he
made  the  tour  of  the  principal  towns  of  Pennsyl
vania,  and  by  his  stirring  oratory  brought  recruits
to  the  ranks  of  the  army.  He  came  up  with  re-
enforcements  before  the  battle  of  Princeton  was
fought.  In  recognition  of  his  services,  congress
commissioned  him  as  major-general  on  19  Feb.,
and  made  him  a  member  of  the  board  of  war.  He
shared  the  dissatisfaction  at  the  "  Fabian  policy  "
of  Gen.  Washington,  and  sympathized  with  the
views  of  Gen.  Horatio  Gates  and  Gen.  Thomas
Conway,  but  afterward  declared  that  he  had  not
shared  in  the  desire  to  elevate  the  former  to  the
supreme  command.  The  cares  of  his  various
offices  so  impaired  Gen.  Mifflin's  health  that  he
offered  his  resignation,  but  congress  refused  to  ac
cept  it.  When  the  friends  of  Washington  over
came  the  Conway  cabal,  Mifflin  was  replaced  by
Gen.  Nathanael  Greene  in  the  quartermaster's  de
partment  in  March,  1778,  and  in  October  he  and
Gates  were  discharged  from  their  places  on  the
board  of  war.  An  investigation  of  his  conduct
was  ordered  by  congress  in  consequence  of  charges
that  the  distresses  of  the  army  at  Valley  Forge
were  due  to  the  mismanagement  of  the  quartermas
ter-general.  When  the  decree  was  revoked,  after  he
had  himself  demanded  an  examination,  he  resigned
his  commission,  but  congress  again  refused  to  ac
cept  it,  and  placed  in  his  hands  $1,000.000  to  set
tle  outstanding  claims.  In  January,  1780,  he  was


appointed  on  a  board  to  devise  means  for  retrench
ing  expenses.  After  the  achievement  of  independ
ence  he  was  elected  to  congress,  was  chosen  its
president,  3  Nov.,  1783,  and,  when  Washington  re
signed  his  commission  as  general  of  the  army,  re
plied  to  him  in  eulogistic  terms.  He  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  legislature  in  1785,  and  was  elected
speaker.  In  1787  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  conven
tion  that  framed  the  constitution  of  the  United
States,  and  was  one  of  its  signers.  He  was  elected
a  member  of  the  supreme  executive  council  of
Pennsylvania  in  1788,  succeeded  to  its  presidency,
and  filled  that  office  till  1790.  He  presided  over
the  convention  that  was  called  to  devise  a  new  con
stitution  for  Pennsylvania  in  that  year,  was  elect
ed  the  first  governor  over  Arthur  St.  Clair,  and
re-elected  for  the  two  succeeding  terms  of  three
years.  He  raised  Pennsylvania's  quota  of  troops
for  the  suppression  of  the  whiskey  insurrection,
and,  served  during  the  campaign  under  the  orders
of  Gov.  Henry  Lee,  of  Virginia.  Not  being  eligi
ble  under  the  constitution  for  a  fourth  term  in  the
governor's  chair,  he  was  elected  in  1799  to  the  as
sembly,  and  died  during  the  legislative  session.
Governor  Mifflin  was  a  member  of  the  American
philosophical  society  from  1768  till  his  death. —
Thomas's  cousin,  Warner,  reformer,  b.  in  Accomac
county,  Va.,  21  Oct.,  1745;  d.  near  Camden,  Del..  16
Oct.,  1798,  was  the  «on  of  Daniel  Mifflin,  a  planter
and  slave-owner,  and  the  only  Quaker  within  sixty
miles  of  his  plantation.  The  son  early  cherished
an  interest  in  behalf  of  the  slaves.  In  giving  an
account  of  his  conversion  to  anti-slavery  views,  he
writes  of  himself:  "About  the  fourteenth  year  of
my  age  a  circumstance  occurred  that  tended  to
open  the  way  for  the  reception  of  those  impres
sions  which  have  since  been  sealed  with  indelible
clearness  on  my  understanding.  Being  in  the  field
with  my  father's  slaves,  a  young  man  among  them
questioned  me  whether  I  thought  it  could  be  right
that  they  should  be  toiling  in  order  to  raise  me,
and  that  I  might  be  sent  to  school,  and  by  and  by
their  children  must  do  so  for  mine.  Some  little
irritation  at  first  took  place  in  my  feelings,  but
his  reasoning  so  impressed  me  as  never  to  be  erased
from  my  mind.  Before  I  arrived  at  the  age  of
manhood  I  determined  never  to  be  a  slave-owner."
Nevertheless,  he  did  become  the  owner  of  slaves —
some  on  his  marriage  through  his  wife's  inherit
ance,  and  others  from  among  his  father's,  who  fol
lowed  him  to  his  plantation  in  Delaware,  whither
the  son  had  removed  and  settled.  Finally,  deter
mining  that  he  would  "be  excluded  from  happi
ness  if  he  continued  in  this  breach  of  the  divine
law,"  he  freed  all  his  slaves  in  1774  and  1775,  and
his  father  followed  the  example.  The  son,  on  the
day  fixed  for  the  emancipation  of  his  slaves,  called
them  one  after  another  into  his  room  and  informed
them  of  his  purpose  to  give  them  their  freedom,
and  this  is  the  conversation  that  passed  with  one
of  them :  "  Well,  my  friend  James,"  said  he,  "  how
old  art  thou?"  "I  am  twenty-nine  and  a  half
years,  master."  "  Thou  should'st  have  been  free,
as  thy  white  brethren  are,  at  twenty-one.  Religion
and  humanity  enjoin  me  this  day  to  give  thee  thy
liberty ;  and  "justice  requires  me  to  pay  thee  for
eight  years  and  a  half  service,  at  the  rate  of  ninety-
one  pounds,  twelve  shillings,  and  sixpence,  owing
to  thee;  but  thou  art  young  and  healthy;  thou
had'st  better  work  for  thy  living ;  my  intention  is
to  give  thee  a  bond  for  it,  bearing  interest  at  seven
and  a  half  per  cent.  Thou  hast  now  no  master  but
God  and  the  laws."  From  this  time  until  his  death
his  efforts  to  bring  about  emancipation  were  un
tiring.  Through  his  labors  most  of  the  members


320


MIFFLIN


MILBERT


of  his  society  liberated  their  slaves.  He  was  an
elder  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  and  travelled  from
state  to  state  preaching  his  anti-slavery  doctrines
among  his  people,  and  in  the  course  of  his  life  vis
ited  all  the  yearly  meetings  on  the  continent.  He
was  much  encouraged  in  his  work  by  the  words  of
the  preamble  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence.
Referring  to  these,  he  writes :  "  Seeing  this  was  the
very  substance  of  the  doctrine  I  had  been  concerned
to  promulgate  for  years,  I  became  animated  with
hope  that  if  the  representatives  were  men,  and  in
culcated  these  views  among  the  people  generally,  a
blessing  to  this  nation  would  accompany  these  en
deavors."  In  1782  he  appeared  before  the  legisla
ture  of  Virginia,  and  was  instrumental  in  having
a  law  enacted  that  admitted  of  emancipation,  to
which  law  may  be  attributed  the  liberation  of
several  thousand  negroes.  In  1783  he  presented  a
memorial  to  congress  respecting  the  African  slave-
trade,  and  he  subsequently  visited,  in  the  further
ance  of  his  work,  the  legislatures  of  Pennsylvania,
Maryland,  and  Delaware.  In  1791  he  presented  his
noted  "  Memorial  to  the  President,  the  Senate,  and
the  House  of  Representatives  of  the  United  States  "
on  the  subject  of  slavery,  and,  on  account  of  some
reflections  that  were  cast  on  him,  he  published  a
short  time  afterward  his  serious  expostulations  with
the  house  of  representatives  in  relation  to  the  prin
ciples  of  liberty  and  the  inconsistency  and  cruelty
of  the  slave-trade  and  slavery.  These  essays  show
the  undaunted  firmness  and  zeal  of  the  writer,  his
cogent  reasoning  and  powerful  appeals  to  the  un
derstanding  and  the  heart.  From  conviction  he
was  against  war,  and  on  principle  opposed  the
Revolution.  On  the  day  of  the  battle  of  German-
town  he  was  attending  the  yearly  meeting  of  the
Quakers  at  Philadelphia,  and  the  room  in  which
they  were  assembled  was  darkened  by  the  smoke
of  the  battle.  At  this  meeting  the  Friends  renewed
their  "  testimony "  against  the  spirit  of  war,  and
chose  Mifflin  to  undertake  the  service  of  communi
cating  it  to  Gen.  Washington  and  Gen.  Howe.  To
perform  this  duty,  he  had  to  walk  in  blood  and
among  the  dead  bodies  of  those  that  had  fallen  in
the  fight.  In  his  conversation  with  Washington
he  said  :  "  I  am  opposed  to  the  Revolution  and  to
all  changes  of  government  which  occasion  war  and
bloodshed."  After  Washington  was  elected  presi
dent,  Mifflin  visited  him  in  New  York,  and  in  the
course  of  the  interview  the  president,  recollecting
an  assertion  of  Mifflin's  at  Germantown,  said:
"  Mr.  Mifflin,  will  you  please  tell  me  on  what  prin
ciple  you  were  opposed  to  the  Revolution  ? "
"  Yes,  Friend  Washington,  upon  the  principle  that
I  should  be  opposed  to  a  change  in  the  present
government.  All  that  was  ever  gained  by  revolu
tion  is  not  an  adequate  compensation  for  the  poor
mangled  soldiers,  for  the  loss  of  life  or  limb."  To
which  Washington  replied :  "  I  honor  your  senti
ments;  there  is  more  in  that  than  mankind  have
generally  considered."  With  reference  to  Mifflin,
Brissot,  in  his  "  New  Travels  in  the  United  States
of  America  "  (London,  1792),  says  :  "  I  was  sick,  and
Warner  Mifflin  came  to  me.  It  is  he  that  first
freed  all  his  slaves ;  it  is  he  who,  without  a  pass
port,  traversed  the  British  army  and  spoke  to  Gen.
Howe  with  so  much  firmness  and  dignity ;  it  is  he
who,  fearing  not  the  effects  of  the  general  hatred
against  the  Quakers,  went,  at  the  risk  of  being
treated  as  a  spy,  to  present  himself  to  Gen.  Wash
ington,  to  justify  to  him  the  conduct  of  the  Qua
kers;  it  is  he  that,  amid  the  furies  of  war,  equally
a  friend  to  the  French,  the  English,  and  the  Ameri
cans,  carried  succor  to  those  who  were  suffering.
Well !  this  angel  of  peace  came  to  see  me."


MIGNOT,  Louis  R£my,  painter,  b.  in  Charles
ton,  S.  C.,  in  1831 ;  d.  in  Brighton,  England,  in
September,  1870.  He  was  the  son  of  a  Baltimore
confectioner,  studied  art  in  Holland,  opened  a
studio  in  New  York  city  about  1855,  and  became
known  as  a  landscape-painter.  He  went  with
Frederick  E.  Church  to  South  America,  where  he
painted  some  tropical  scenes.  He  was  elected  an
associate  member  of  the  Academy  of  design  in
1858,  and  an  academician  in  1859.  When  the
civil  war  began,  desiring  neither  to  return  to  his
native  state  nor  to  remain  in  the  north,  he  emi
grated  to  Europe,  and  settled  in  London  in  1862.
lie  made  studies  in  Switzerland  and  other  parts
of  Europe,  and  painted  works  that  found  recogni
tion.  Among  his  earlier  pictures  are  "Twilight
in  the  Tropics,"  "  Southern  Harvest,"  "  Tropical
Scenery,"  and  "  Source  of  the  Susquehanna,"  which
was  exhibited  at  the  Paris  exposition  of  1807.  He
also  painted  ''Niagara,"  a  view  from  the  American
side.  He  exhibited  at  the  Royal  academy  in  London
"Lagoon  of  Guayaquil,  South  America"  and  "A
Winter  Morning"  in  1863,  "Evening  in  the  Trop
ics"  in  1865,  "  Under  the  Equator"  in  1866,  "  Tin-
tern"  in  1867,  and  "Sunset  off  Hastings"  in  1870.
"Mount  Chimborazo  "  was  shown  in  1871.  After
his  death  a  collection  of  his  paintings  was  placed
on  exhibition  in  London.

MIJARES,  Jacobo  (me-hah'-res),  Mexican  cler
gyman,  b.  in  Puebla  de  los  Angeles,  Mexico,  in  1695 ;
d.  in  Guadalajara  in  1751.  He  became  a  Jesuit  in
1713.  After  his  ordination  he  was  professor  of
philosophy  in  various  Mexican  colleges,  and  then
filled  successively  the  posts  of  rector  of  the  col
leges  of  Oajaca  and  Guadalajara.  He  published
"  Elogio  de  la  Inmaculada  Concepcion  de  la  Vir-
gen  Maria"  (Mexico,  1730)  and  "El  Penitente  in-
struido  y  eLConfesor  asegurado"  (1747).

MILANES  Jose  Jacinto  (me-lah-nays'),  Cuban
poet,  b.  in  Matanzas,  Cuba,  in  August,  1814;  d.  in
November,  1863.  He  studied  in  his  native  city,
which  at  that  time  was  poorly  endowed  with  the
means  of  furnishing  an  education.  He  showed
a  remarkable  talent  for  poetry  from  his  boyhood,
but  his  first  poems  were  published  in  "  Aguinaldo
Habanero"  (Havana,  1837).  He  then  established
his  residence  in  that  city,  where  his  drama  "El
Conde  de  Alarcos"  was  performed  with  success  in
1838.  This  drama  made  its  author  famous  at
once,  and  was  soon  translated  into  German.  George
Ticknor,  in  his  "  History  of  Spanish  Literature,"
says  that  it  "  contains  passages  of  very  passionate
poetry."  Soon  afterward  he  composed  his  drama
"  Un  poeta  en  la  corte."  In  the  mean  time  he  had
published  in  the  reviews  and  literary  papers  several
poems,  some  of  them  deemed  among  the  best  Span
ish  lyrics.  He  published  "  Miron  Cubano,"  a  series
of  social  sketches  (1842);  but  his  reason  began  to
fail,  and  the  physicians  recommended  change  of
life.  He  traveled  through  the  United  States  and
Europe  accompanied  by  his  brother,  but  without
any  improvement,  and  when  he  had  returned  to
his  native  country  he  was  hopelessly  insane.  His
"Complete  Works"  have  been  issued  (4  vols.,  Ha
vana,  1846;  2d  ed.,  enlarged,  New  York,  1865).
The  second  edition,  besides  the  two  dramas  already
mentioned,  contains  three  dramatic  works,  five
legends,  numerous  poems,  "  Cancionero  de  Tristan
Morales,"  and  other  productions  of  less  interest.
Almost  all  his  works  have  been  translated  into
German,  and  many  of  his  poems  into  English,
French,  and  Italian.

MILBERT,  Jacques  Gerard,  French  natural
ist,  b.  in  Paris,  18  Nov.,  1766 ;  d.  there,  5  June,  1840.
He  showed  early  in  life  a  disposition  for  art.  In


MILBURN


MILES


321


1795  he  became  professor  of  drawing  in  the  Paris
school  of  mines,  and  two  years  later  was  ordered
to  the  Pyrenees  to  make  sketches.  During  the  fol
lowing  years,  he  was  employed  on  similar  missions
in  the  Alps  and  along  the  river  Rhone,  and  also
accompanied  as  geographer  the  expedition  of  1800
to  the  Antarctic  ocean.  In  1815  he  left  France
with  Hyde  de  Xeuville,  the  French  consul-general  at
New  York,  and,  receiving  from  the  latter  a  mission
to  study  the  natural  history  of  the  United  States,
explored  for  nine  years  the  eastern  and  southern
parts  of  the  country,  living  for  eighteen  months
alone  in  a  hut  in  the  Alleghany  and  Rocky  moun
tains,  and  studying  their  flora.  Pie  sent  to  the
Paris  museum  of  natural  history  specimens  of
every  animal  in  North  America,  and  discovered
also  many  new  plants,  and  corrected  the  erroneous
ideas  that  were  current  in  Europe  about  the  flora
of  the  United  States.  Many  scientific  societies  of
the  United  States  elected  him  to  membership.  But
he  had  to  bear  most  of  the  expenses  of  his  explo
rations,  his  allowance  from  the  French  consulate
being  small  and  insufficient,  and  he  was  compelled
to  abandon  his  labors  in  1825  and  return  to  Paris,
where  he  served  again  as  professor  of  drawing  in  the
School  of  mines  almost  till  his  death. ^  His  principal
works  are  "  Voyage  pittoresque  a  1'Ile  de  France,
au  Cap  de  Bonne  Esperance  et  a  File  de  Tenerife  "
(2  vols.,  Paris,  1812) ;  "  Itineraire  pittoresque  du
fleuve  Hudson  et  des  parties  laterales  de  1'Amerique
du  Nord,  d'apres  des  dessins  originaux  pris  sur
les  lieux  "  2  vols.,  1828-'9) ;  and  "  Memoires  au  mu
seum  d'histoire  naturelle  sur  1'histoire  naturelle
de  1'Amerique  du  Nord"  (7  vols..  1817-'33).

MILBURN,  William  Henry,  clergyman,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  26  Sept.,  1823.  When  he  was
five  years  of  age  a  playfellow  accidentally  struck
him  in  the  left  eye  with  a  piece  of  glass.  For  two
years  he  was  confined  to  a  dark  room,  subjected
to  the  heroic  medical  treatment  of  that  time,  and
when  he  came  forth  into  the  light  again  it  was
found  that  one  of  his  eyes  was  entirely  blind,  and
that  but  little  sight  was  left  in  the  other.  With
this  fraction  of  an  eye  he  pursued  his  studies  at
school  and  college  for  about  twenty  years,  the  sight
growing  dimmer,  until  at  last  it  went  out,  and  he
has  been  totally  blind  for  more  than  thirty  years.
In  the  spring  of  1838,  with  his  father's  family,  he
removed  to  Jacksonville,  111.,  was  a  student  at
Illinois  college,  and  in  1843  became  a  travelling
preacher  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  hav
ing  Peter  Cartwright  for  his  presiding  elder.
After  an  apprenticeship  with  this  pioneer  and  other
men  of  his  class,  Milburn  was  thought  fit  to  enter
"  Brush  college,''  or  "  Swamp  university,"  as  the
regular  ministry  in  the  west  was  called  at  that  day,
and  was  sent  to  a  circuit  where  it  was  his  duty  to
ride  about  200  miles  and  preach  between  thirty
and  forty  rimes  every  four  weeks,  at  a  salary  of
§100  a  year.  In  1845,  when  a  little  over  twenty-
two  years  of  age,  he  was  elected  chaplain  of  the
29th  congress.  The  suggestion  of  his  selection  is
said  to  have  proceeded  from  some  western  con
gressmen,  fellow-passengers  on  an  Ohio  steamboat,
on  which  he  was  invited  to  deliver  a  Sunday  dis
course,  which  he  closed  with  a  rebuke  to  the  legis
lators  for  intemperance,  profanity,  and  gambling
during  the  voyage.  In  1848  he"  received  an  ap
pointment  as  minister  in  charge  of  the  church  at
Montgomery,  Ala.  Two  years  later  he  was  sent  to
Mobile,  and  while  there  underwent  a  trial  for
heretical  teachings,  after  which  he  served  two  years
as  minister  of  a  free  church  that  was  largely  at
tended  by  all  classes.  In  1853  he  returned  to
Washington  as  chaplain  of  the  33d  congress,  and
VOL.  iv. — 21


;  he  subsequently  made  his  home  in  New  York  city,
and  devoted  himself  chiefly  to  lecturing. He  went
i  to  England  in  1857  on  a  lecturing  tour,  and  has
since  crossed  the  ocean  three  times,  spending  five
or  six  years  abroad. After  a  visit  to  Great  Britain
in  1859  he  took  orders  Jn  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church, but  he  returned  to  Methodism  in 1871.
Mr.  Milburn  is  widely  known  as  the  "blind  preach
er." His  ministry  and  lecture-field  have  covered
:  all  parts  of  the  United  States  and  Canada  and  of
Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  and  his  travels  amount
!  to  1,500.000  miles. In  1885  he  served  for  the  third
time  as  chaplain  of  congress,  and  in  1887  he  was
for  the  fourth  time  elected  to  that  office  on  the
meeting  of  the  50th  congress. For  many  years  it
was  his  habit  to  speak  in  public  every  day. Mr.
Milburn  has  published  "Rifle,  Axe,  a'nd Saddle-
Bags,  Symbols  of  Western  Character  and  Civiliza
tion"  (New  York,  1856);  "Ten  Years  of  Preacher-
i  Life;  Chapters  from  an  Autobiography"  (1858);
and  "  The  Pioneers,  Preachers,  and  People  of  the
I  Mississippi  Valley,"  a  course  of  lectures  that  were
!  given originally  at  the  Lowell  institute.  Boston,
;  in  1854  (1860).  "The  two  first  were  republished  in
England,  and  were  popular  in  both  countries.

MILES,  Dixon  S.,  soldier,  b.  in  Maryland  in
1804  ;  d.  in  Harper's  Ferry.  Va.,  16  Sept., 1862.
:  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
'  in  1824,  and  assigned  to  the  infantry. After  serv
ing  as  adjutant  for  five  years,  he  was  commissioned
j  as  captain,  8  June,  1836,  and  held  a  staff  appoint
ment  as  quartermaster during the Florida  war
and  until  the  beginning  of  the  war  with  Mexico.
j  He  was  brevetted  major  for  gallantry  in  the  de-
i  fence  of Fort  Brown,  and  lieutenant-colonel  for
|  brave  conduct  at  Monterey,  was  promoted  major  on
i  16  Feb.,  1847,  and  was  co'mmandant  at  Vera  Cruz
!  for  four  months. He  was  advanced  to  the  grade
i  of  lieutenant-colonel  on  15  April,  1851,  commanded
;  a  column  in  the  Gila  expedition  in  1857.  and  in  the
j  following  year conducted  an  expedition  against
\  the  Navajo  Indians  in  New  Mexico. He  was  made
j  colonel  of  the  28th  infantry  on  19  Jan.,  1859,  was
;  on  duty  at  Fort  Leavenworth,  Kan.,  in  1861,  and
after  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  ordered  to  the
:  east,  taking  part  in  the  defence  of  Washington,
and  commanding  the  reserve  at  the  battle  of  Bull
Run. After  several  months'  leave  of  absence,  he
!  was  given  charge  of  a  brigade  guarding  the  Balti
more  and  Ohio  railroad  in March,  1862. In  Sep-
I  tember  he  was  intrusted  with  the  command  of  the
post  of  Harper's  Ferry. He  asked  for  re-enforce
ments,  but  they  were  not  sent. After  Maryland
heights  had  been  evacuated  by  the  force  that  was
posted there,  and  when the enemy opened fire
from  commanding  positions in  two  quarters,  he
offered  no  further  resistance,  but  surrendered  the
post  with 11,500  troops and  arms,  ammunition,
and  supplies. He  was  mortally  wounded  by  the
bursting  of  a  shell  after  the  capitulation.

MILES,  Georg-e  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Balti
more,  Md.,  31  July.  1824:  d.  in  Thornbrook.  near
Emmettsburg,  Md..  23  July,  1871.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Mount  St.  Mary's  college  in  1843,  studied
law,  and  practised  in  Baltimore  for  several  years.
'  His  first  literary  work  was  "  The  Truce  of  God."
a  story.  In  1849  he  gained  the  $50  prize  that  was
offered  by  the  Baltimore  "  Catholic  Mirror  "for  the
best  short  story,  by  his  "  Loretto,  or  the  Choice."  In
1850  Mr.  Miles s  drama-Mohammed"  won  thef  1.000
prize  that  was  offered  by  Ed  win  Forrest  for  the  best
play  by  an  American  author.  In  1851  he  was  sent
by  President  Filimore  as  bearer  of  despatches  to
Madrid.  In  1864  he  again  visited  Europe,  and  upon
his  return  wrote  a  series  of  sketches,  "  Glimpses  of


322


Tuscany,"  which  were  published  in  "The  Catholic
World."  "  Christine :  a  Troubadour's  Song,"  his
longest  poera,  also  was  first  published  in  that,
magazine.  In  October,  1856,  his  lyric  "  Inker-
man  "  appeared  in  "  Brownson's  Review."  In  j
April.  1857,  his  drama  "  De  Soto  "  was  played  at
the  Broadway  theatre,  New  York,  with  success.
The  same  season,  his  comedy  "  Mary's  Birth-Day  "
was  also  played  in  New  York  for  'the  first  ttme,
and  received  favorable  notice.  On  6  Oct.,  1858,  at
the  semi-centennial  celebration  of  Mount  St.  Mary's
college,  he  read  a  poem  called  "  Aladdin's  Palace."
In  April,  1859,  his  comedy  "  Sefior  Valiente"  was
brought  out  successfully ' in  New  York,  Boston,
and  Baltimore  on  the  same  night.  After  writing
several  minor  pieces,  he  began  his  greatest  effort,
"Cromwell,  a  Tragedy,"  which  has  never  been
acted.  He  was  also  the  author  of  the  "  Seven  Sis
ters,"  founded  on  the  secession  of  the  seven  cotton
states,  which  had  a  long  run  at  Laura  Keene's
theatre,  New  York,  in  the  winter  of  I860-'!.  In
1859  Mr.  Miles  was  appointed  professor  of  English
literature  in  Mount  St.  Mary's  college,  and  removed
from  Baltimore  to  Thorubrook,  a  cottage  near
Emmettsburg,  where  he  passed  the  remainder  of
his  life.  Besides  the  works  mentioned  he  was  the
author  of  "Discourse  in  Commemoration  of  the
Landing  of  the  Pilgrims  of  Maryland"  (Emmetts
burg.  1847) ;  "  Christine,  a  Troubadour's  Song,  and
other  Poems"  (New  York,  I860;;  and  "  Abou  Has
san  the  Wag,  or  the  Sleeper  Awakened"  (Balti
more,  1868).  He  projected  a  series  of  critiques
upon  the  tragedies  of  Shakespeare,  but  completed
only  one  of  them,  "  A  Review  of  Hamlet "  (1870).

MILES,  Henry  Adolphus,  clergyman,  b.  in
Grafton,  Mass..  30  May,  1809.  He  was  graduated
at  Brown  in  1829.  and  at  Harvard  divinity-school
in  1882.  He  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Unitarian
church,  has  held  pastorates  at  Hallo  well,  Me.,  and
Lowell,  Longwood.and  Hingham,  Mass., and  during
six  years  was  secretary  of  the  American  Unitarian
association  in  Boston.  He  visited  Europe  four
times,  living  there  altogether  some  six  years.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  I),  from  Brown  in  1850.
In  1854-'9  he  edited  the  "Quarterly  Journal,"
which  was  published  in  Boston.  Dr.  Miles  is  the
author  of  "Lowell  as  it  Was  and  Is"  (Lowell,
1845);  "Grains  of  Gold"  (Boston,  1854):  "The
Altar  at  Home  "  (1855) ;  "  Gospel  Narratives "
(1858) :  "  Channing's  Thoughts  "  (1859) ;  "  Words
of  a  Friend  "  (1870) ;  "  Picture  Writing  "  (1870) :
and  "  The  Birth  of  Jesus  "  (1878).

MILES,  James  Browning',  clergyman,  b.  in
Rutland,  Mass.,  18  Aug.,  1822;  d.  in  Worcester,
Mass.,  13  Nov.,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1849,  taught  for  a  year  in  North  Fairfield,  stud
ied  theology  at  Yale  and  Andover  seminaries,  was
tutor  at  Yale  in  1852-'4,  and  was  ordained  as  pas
tor  of  the  1st  Congregational  church  in  Charles-
town,  Mass.,  on  2  Jan.,  1855.  In  October,  1871,  he
resigned  and  removed  to  Boston,  having  accepted
the  office  of  secretary  of  the  American  peace  asso
ciation.  He  applied  himself  with  energy  to  the
task  of  reorganizing  the  society,  and,  while  the
Washington  treaty  and  the  Geneva  award  were
fresh  in  the  public  mind,  set  on  foot  an  agitation
for  the  codification  of  international  law  and  the  in
stitution  of  a  high  court  of  nations.  Public  meet
ings  were  held  in  Boston,  New  York,  and  other
cities.  With  Elihu  Burnt t  and  others,  he  matured
a  project  for  an  international  congress  and  asso
ciation,  and,  going  to  Europe,  he  gained  the  adhe
sion  of  many  eminent  jurists.  At  a  congress  held
in  Brussels  in  1873  the  International  association
for  the  codification  of  international  laws  was  or


ganized,  and  he  was  chosen  its  secretary.  He  at
tended  the  second  congress  at  Geneva  in  1874,  and
afterward  several  ratification  meetings  in  Italy,
France,  and  England  ;  likewise  the  next  congress,
held  at  the  Hague  in  July,  1875.  He  was  made
D.  D.  by  Beloit  college  in  1873.

MILES,  James  Warley,  clergyman,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C.,  24  Nov.,  1818 ;  d.  there,  in  Au
gust,  1875.  He  was  educated  at  the  South  Caro
lina  college,  took  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episco
pal  church,  and  went  as  a  missionary  to  the  Orient,
where  he  acquired  a  knowledge  of  Turkish,  Per
sian,  and  other  languages.  After  his  return  he  was
for  a  time  assistant  rector  of  St.  Michael's  church,
Charleston,  and  then  professor  of  Greek  and  of
the  history  of  philosophy  in  Charleston  college
until  his  health  failed,  in  consequence  of  which  lie
went  to  Europe,  and  while  there  studied  philology
and  philosophy  in  Berlin.  When  he  returned,  at
the  end  of  two  years,  he  became  librarian  of  Charles
ton  college.  He  has  published  articles  in  the
"  Southern  Review,"  also  addresses  and  poems,  and
is  the  author  of  a  treatise  entitled  "Philosophic
Theology,  or  Ultimate  Grounds  of  all  Religious
Belief  based  on  Reason  "  (Charleston,  1849).

MILES.  Nelson  Appleton,  soldier,  b.  in  West
minster,  Mass.,  8  Aug.,  1830.  He  received  an  aca
demic  education,  and  was  engaged  in  mercantile
pursuits  in  Boston  when  the  civil  war  began.  On
9  Sept.,  1861.  he
entered  the  vol
unteer  service
as  lieutenant  in
the  22d  Mas
sachusetts  in
fantry,  and
was  commis
sioned  lieuten
ant  -  colonel  of
the  61st  New
York  volun
teers,  to  date
from  31  May,
1862.  He  was
engaged  in  the
battles  of  the
peninsula,  be
fore  Richmond,
and  at  Antie-
tarn,  and  on  30

Sept.  was  made  colonel  of  his  regiment.  Col.  Miles
fought  in  all  the  battles  of  the  Army  of  the  Poto
mac  with  one  exception  up  to  the  surrender  of  Lee
at  Appomattox  Court-House,  Va.,  and  was  wounded
three  times.  He  received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  for  gallantry  at  Chancellors-
ville,  and  was  advanced  to  the  full  rank  on  12  May,

1864,  for  his services  at  the  battles  of the  Wil
derness  and  Spottsylvania  Court-IIouse. On  25
Aug.,  1864,  he  was  brevetted  major-general  of  vol
unteers  for  his  conduct  throughout  the  Richmond
campaign  and  valuable  service  at  Ream's  Station.
He  was  commissioned major-general  on  21 Oct.,

1865,  and  mustered  out  of  volunteer  service  on  1
Sept.,  1866,  after  receiving,  on  28  July,  an  appoint
ment  in  the  regular  army  as  colonel  of  the  40th
infantry. On  2  March,  1867,  the  brevets  of  briga
dier-general  and  major-general,  U.  S:  army,  were
conferred  on  him  for  bravery  at  Chancellorsville
and  Spottsylvania. He  was  transferred  to  the  5th
infantry  on  15  March,  186!),  defeated  the  Cheyenne,
Kiowa.  and  Comanche  Indians  on  the  borders  of
the  Staked  Plains  in  1875,  and  in  1876  subjugated
the  hostile  Sioux  and  other  Indians  in  Montana,
driving  Sitting  Bull  across  the  Canada  frontier,  and


MILES


MILES


323


breaking  up  the  bands  that  were  led  by  him  and  by
Crazy  Horse,  Lame  Deer,  Spotted  Eagle,  Broad
Trail,  Hump,  and  others.  In  September  he  cap
tured  the  Xez  Perces  under  Chief  Joseph  in  north
ern  Montana,  and  in  1878  captured  a  band  of  Ban
nocks  near  the  Yellowstone  park.  He  was  commis
sioned  brigadier-general  of  the  U.  S.  army  on  15
Dec.,  1880,  commanded  for  five  years  the  Depart
ment  of  the  Columbia,  in  July,  1885.  assigned  to
the  command  of  the  Department  of  the  Missouri,
and  in  April,  1886,  was  transferred  to  Arizona.
After  a  difficult  campaign  against  the  Apaches
under  Geronimo  and  Natchez,  he  compelled  those
chiefs  to  surrender.  4  Sept.,  1886.  He  deemed  it
advisable,  in  the  interest  of  the  future  tranquillity
of  the  Indians,  to  accept  a  conditional  surrender
from  Geronimo,  agreeing  that  neither  the  chief
nor  any  of  his  lieutenants  should  suffer  death  for
their  past  crimes.  He  received  the  thanks  of  the
legislatures  of  Kansas,  Montana,  New  Mexico,  and
Arizona  for  services  in  the  west,  and  the  citizens
of  Arizona  presented  to  Gen.  Miles  a  sword  of
honor  at  Tucson  on  8  Nov.,  1887,  in  the  presence
of  a  large  gathering  of  citizens  of  the  territory.

MILES,  Pliny,  author,  b.  in  Watertown,  N.  Y.,
16  Nov.,  1818;  d.  on  the  island  of  Malta,  7  April.
1865.  He  was  brought  up  on  a  farm,  taught  for
some  time,  and  on  coming  of  age  entered  upon  com
mercial  pursuits,  and  subsequently  studied  law.
He  next  passed  five  years  in  travelling  through  the
United  States,  delivering  lectures  and  contribut
ing  to  newspapers  for  his  support,  and  then  five
years  in  exploring  the  countries  of  Europe,  send
ing  home  descriptive  letters.  All  of  his  communi
cations  were  signed  "  Communipaw."  During  the
last  period  of  his  life  he  labored  in  advocacy  of
postal  reform,  urging  the  reduction  of  postage  to
one  cent  for  half-ounce  letters.  For  the  last
twenty  years  of  his  life  he  made  London  his  home,
but  continued  his  travels  in  various  parts  of  the
world.  He  died  while  on  the  journey  to  Egypt  to
report  the  opening  of  the  Suez  canal  for  a  New
York  newspaper.  He  published  "  Statistical  Reg
ister"  (New  York,  1848);  "Elements  of  Mnemo-
techny,  or  Art  of  Memory  "  (1848),  which  passed
through  several  editions  and  was  republished  in
London  ;  '•  Northurfari.  or  Rambles  in  Iceland  "
(1854),  republished  in  England ;  "  Ocean  Steam
Navigation";  and  "Postal  Reform,  its  L'rgent  Ne
cessity  and  Practicability  "  (1855).

MILES,  Richard  Pius,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Prince  George  county,  Md.,  17  May,  1791 :  d.  in
Nashville,  Tenn.,  17  "Feb.,  1860.  His  family  re
moved  to  Kentucky  when  he  was  four  years  old.
In  1807  he  was  sent  to  St.  Rose's  academy  in
Washington  county,  which  had  been  established
by  the  Dominicans  in  the  same  year.  He  after
ward  attached  himself  to  this  order  as  a  candidate
for  the  priesthood,  and  was  ordained  in  1816.  In
1830  he  accompanied  Bishop  Fenwick,  of  Cincin
nati,  into  Ohio,  where  he  aided  in  founding
churches.  He  was  also  a  constant  attendant  of
Bishop  Flaget.  with  whom  he  made  long  and  diffi
cult  journeys  through  the  west.  He  established  a
convent  of  Dominican  nuns  near  Springfield,  Ky.,
drew  up  rules  for  their  guidance,  and  was  appoint
ed  their  ecclesiastical  superior.  He  was  also  pro
vincial  of  the  Dominicans  of  Kentucky  and  Ohio
for  several  years.  In  1837  the  see  of  Nashville,
embracing  the  state  of  Tennessee,  was  created,  and
in  1838  Dr.  Miles  was  consecrated  its  first  bishop.
At  this  time  there  was  not  a  single  priest  in  the
entire  state.  Bishop  Miles  began  to  organize  a
diocese  without  any  assistance,  travelling  on  horse
back  through  every  part  of  the  state,  and  preach


ing  in  court-houses  and  other  places.  He  went  to
Europe  in  1845  in  the  interests  of  his  diocese,  and
on  his  return  dedicated  several  churches,  among
others  the  cathedral  of  Nashville.  He  also  built  an
episcopal  residence  and  charity  hospital,  which  he
placed  under  the  care  of  the  Sisters  of  Charity  of
Nazareth.  He  founded  the  Academy  of  St.  Mary
conducted  by  the  Sisters  of  Charity,  which  in  his
lifetime  became  one  of  the  most  flourishing  institu
tions  in  the  west,  established  a  theological  semi
nary,  three  female  religious  institutes,  a  colony  of
the'Dominican  order  in  Memphis,  and  an  orphan
asylum  under  the  care  of  the  Sisters  of  St.  Domi-
nick.  Bishop  Miles  took  part  in  five  councils  that
assembled  at  Baltimore  in  1840-'52.  At  his  death
his  diocese  contained  a  Roman  Catholic  popula
tion  of  about  13,000,  eleven  priests,  twenty-two
churches  and  chapels,  and  forty  mission  stations.

MILES,  Samuel,  soldier,  'b.  in  Montgomery
county,  Pa.,  11  March,  1740:  d.  in  Chesterham,
Pa.,  29  Dec.,  1805.  He  received,  according  to  his
own  statement,  a  "  common  country  education,"  in
the  sixteenth  year  of  his  age  enlisted  in  Capt.
Isaac  Wayne's  company,  which  was  formed  after
Braddock's  defeat.  He"  was  discharged,  February,
1756,  re-enlisted  as  sergeant  in  Capt.  Thomas
Lloyd's  company,  served  as  captain-lieutenant  in
the  "expedition  to  Fort  Duquesne,  was  wounded  at
Ligonia  in  an  attack  made  by  the  French  and  In
dians,  was  commissioned  captain  in  1760,  and  at
the  end  of  the  campaign  was  left  in  command  of
the  forces  at  Presque  Isle  (now  Erie),  Pa.  In  1761
he  became  a  wine-merchant  in  Philadelphia,  where
in  1766  he  was  chosen  one  of  the  wardens  and  a
manager  of  the  House  of  employ,  and  in  1772-'3  a
member  of  the  assembly.  He  was  one  of  the  first
to  espouse  the  cause  of  independence.  "  I  took,"
he  says  in  his  autobiography,  "  an  early  and  active
part  in  opposition  to  the  parliament  of  Great  Brit
ain,  who  claimed  the  right  of  binding  by  their  acts
this  country  in  all  cases,  and  raised  a  company,  .  .  .
the  second  company  of  militia  that  was  raised  on
that  occasion,  and  was  appointed  a  member  of  all
the  committees  in  the  county,  and  when  the  mili
tia  was  formed  into  a  regiment  I  was  elected  colo
nel."  In  1775  he  was  again  chosen  to  the  assem
bly,  in  which,  and  as  a  member  of  the  council  of
safety,  he  served  until  the  spring  of  1776,  when  he
was  chosen  colonel  of  the  Pennsylvania  rifle  regi
ment,  composed  of  two  battalions,  and  was  shortly
afterward  sent  with  a  force  to  quell  an  insurrec
tion  in  Sussex  county,  Del.  His  command  was
tendered  to  congress,  placed  in  the  flying  camp,
and  marched  to  Long  Island,  where  it  participated
in  the  battle  of  27  Aug.,  1776,  in  which  he  was
taken  prisoner,  and  held  until  he  was  exchanged
in  April,  1778.  Pie  was  appointed  in  December,
1776,  brigadier-general  of  state  forces,  but  after
his  exchange,  not  being  able  to  obtain  his  rank,  he
retired  from  active  service,  and  was  appointed  au
ditor  for  settling  public  accounts  and  deputy  quar
termaster-general  for  Pennsylvania,  which  latter
office  he  held  until  1782.  He  was  appointed  one
of  the  judges  of  the  high  court  of  errors  and  ap
peals  in  1783.  in  1787  to  the  council  of  censors  at
Philadelphia,  in  1788  to  the  city  council,  in  1789
an  alderman  and  a  member  of  the  council  of  prop
erty,  and  in  1790  became  mayor,  to  which  office
in  "1791  he  was  unanimously  re-elected,  but  de
clined  to  serve.  In  1805  he  was  again  chosen  to
the  assembly.  He  was  a  large  land-owner  in  Cen
ter  county,  Pa.,  where  the  town  of  Milesburg  was
laid  out  by  him.  His  autobiography,  written  in
1802  and  published  in  the  "  American  Historical
Record  "  (Philadelphia,  1873),  is  an  interesting  pa-


324


MILET


MILLER


per,  and  a  valuable  contribution  to  the  history  of
the  battle  of  Long  Island.  It  has  been  claimed
that,  if  his  advice  had  been  taken,  this  battle
would  have  resulted  in  the  defeat  of  the  British.

MILET,  Peter,  French  missionary,  b.  in  France ;
d.  in  Quebec,  Canada,  31  Dec.,  1708.'  He  belonged  j
to  the  Jesuit  order,  was  sent  to  Canada  in  1667,  |
and  stationed  as  a  missionary  among  the  Iroquois  |
in  New  York  in  1668.  In  1671  he  took  charge  of  |
the  Oneida  mission.  His  progress  was  slow,  but
in  1675  he  converted  the  principal  chief,  and  had
soon  a  considerable  congregation.  In  1684  he
left  the  Oneidas  and  accompanied  the  French  gov
ernor,  De  la  Barre,  in  his  proposed  campaign
against  the  Senecas.  He  acted  as  interpreter  at
the  conference  between  the  Iroquois  chiefs  and  the
French  at  Fort  Frontenac  in  1686.  In  1687  he
was  at  Niagara,  but  after  the  abandonment  of  the
fort  was  stationed  at  Fort  Frontenac,  where  his
knowledge  of  the  Iroquois  character  and  language
was  relied  on  by  the  French  as  a  means  of  gaining
the  friendship  of  these  Indians.  When  Fort  Fron
tenac  was  besieged  by  the  Iroquois  in  1689,  Father
Milet  was  summoned  to  attend  a  dying  Christian
brave,  and  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Onondagas,
who,  after  treating  him  with  great  indignity,  gave
him  up  to  the  Oneidas,  by  whom  he  was  doomed
to  the  stake,  but  just  as  he  was  about  to  be  exe
cuted  he  was  saved  by  a  matron,  who  adopted  him
and  took  him  to  her  cabin.  lie  was  released  in
October,  1694.  and  arrived  safely  in  Quebec.  In
1697  ambassadors  came  from  the  Oneidas  asking
to  have  him  assigned  as  their  missionary,  but  he
does  not  appear  to  have  returned  among  them.

MILLARD,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ballston.
N.  Y.,  24  Nov.,  1794  ;  d.  in  Jackson,  Mich.,  3  Aug.,
1873.  His  father,  Nathaniel,  was  a  soldier  in  the
Revolution.  The  son  worked  on  a  farm  till  his
seventeenth  year,  when  he  began  to  teach,  al
though  his  own  education  was  limited.  He  en
tered  the  ministry  of  the  Christian  denomination
in  1815.  and  in  1818-'32  was  pastor  of  the  church
at  West  Bloomfield,  N.  Y.  He  subsequently  edit
ed  the  "  Boston  Luminary,"  a  sectarian  monthly,
was  pastor  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  in  1837-'41,  and
at  the  latter  date  visited  Palestine  and  the  East.
On  his  return  he  became  professor  of  Bible  an
tiquities  and  sacred  geography  in  Meadville,  Pa.,
theological  seminary.  He  published  "  The  True
Messiah  in  Scripture  Light"  (Rochester,  1818):
and  "Journal  of  Travel  in  Arabia  Petraea  and  the
Holy  Land  "  (1843).  See  his  life  by  his  son  (1874).

MILLARD,  Harrison,  musician,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  27  Nov.,  1829.  He  was  educated  at  public
schools  in  his  native  city.  In  May,  1861,  he  was
appointed  1st  lieutenant  in  the  19th  U.  S.  infantry,
and  served  during  the  civil  war  as  aide-de-camp,
division  commissary,  and  division  inspector,  on
the  staffs  of  Gens.  Lovell  H.  Rousseau.  William  S.
Rosecrans,  and  Innis  H.  Palmer.  While  with  the
Army  of  the  Cumberland  he  was  wounded  at  Chicka-
mauga.  19  Sept.,  1863,  and  soon  afterward  resigned
from  the  army.  He  then  settled  in  New  York
city,  where  he  was  appointed  in  1864  to  a  place
in  the  custom-house,  and  remained  there  until
1885.  Meanwhile  he  has  devoted  his  leisure  to
musical  composition,  producing  many  songs  and
several  masses.  His  ability  in  this  direction  has
been  conspicuous,  and  his  efforts  have  tended  to
ward  giving  character  and  dignity  to  American
song  literature,  going  far  toward  placing  them  on
a  level  with  similar  German  productions.  His
best-known  songs  are  "  Waiting,"  "  When  the  Tide
comes  in,"  "  Viva  L'America,"  "  Under  the  Dai
sies,"  and  "Say  not  Farewell."


MILLEDGE,  John,  statesman,  b.  in  Savannah.
Ga.,  1757;  d.  on  the  Sand  Hills,  near  Augusta,
Ga.,  9  Feb.,  1818.  He  was  descended  from  one  of
the  early  settlers  of  the  colony,  and  was  brought
up  in  the  office  of  the  king's  attorney.  At  the  be
ginning  of  the  Revolution,  he  espoused  the  cause
of  the  colonies,  and  was  one  of  the  party  that,
headed  by  Joseph  Habersham,  entered  the  dwell
ing  of  the  governor,  Sir  James  Wright,  and  took
him  prisoner,  17  June,  1775.  This  was  the  first
bold  Revolutionary  act  that  was  performed  in
Georgia.  When  Savannah  was  captured  by  the
British,  Milledge  escaped  to  South  Carolina,  where
he  was  taken  by  a  party  of  patriots,  and  very  near
ly  hanged  as  a  spy.  He  was  present  at  the  siege
of  Savannah  under  Count  d'Estaing  and  Gen.
Benjamin  Lincoln,  and  also  at  Augusta,  and  did
good  service  in  the  patriot  army.  He  became  at
torney-general  in  1780,  was  frequently  in  the  legis
lature,  and  was  elected  to  congress  in  1792  in  place
of  Anthony  Wayne,  serving  three  terms  in  succes
sion,  and  also  in  1801-'2,  when  he  resigned  to  be
come  governor  of  Georgia.  He  was  U.  S.  senator
in  1806-'9,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  president  of
that  body.  In  1802,  with  James  Jackson  and
Abraham  Baldwin,  he  was  a  commissioner  for  ced
ing  parts  of  Georgia  to  the  United  States.  He
was  the  principal  founder  of  the  state  university,
and  presented  the  lands  on  which  the  town  of
Athens,  the  seat  of  the  university,  is  built.  By  a
special  act  of  the  legislature,  the  town  of  Millcdge-
ville  was  named  in  his  honor.

MILLEDOLER, Philip, clergyman, b. in
Rhinebeck,  N.  Y.,  22  Sept.,  1775;  d.  on  Staten
island,  N.  Y.,  23  Sept.,  1852. His  father,  a  Swiss,
emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1751. The  son
was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1793,  studied  the
ology,  and  at  nineteen  years  of  age  preached  in
German  and  Eng
lish  at  the  German
Reformed church
in Nassau street,
New  York  city.  He
was  pastor  of the
collegiate Dutch
Reformed church
in 1800,  and  soon
afterward of the
Pine street Pres
byterian  church  of
Philadelphia. He
was  secretary  of  the
board of trustees
of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  1801,  and
became pastor of
the  Collegiate  Pres
byterian churches
of New York in
1804, and of the

Collegiate  Dutch  church  in  1813.  He  was  also
professor  of  didactic  and  polemic  theology  in  the
seminary  in  New  Brunswick,  and  president  of
Rutgers  in  1825-'35,  holding  both  offices  at  the
same  time.  The  University  of  Pennsylvania  gave
him  the  degree  of  S.  T.  I).  His  publications  in
clude  many  sermons  and  addresses,  and  a  "  Dis
sertation  on  Incestuous  Marriages"  (New  Bruns
wick,  N.  J.,  1843).  One  of  his  sons  was  a  well-
known  clergyman  of  the  Episcopal  church.

MILLER,  Alfred  Jacob,  artist,  b.  in  Balti
more,  Md.,  2  Jan.,  1810 ;  d.  there,  26  June,  1874.
He  received  his  first  lessons  in  art  from  Thomas
Sully,  and,  after  painting  with  success  in  Balti
more  and  Washington,  went  to  Europe  in  1833,


MILLER


325


studied  in  Paris,  Rome,  and  Florence,  and  lived
on  terms  of  intimacy  with  Thorwaldsen.  Horatio
Greenough.  and  Horace  Vernet.  His  work  at  this
time  consisted  chiefly  of  copies  of  the  old  masters,
but  it  was  done  with  appreciation  and  accuracy.
In  1887  he  accompanied  Sir  William  Drumrnond.
Stewart  to  the  Rocky  mountains,  and  made  a
series  of  sketches  of  the  scenes  and  incidents  of
the  journey  that  were  the  ground-work  of  a  gal-
lery  of  Indian  paintings  that  are  now  at  Murthley
castle.  This  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  collections
of  pictures  of  aboriginal  American  life  that  are
now  extant.  He  spent  the  winter  of  1841  at  Tay-
mouth,  the  seat  of  the  Earl  of  Breadalbane,  in  the
highlands  of  Scotland,  painting  several  portraits
of  the  earl's  family.  On  his  return  to  Baltimore
he  opened  a  studio  there  and  followed  his  art  until
his  death.  He  belonged  to  the  school  of  Sir
Thomas  Lawrence  in  portraiture.

MILLER,  Charles  Henry,  artist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  20  March,  1842.  He  was  educated  at
Mount  Washington  collegiate  institute,  and  was
graduated  in  medicine  at  the  New  York  homoeo
pathic  institute  in  1864.  Before  this  time  he  had
occasionally  painted  pictures,  and  in  1860  he  ex
hibited  "  The  Challenge  Accepted  ''at  the  National
academy  of  design,  in  New  York  city.  He  went
abroad  in  1864  and  again  in  1867.  and  was  a  pupil
in  the  Bavarian  royal  academy  at  Munich  under
the  instruction  of  Adolf  Lier.  "  He  was  elected  an
associate  of  the  National  academy  in  1873  and
academician  in  1875.  and  was  president  of  the  New
York  art  club  in  1879  and  of  the  American  com
mittee  at  the  Munich  international  exposition  in
1883.  Among  those  of  his  pictures  that  have  been
exhibited  at  the  National  academy  of  design  are
"Near  Munich  "  (1870) ;  "A  Long  Island  Home
stead  "  (1873) ;  "  High  Bridge  from  Harlem  Lane  "
(1875) ;  "  A  Bouquet  of  Oaks  "  (1884) ;  "  A  Suburb
an  Way-Side''  (1886);  and  "Cornfield  at  Queen
Lawn  ""(1887).  He  exhibited  "  Old  Mill  at  Spring
field,  L.  I.,"  and  other  paintings  at  the  Philadel
phia  centennial,  '•  Oaks  at  Creedmore  ''at  the  Paris
exposition  of  1878,  and  "  Sunset  at  Purgatory  "  in
that  of  1882.  He  received  the  gold  medal"  that
was  awarded  by  the  Massachusetts  charitable  asso
ciation  in  1878,  and  another  at  the  World's  exposi
tion  in  New  Orleans  in  1885.  He  has  also  pub
lished,  under  the  pen-name  of  Carl  de  Muldor,  "  The
Philosophy  of  Art  in  America  '"  (New  York,  1885).

MILLER,  Cincinnatiis  Miner  (.JOAQL IN),  poet,
b.  in  Wabash  district,  Ind.,  10  Nov.,  1841. He  re
moved  with  his  parents  to  Oregon  in  1854,  became  j
a  miner  in  California,  and  after  various  adventures  i
returned  in  1860  and  studied  law  under  George  H.
Williams. The  next  year  he  was  express-messen
ger  in  the  gold-mining  districts  of  Idaho,  edited  in  |
1863  the  "  Democratic  Register,"  a  weekly  news
paper  in  Eugene,  Oregon,  which  was  suppressed
for  disloyalty,  and  then  opened  a  law-office  in  Canon
City. He  was  judge  of  Grant  county,  Oregon,  in
1866-'70,  and  while  occupying  that  office began
his  literary  career. From  "early  boyhood  he  had
written  verses  that  were  not  devoid"  of  merit,  al
though  he  was  ignorant  of  the  rules  of  versifica-  ]
tion  and  of  grammar. Having  published  a  paper  j
in  defence  of  Joaquin  Murietta,  the  Mexican  brig-  I
and,  he  signed  his  first  two  collections  of  poems  by  j
the  latter's  first  name. He  was  abroad  in  1870.
travelled  in  southern  Europe  and  in  England,  and
while  there  prepared  and  published  his  first  vol
ume  of  sustained  verse,  which  met  with  praise  from
the  English  critics. On  his  return  he  settled  as  a
journalist  in  Washington,  D.  C..  and  in  the  au
tumn  of  1887  returned  to  California. He  has  writ


ten  several  successful  plays,  including  "  The  Dan-
ites."  His  poems  are  "  Songs  of  the  Sierras  "  (Bos
ton  and  London,  1871) ;  "  Songs  of  the  Sunlands  "
(1873) ;  "  Songs  of  the  Desert  "  (1875) ;  '•  Songs  of
Italy"  (1878);  "Collected  Poems"  (1882);  and
'•  Songs  of  the  Mexican  Seas  "  (Boston,  1887).  His
prose  works  are  '•  The  Baroness  of  New  York "
(New  York,  1877);  "The  Danites  in  the  Sierras"
(Chicago,  1881);  "Shadows  of  Shasta"  (1881);
"  Memorie  and  Rime  "  (New  York,  1884) :  and  '•  49,
or  the  Gold-Seekers  of  the  Sierras"  (1884). — His
first  wife,  MIXXIE  DYER,  whom  he  married  in  1863,
and  who  obtained  a  divorce  from  him  in  1876,  was
a  writer  of  graceful  verses,  which  were  published
under  the  pen-name  of  "  Minnie  Myrtle."

MILLER,  Ezra,  inventor,  b.  in  New  Jersey,  12
May,  1812.  He  received  a  good  education  and  be
came  a  civil  engineer,  which  profession  he  fol
lowed  during  many  years  in  New  York.  In  1842
he  moved  to  Wisconsin  and  settled  in  Magnolia,
where  he  was  soon  elected  justice  of  peace  for  two
terms.  In  1852  he  was  chosen  a  state  senator  and
served  for  one  term,  refusing  a  renomination.  The
frequent  accidents  on  railway  trains  by  collision
led  to  an  endeavor  to  devise  means  for  their  pre
vention,  and  he  finally  invented  his  trussed  plat
forms,  compression  buffers,  and  automatic  coup
lers.  These  he  patented  in  1864,  and  they  have
since  become  almost  universally  adopted  by  the
railway  companies  in  the  United  States.  He  also
obtained  patents  for  his  platform  in  Europe,  and
it  is  now  extensively  used  on  the  continent  and
elsewhere.  Mr.  Miller  has  also  invented  other  de
vices  that  have  come  into  constant  use.  He  has
also  been  active  in  the  militia.  In  1833  he  enlisted
in  a  company  of  horse  artillery  belonging  to  the
2d  New  York  regiment,  and  advanced  until  he
reached  the  colonelcy  in  1842.  In  1851  he  was  ap
pointed  colonel  of'the8th  Wisconsin  militia,  which
office  he  held  during  his  residence  in  that  state.
He  subsequently  settled  in  Brooklyn.

MILLER,  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Lancaster
county,  Pa.,  13  Feb.,  1751  ;  d.  in  Carlisle.  Pa.,  5
April.  1824.  He  received  an  English  education,
studied  law,  and  about  1770  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  York  county,  where,  from  1772  until  he
joined  the  Continental  army,  he  held  the  office  of
collector  of  the  excise.  He  was  an  early  and  ar
dent  advocate  of  the  cause  of  the  colonies,  and  on
hearing  the  news  from  Lexington  and  Concord
assisted  in  organizing  a  company,  was  commis
sioned  1st  lieutenant,  and  reached  Cambridge  on
25  July,  being  the  first  to  arrive  from  south  of
Long  Island  and  west  of  the  Hudson.  With  a
portion  of  his  company  he  succeeded  in  getting  in
the  rear  of  the  British  sentries,  and  became  en
gaged  with  the  guard,  killing  several,  and  taking
two  prisoners,  with  the  loss  of  one  man.  Shortly
afterward  he  was  promoted  captain.  He  bore  a
conspicuous  part  in  the  battle  of  Long  Island.  In
November,  1777,  he  was  promoted  major,  and  in
1778  he  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  comman
dant  in  the  2d  Pennsylvania  line,  in  which  post  he
continued  until  he  le'ft  the  army.  A  companion-
in-arms,  writing  in  1801  of  him.  says :  '•  He  must
have  risked  his  person  in  fifty  or  sixty  conflicts."
At  Monmouth  two  horses  were  shot  under  him,  but
he  mounted  a  third  and  continued  in  the  thick  of
the  fight.  Gen.  James  Wilkinson,  in  his  memoirs,
says  that  "Maj.  Miller,  of  Hands  riflemen,  was
ordered  by  Gen.  Washington  to  check  the  rapid
movements  of  the  enemy  in  pursuit,"  while  the
patriot  army  was  retreating  across  New  Jersey,
and  the  services  of  Miller  on  this  occasion  proba
bly  saved  it  from  irreparable  disaster.  In  1779


326


MILLER


MILLER


he  resigned  his  commission,  on  account  of  the
straitened  pecuniary  circumstances  of  his  family,
which  had  arisen  by  reason  of  his  long  absence
in  the  field.  He  was  chosen  high  sheriff  of  York
county  in  1780,  and  held  the  office  until  1788,
when  he  was  chosen  to  the  legislature.  He  served
there  until  1785,  and  the  next  year  was  appointed
prothonotary  of  the  county  and  a  justice  of  the
peace  and  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,  which
office  he  held  until  1794,  serving  also  in  1790  as
a  member  of  the  Constitutional  convention  of  the
state.  In  1794,  under  the  requisition  of  the  presi
dent  for  troops,  on  account  of  the  dangers  that
were  apprehended  from  the  English  on  the  western
borders,  he  was  made  brigadier-general,  and  later
in  the  same  year  he  became  quartermaster-general
of  the  expedition  to  suppress  the  whiskey  insur
rection.  Still  later  in  that  year  he  was  appointed
by  Washington  supervisor  of  the  revenue  for  Penn
sylvania,  which  office  he  held  until  Jefferson  be
came  president.  He  then  removed  to  Baltimore,
Md.,  where  he  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits.  In
the  war  of  1812  he  was  brigadier-general,  in  com
mand  of  the  militia  at  Baltimore,  and  charged
with  the  defence  of  Fort  McIIenry  and  its  depend
encies.  When  the  enemy  left  the  Chesapeake,  he
retired  from  the  army,  and  returned  to  Pennsyl
vania,  where  from  1821  until  his  death  he  was
prothonotary  of  Perry  county.

MILLER,  Henry,  physician,  h.  in  Lexington,
Ky.,  1  Nov.,  1800;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  9  Feb..
1874.  He  was  licensed  to  practise  medicine  in
Lexington,  Ky.,  resided  for  a  short  time  in  Glas
gow  and  Harrodsburg,  and  on  the  organization  of
a  school  of  medicine  in  Louisville,  Ky..  in  1835,  re
moved  to  that  city.  He  was  professor  of  obstetrics
and  the  diseases  of  women  and  children  in  Louis
ville  university  till  1809,  when  he  became  professor
emeritus.  Dr.  Miller  was  president  of  the  American
medical  association  in  1859.  He  published  "A
Treatise  on  Human  Parturition "  (Louisville,
1844) ;  and  "  The  Principles  and  Practice  of  Partu
rition  "  (Philadelphia,  1858).

MILLER,  Homer  Martin  Yirgil,  senator,  b.
in  Pendleton  county,  S.  C.,  29  April,  1814.  He  re
moved  with  his  parents  to  Raburn  county,  Ga.,
where  he  received  a  classical  education,  was  gradu
ated  at  the  Medical  college,  of  South  Carolina  in
1835,  and  completed  his  professional  studies  in
Paris  in  1838.  On  his  return  he  settled  in  Cass-
ville,  Ga.,  became  a  member  of  the  Methodist  Epis
copal  church,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  without
joining  the  itinerancy.  He  also  participated  in  the
presidential  canvass 'of  1840  and  in  that  of  1844.
in  which  his  eloquence  won  for  him  the  title  of
the  Demosthenes  of  the  mountains.  He  was  pro
fessor  in  the  Medical  college  of  Memphis,  Tenn.,
in  1846-'8,  and  occupied  a  similar  office  in  the
Medical  college  of  Augusta,  Ga.,  in  1849-'65.  Dur
ing  the  civil  war,  he  was  surgeon  and  division  sur
geon  in  the  Confederate  army,  and  subsequently
medical  inspector  of  the  military  department  of
Georgia.  After  the  war,  he  was  an  active  member
of  the  Constitutional  convention  under  the  recon
struction  acts  of  congress.  In  1870  he  was  elected
to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Democrat,  to  fill  the  seat
that  had  been  vacant  since  the  civil  war,  and  served
till  1871.  Since  1869  he  has  been  professor  of  the
principles  and  practice  of  medicine  in  Atlanta
medical  college.  He  is  an  editor  of  the  "Atlanta
Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,"  and  for  thirty  years
has  been  a  trustee  of  the  University  of  Georgia.

MILLER,  Jacob  Welsh,  senator,  b.  in  German
valley,  Morris  co.,  X.  J.,  in  November,  1800;  d.  in
Morristown,  N.  J.,  30  Sept.,  1862.  He  received  an


academic  education,  studied  law,  was  admitted  tfo
the  bar  of  his  native  county,  and  attained  emi
nence  there.  He  was  state  senator  in  1838-'40,
and  in  the  latter  year  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  sen
ate  as  a  Whig,  serving  till  1853.  He  opposed  the
compromise  measures  of  1850.  and  in  1855  joined
the  Republican  party,  of  which  he  continued  an
active  member  until  his  death.

MILLER,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Peterborough,
N.  H.,  25  April,  1776;  d.  in  Temple,  N.  H.,  7  July,
1851.  He  was  educated  for  the  law,  but  in  1808
entered  the  U.  S.  army  as  major  of  the  4th  in
fantry,  and  was  lieutenant-colonel  in  1810.  He
commanded  at  the  battle  of  Brownstown,  9  Aug.,
1812,  was  brevetted  colonel  for  gallantry  in  that
action,  fought  at  Fort  George,  27  May,  1813,  and
was  colonel  of  the  21st  infantry  at  Chippewa  and
Lundy's  Lane.  In  the  latter  affair  the  success  of
the  Americans  depended  on  the  capture  of  a  Brit
ish  battery.  "  Can  you  take  it  ?  "  asked  Gen.  Win-
field  Scott.  "I  will  try,  sir,"  he  said,  and  with
great  gallantry  led  his  command  to  the  assault,
captured  the  battery,  and  decided  the  fortune  of
the  day.  For  this  service  he  was  brevetted  brig
adier-general,  and  received  a  gold  medal  from  con
gress.  He  was  governor  of  Arkansas  in  1819-'25,
and  collector  of  the  port  of  Salem,  Mass.,  in  1825-
'49. — His  son,  James  Ferfrurson,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Peterborough,  N.  II.,  29  April,  1805;  d.  in  Bos
ton.  Mass.,  11  July,  1868.  was  appointed  midship
man  in  1826,  passed  midshipman  in  1832.  and  lieu
tenant  in  1837.  He  served  through  the  Mexican
war,  but  in  consequence  of  African  fever,  from
which  he  never  fully  recovered,  was  placed  in  the
reserved  list  in  1855.  He  became  commander  on
the  retired  list  in  1861,  and  commodore  in  1867.

MILLER,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
24  Dec.,  1722;  d.  near  Dover,  Del..  22  July,  1791.
He  was  educated  in  the  Boston  public  schools,
licensed  to  preach  in  1748,  and  in  1749  ordained
pastor  of  Presbyterian  churches  in  Smyrna  and
Dover,  Del.,  where  he  continued  for  forty-three
years.  The  University  of  Pennsylvania  gave  him
the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1763.  Dr.  Miller  was  an
ardent  promoter  of  education,  and  an  active  advo
cate  of  the  patriot  cause. — His  eldest  son,  John,
was  a  surgeon  in  the  Continental  army,  and  died
of  exposure  during  the  Revolution. — Another  son,
Edward,  physician,  b.  in  Dover,  Del.,  9  May,  1760;
d.  in  New  York  city,  17  March,  1812,  studied  in  the
medical  hospital  at  Baskingridge,  N.  J..  was  sur
geon's  mate  in  the  Revolutionary  army,  and  in  1782
went  to  France  in  that  capacity  on  an  armed  ship.
On  his  return  he  settled  in  Dover,  was  graduated  at
the  medical  department  of  the  University  of  Penn
sylvania  in  1784,  and  from  1783  till  1796  practised
in  Dover.  He  then  removed  to  New  York  city,  and
with  Dr.  Elihu  H.  Smith  and  Dr.  Samuel  L".  Mit
chell  founded  in  August,  1779.  the  "  Medical  Reposi
tory,"  the  first  American  medical  journal.  Its  con
ductors  were  members  of  a  "  Friendly  "  club  whose
weekly  receptions  were  attended  by  the  wit  and  in
tellect  of  the  city,  and  which  included  William  Dun-
lap,  Charles  Brockden  Brown,  Anthony  Bleecker,
and  James  Kent.  Dr.  Miller  became  resident  phy
sician  of  New  York  city  in  1803,  professor  of  the
practice  of  medicine  in  the  University  of  New  York
in  1807,  and  clinical  lecturer  in  New  York  hospital
in  1809.  He  received  many  professional  honors,
had  a  large  correspondence  with  men  of  letters
both  in  this  country  and  abroad,  was  an  earnest
advocate  of  temperance,  and  opposed  the  use  of
tobacco.  His  report  on  "  Yellow  Fever  in  New
i  York  in  1805  "  is  the  source  from  which  most  later
i  authors  have  drawn  their  arguments  in  support  of


MILLER


MILLER


327


the  non-contagious  nature  of  that  disease.  See  his
memoir  and  writings  by  his  brother,  Rev.  Samuel
Miller  (New  York,  1814). — Another  son  of  John,
Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dover,  Del.,  31  Oct.,
1769;  d.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  7  Jan.,  1850,  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1789,  studied  theology,  was  licensed  to  preach  in

1791,  and  the  same
year  was  installed
colleague  pastor  of
the  1st  Presbyterian
church  in  New  York
city.  He  became
professor  of  ecclesi
astical  history  and
church  government
in  Princeton  theo
logical  seminary  in
1813,  and  held 'this
office  till  1849.  He
was  corresponding
secretary  of  the  New
York  historical  soci
ety,  and  in  1809  de
livered  before  that
body  a  discourse  to
commemorate  the
discovery  of  New

York.  The  University  of  Pennsylvania  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1804.  Dr.  Miller  enlisted
vigorously  in  the  controversy  that  resulted  in  the
division  of  his  church  into  the  new  and  old  schools,
and  was  an  eminent  theological  and  polemical
writer.  He  published  "A  brief  Retrospect  of  the
18th  Century "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1803 ;  3  vols.,
London.  1805);  "Letters  on  the  Constitution  and
Order  of  Christian  Ministry  "  (1807;  with  a  "  Con
tinuation,"  1809);  "Memoir  of  the  Rev.  John
Rogers  "  (1813) ;  "  Letters  on  Unitarianism  "  (Tren
ton,  1821);  "Letters  on  Clerical  Manners  and
Habits"  (Philadelphia,  1827);  "An  Essay  on  the
Office  of  the  Ruling  Elder"  (New  York,  1831);
"  Letters  to  Presbyterians  "  (1833) :  "  Discourses  en
Infant  Baptism"  (1834);  "  Presbyterianism  the
truly  Apostolic  and  Primitive  Constitution  of  the
Church  of  Christ"  (Philadelphia,  1835);  "The
Primitive  and  Apostolic  Order  of  Christ  vindicated"
(1840) ;  "  Letters  from  a  Father  to  a  Son  in  College  "
(1843):  "A  Sermon  on  the  Ruling  Elderships,
with  Appendix"  (1843);  "Thoughts  on  Public
Prayer"  (1849);  and  the  "Life  of  Jonathan  Ed
wards  "  in  Sparks's  "  American  Biography."  His
life  was  written  by  his  son,  Samuel  (2  vols.,  Phila
delphia.  1869). — Samuel's  son,  Samuel,  clergyman,
b.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  23  Jan.,  1816;  d.  in  Mount
Holly.  N.  J.,  12  Oct.,  1883,  was  graduated  at  Prince
ton  in  1833,  was  tutor  there  in  1835-'6,  studied
law  and  was  admitted  to  the  Philadelphia  bar,  but
abandoned  it  for  theology.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  seminary  in  1844,  and  settled  as  pastor
of  the  Presbyterian  church  at  Mount  Holly,  N.  J.
He  was  principal  of  the  West  Jersey  colleg'iate  in-  j
stitute  in  184o-'57,  and  from  1857  till  1873  was  in
charge  of  the  church  in  Oceanic,  N.  J.  Princeton
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1861.  He  published
"  Report  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  Case  "  (Phila
delphia,  Pa..  1840). — Another  son  of  the  first  Sam
uel.  Elihu  Spencer,  lawyer,  b.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,
3  Sept.,  1817 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  6  March,  1879,
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1836,  and  studied
law.  first  with  James  S.  Green  in  Princeton,  after
ward  with  Reverdy  Johnson  in  Baltimore.  He
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Baltimore  and  subse
quently,  in  1843,  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  prac
tised  his  profession  during  the  remainder  of  his


life.  As  a  lawyer  he  attained  a  very  high  standing
among  his  contemporaries,  and  was  well  known
for  his  integrity,  intrepidity,  and  skill.  He  was  a
close  thinker,  a  deliberate  and  careful  speaker,  and
a  man  of  pungent  and  refined  wit.  The  great
facility  which  he  possessed  for  turning  instantly
from  even  the  pleasures  of  life  to  the  most  serious
work  was  a  remarkable  trait,  and  no  less  so  was
the  tenacity  with  which  he  clung  to  any  course  in
the  conduct  of  legal  work  upon  which  he  had  de
liberately  entered.  He  occupied  the  chair  of  real
estate  and  equity  in  the  law  department  of  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  for  twenty  years.  During
the  civil  war  he  raised  and  commanded  an  artillery
company.  He  died  suddenly  in  his  office  at  the
close  of  his  day's  work.  He  published  a  "  Treatise
on  the  Law  of  Partition  by  Writ  in  Pennsylvania"
(Philadelphia,  1847) :  and  edited  the  second  edition
of  Sergeant's  "  Treatise  of  the  Lien  of  Mechanics
and  Material  Men  in  Pennsylvania"  (1856).  He
also  printed  a  small  collection  of  fugitive  poems
entitled  "Caprices"  (1849;. — Another  son  of  the
first  Samuel,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Princeton,
N.  J.,  6  April,  1819,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1836,  and  at  the  theological  seminary  there  in  1842.
He  was  pastor  successively  of  Presbyterian  churches
in  Frederick,  Md.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  and  Peters
burg.  Va.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  a  captain
of  artillery  in  the  Confederate  army,  and  since  1871
he  has  resided  in  Princeton,  where  he  has  founded
three  "Evangelical"  churches  and  officiated  in
them.  In  1877  he  was  dismissed  from  the  presby
tery  of  his  church  for  holding  heterodox  views  on
the  subject  of  the  Trinity,  and  other  minor  points
of  ecclesiastical  difference  affecting  the  peccability
of  Christ,  and  the  state  of  the  dead,  but  on  appeal
ing  to  the  synod  of  New  Jersey  was  permitted  to
withdraw  as  an  independent  clergyman  without
deposition.  His  latter  years  for  the  most  part  have
been  devoted  to  controversial  writings,  and  his
publications  include  "  Design  of  the  Church  "  (Phil
adelphia,  1846) ;  "  A  Commentary  on  the  Prov
erbs"  (New  York,  1863);  "Fetich  in  Theology"
(1874);  "Metaphysics"  (1875);  "Are  Souls  Im
mortal  ? "  (Philadelphia,  1877) :  "  Was  Christ  in
Adam?"  (1877);  "Is  God  a  Trinity?"  (1877);
"Creed"  (Princeton,  1879);  "Theology"  (1887);
and  "Commentary  on  Romans"  (1887).

MILLER,  John,  governor  of  Missouri,  b.  in
Steubenville,  Ohio,  in  1780 ;  d.  in  Florisant,  Mo.,  18
March,  1846.  He  received  a  public-school  education,
served  in  the  war  of  1812  as  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  17th  infantry,  and  subsequently  as  colonel  of
the  19th  infantry,  and  was  in  command  of  a  de
tachment  of  troops  from  Fort  Meigs  that  destroyed
the  enemy's  batteries  on  5  May,  1813.  He  resigned
from  the  army  in  1818,  removed  to  Missouri,  and
for  several  years  was  register  of  public  lands  in
Howard  district.  He  edited  the  "  Western  Her
ald  "  in  1825,  and  the  next  year  was  elected  gover
nor  of  Missouri,  serving  till  1832.  In  1836  he  was
sent  to  congress  as  a  Van  Buren  Democrat,  and
was  twice  re-elected.

MILLER,  John  Franklin,  senator,  b.  in  South
Bend,  Ind.,  21  Nov.,  1831  ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,
8  March,  1886.  He  was  educated  in  the  academies
of  his  native  state,  graduated  at  the  New  York
state  law-school  in  1852.  and  began  practice  in
South  Bend,  Ind.  The  failure  of  his  health  induced
him  to  spend  the  next  three  years  in  California,
but  he  returned  in  1855,  resumed  his  profession,
and  took  an  active  part  in  the  Republican  presi
dential  canvass  of  1856.  He  was  a  member  of  the
state  senate  in  1860,  but  resigned  to  enter  the
army,  and,  after  serving  on  the  governor's  staff


328


MILLER


as  colonel,  was  in  coinmand  of  the  29th  regi
ment  of  Indiana  volunteers.  He  was  engaged
from  the  beginning  of  hostilities  in  the  west.  At
the  battle  of  Stone  river  he  charged  at  the  head  of

a  brigade  across  the
river,  drove  Gen.
John  C.  Breckin-
ridgefrom  his  posi
tion,  and  received  a
bullet-wound  in  his
neck.  For  his  gal
lantry  in  this  ac
tion  he  was  promot
ed  brigadier  -  gen
eral  of  volunteers.
In  the  battle  of  Lib
erty  Gap  he  made
another  charge  with
his  brigade,  and  at
the  moment  of  vic
tory  was  severely
wounded  in  the  eye.
He  commanded  a
division  of  8.000  men  on  the  left  at  the  battle  of
Nashville,  and  was  brevetted  rnajor-general  of  vol
unteers  in  1865.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  was
offered  a  colonel's  commission  in  the  regular  army,
but  declined,  settled  in  San  Francisco,  and  for  four
years  was  collector  of  the  port.  lie  then  engaged
in  business,  and  was  an  originator  and  president  of
the  Alaska  commercial  fur  company,  in  which  he
amassed  a  large  fortune.  He  was  a  Republican
presidential  elector  in  1872. 1876,  and  1880,  a  mem
ber  of  the  California  constitutional  convention  in
1879.  and  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Re
publican  in  January,  1881,  serving  from  the  follow
ing  March  until  his  death.  He  was  a  member  of
the  senate  committees  on  foreign  relations  and
naval  affairs  in  the  47th  congress,  and  in  the  48th
and  49th  chairman  of  the  former,  and  a  member
of  that,  on  civil  service  and  retrenchment.

MILLER,  John  Henry,  publisher,  b.  in  Wai-
deck,  Germany,  in  1702;  d.  in  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  31
March,  1782.  He  came  to  this  country  and  was
employed  by  Benjamin  Franklin  and"  William
Bradford  to  superintend  their  German  printing.
He  published  the  Lancaster.  Pa.,  "  Gazette "  in
1752,  and  from  1762  till  1779  "  Der  Wochentliche
Philadelphische  Staatsbote."  He  did  a  large  busi
ness  throughout  the  colonies  in  printing  almanacs,
laws,  school-books,  and  the  classics,  and  in  re
printing  English  and  German  works.

MILLER,  Jonathan  P.,  reformer,  b.  in  Ran
dolph,  Vt..  in  1797;  d.  in  Montpelier  in  1847.  He
was  educated  at  the  University  of  Vermont  and
became  a  lawyer.  In  1824  he  went  to  Greece  as  a
volunteer,  and  after  the  siege  and  fall  of  Misso-
longhi  in  April,  1826,  he  returned  to  Vermont  and
lectured  through  New  York  and  the  New  England
states  for  the  benefit  of  the  Greek  cause.  At  the
solicitation  of  the  Boston  and  New  York  Greek
committee  Col.  Miller  went  to  Greece  a  second
time  as  their  general  agent,  and  distributed  several
cargoes  of  provisions  and  clothing  to  the  suffering
Greeks,  returning  to  Montpelier,  Vt.,  in  1827.
He  introduced  anti-slavery  resolutions  into  the
Vermont  legislature  in  1833.  He  was  a  delegate
from  his  state  to  the  world's  anti-slavery  conven
tion  in  London  in  1840,  and  from  that  time  until
his  death  gave  a  large  part  of  his  time  and  fortune
to  the  furtherance  of  the  anti-slavery  cause.

MILLER,  Joseph  Nelson,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Ohio,  22  Nov.,  1836.  He  entered  the  navy  in  1851,
became  passed  midshipman  in  1856,  master  in
1858,  lieutenant  in  1860,  lieutenant-commander  in


1862,  commander  in  1870,  and  captain  in  1881.  He
served  as  executive  officer  on  the  iron-clad  "Passaic"
in  the  attack  upon  Fort  Sumter  and  Fort  McAllis
ter  during  the  spring  of  1863,  and  in  the  same
capacity  on  board  the  "Monadnock"  in  both  the
Fort  Fisher  fights,  and  was  highly  recommended
for  ability  and  bravery  in  these  actions.  He  is  now
(1888)  in  command  of  the  receiving-ship  "  Wabash."

MILLER,  Madison,  soldier,  b.  in  Mercer.  Pa.,
6  Feb.,  1811.  He  was  educated  in  the  common
schools,  was  captain  of  the  2d  regiment  of  Illi
nois  volunteers  in  the  Mexican  war.  and  wounded
at  the  battle  of  Buena  Vista.  He  was  judge  of  El
Dorado  county,  Cal.,  in  1851-'2,  was  subsequently
for  several  years  a  resident  of  Carondelet.  Mo.,  and
president  of  the  St.  Louis  and  Iron  Mountain
railroad.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he
entered  the  U.  S.  army  as  captain  of  the  1st  Mis
souri  infantry,  was  promoted  colonel  of  volunteers
in  1862,  commanded  the  2d  brigade  of  the  6th
division  at  Shiloh,  where  he  was  captured,  and
while  a  prisoner  was  one  of  a  commission  sent  by
the  Confederates  to  Washington  to  arrange  for  an
exchange  of  prisoners.  In  March,  1865,  he  received
the  brevet  of  brigadier -general  for  meritorious
service  at  Wilson's  Creek  and  Shiloh.  He  was  in
the  Missouri  senate  in  1865,  and  since  1867  has
been  fund  commissioner  of  the  Missouri  railroad.

MILLER,  Morris  Smith,  soldier,  b.  in  Utica,
N.  Y.,  2  April,  1814;  d.  in  New  Orleans.  La.,  11
March.  1870.  lie  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili
tary  academy  in  1834,  became  1st  lieutenant  in
1837,  captain  in  1846,  quartermaster  with  the  rank
of  major  in  1861,  and  lieutenant-colonel  on  the
staff  and  deputy  quartermaster-general  in  1866.
In  March,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  colonel  and
brigadier-general  for  faithful  service  in  the  quarter
master's  department  during  the  civil  war.  He  had
served  during  the  Canada  border  disturbances,  was
in  the  Florida  and  Mexican  wars,  and  in  1861.  as
quartermaster  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  was  responsible
for  all  the  arrangements  for  the  arrival  of  troops  to
defend  the  capital.  Upon  the  attack  on  the  Massa
chusetts  volunteers  in  Baltimore.  19  April,  1861,  he
was  ordered  by  Gen.  Winfield  Scott  to  Annapolis  to
attend  to  forwarding  the  New  York  and  Massa
chusetts  troops  that  were  expected  by  that  route.
Finding  that  no  troops  had  arrived,  he  returned,  but
a  second  attempt  was  successful,  and  he  reached
Annapolis  in  time  to  forward  the  first  troops  that
arrived  in  Washington.  Throughout  the  entire
war  he  remained  in  the  quartermaster's  department
at  Washington.  After  four  years,  during  which
$20,000,000  passed  through  his  hands,  an  exami
nation  of  his  accounts  showed  that  less  than  $20  was
to  be  disallowed.

MILLER,  Nathan,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  Rhode  Island  about  1750;  d.  there
after  1787.  He  was  a  brigadier-general  of  militia,
and  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress  in
1785-'6.  but  did  not  take  his  seat  till  14  July.  1786.
He  was  not  active  in  debate  in  that  body.  On  27
July  he  voted  in  the  affirmative  on  the  bill  "for
imposing  duties  on  foreign  goods  for  the  purpose
of  paying  the  debt  contracted  in  the  war  with
Great  Britain,"  and  on  13  Oct.,  in  the  affirmative,
on  the  motion  "for  establishing  a  board  to  liqui
date  all  accounts  between  the  United  States  and
individual  states."

MILLER,  Samuel  Freeman,  jurist,  b.  in  Rich
mond,  Ky.,  5  April.  1816.  He  was  graduated  at
the  medical  department  of  Transylvania  university,
Ky.,  in  1838,  practised  for  a  short  time,  and  after
ward  became  a  lawyer.  He  was  strongly  in  favor
of  emancipation,  and  did  much  to  further  that


MILLER


MILLER


329


cause,  and,  although  he  took  no  part  in  politics,
the  course  of  public  affairs  induced  him  to  remove
in  1850  from  Kentucky  to  Iowa,  where  he  became
a  leader  of  the  Republican  party.  He  was  offered
and  declined  numerous  state  and  local  offices,  and
devoted  himself  to  his  profession,  in  which  he  took
high  rank.  In  1862  he  was  appointed  by  President
Lincoln  associate  justice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,
which  office  he  still  (1888)  occupies.  He  was  the
orator  at  the  constitutional  centennial  celebration
at  Philadelphia  on  15  Sept.,  1887.

MILLER,  Stephen,  soldier,  b.  in  Perry  county,
Pa..  7  Jan.,  1816;  d.  in  Worthington.  Minn..  18
Aug.,  1881.  His  grandfather,  Melchior  Miller,
came  from  Germany  about  1785.  Stephen  received
a  common-school  education,  became  a  forwarding
and  commission  merchant  in  Harrisburg  in  1837,
was  elected  prothonotary  of  Dauphin  county  in
1849  and  1852,  and  in  1853-'5  edited  the  "  Tele
graph,"  a  Whig  journal  at  Harrisburg.  In  1855-'8
he  was  flour-inspector  of  Philadelphia,  and  in  the
latter  year  he  removed  to  Minnesota  for  his  health,
and  engaged  in  business  in  St.  Cloud.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  Republican  national  convention  of
1800.  and  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Lincoln
ticket  in  that  year.  He  enlisted  as  a  private  sol
dier  in  1861,  was  made  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
1st  Minnesota  infantry,  and  served  with  the  Army
of  the  Potomac  till  September,  1862,  when  he  be
came  colonel  of  the  7th  Minnesota,  and  assisted,
with  his  regiment,  in  quelling  the  Indian  outbreak
of  that  year  in  his  adopted  state.  He  was  commis
sioned  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  26  Oct..
1868.  and  shortly  afterward  elected  governor  of
Minnesota,  so  that  he  resigned  from  the  army  on
18  Jan.,  1864.  He  served  as  governor  in  1864-'o,
and  from  1871  till  his  death  was  field-agent  of  the
St.  Paul  and  Sioux  City  railroad.  He  was  also  in
the  legislature  in  1873,  and  a  presidential  elector
on  the  Hayes  ticket  in  1876.

MILLER,  Stephen  Decatiir,  senator,  b.  in
"Waxhaw  settlement,  Lancaster  district,  S.  C.,  in
May,  1787;  d.  in  Raymond,  Miss.,  8  March,  1838.
He  was  graduated  at  the  College  of  South  Carolina
in  1808,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Columbia  in  1811,
and  elected  to  congress  in  1816  as  an  anti-Calhoun
Democrat,  serving  in  1817-'19,  and  declining  a  re
election.  He  was  state  senator  in  1822-'8.  and  in
1828-'30  governor  of  South  Carolina.  While  oc
cupying  the  former  office,  he  was  chairman  of  the
judiciary  committee,  and  originated  important
changes,  especially  in  the  criminal  law  of  the  state.
As  governor  he  threw  all  his  influence  on  the  side
of  nullification.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state
convention  in  1830.  again  in  1832,  and  in  1830-'3
was  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  but  resigned  at  the  latter
date  on  account  of  the  failure  of  his  health.  He
removed  to  Mississippi  in  1835,  settled  on  a  planta
tion,  and  engaged  in  cotton-planting  till  his  death.

MILLER,  Stephen  Franks,  lawyer,  b.  in  North
Carolina  about  1810;  d.  in  Oglethorpe,  Ga.,  in
1867.  He  removed  to  Georgia  in  his  early  youth,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  when  twenty-one  years  of
age.  and  was  soon  afterward  elected  solicitor-gen
eral  of  the  southern  district.  On  the  expiration  of
his  term  of  office  he  removed  to  Alabama,  where  he
practised  his  profession  until  a  bronchial  affection
compelled  him  to  engage  in  other  pursuits.  From
1840  till  1847  he  edited  "The  Monitor."  a  Whig
journal  published  in  Tuscaloosa,  Ala.  In  1848-'9
he  resided  in  New  Orleans,  where  he  was  associated
in  the  editorial  management  of  "  De  Bow's  Re
view"  and  the  "  Daily  Commercial  Times."  His
health  again  failing,  he  removed  to  Oglethorpe.  Ga..
where  he  resided  until  his  death.  He  published


"  Bench  and  Bar  of  Georgia  "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1858) :  "  Wilkins  Wilder,  or  the  Successful  Man  "
(1860) :  and  "  Memoir  of  Gen.  David  Blackshear."
MILLER,  Theodore,  jurist,  b.  in  Hudson,
N.  Y.,  in  May,  1816.  He  was  educated  in  the  pub
lic  schools,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1837,  was  district
attorney  for  Columbia  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1843-'5,
and  conducted  successfully  the  prosecutions  against
the  leaders  of  the  anti-rent  faction,  his  energy  in
maintaining  the  law  resulting  in  the  suppression
of  that  movement.  He  was  elected  a  judge  of  the
supreme  court  of  New  York  state  in  i861,  and
during  the  last  four  years  of  his  service  was  presid
ing  justice  of  the  3d  department.  He  was  elevated
to  the  bench  of  the  court  of  appeals  in  1874  as  as
sociate  justice,  and  held  office  till  1886,  when  he
was  retired  on  account  of  age.

MILLER,  Warner,  senator,  b.  in  Oswego
county,  N.  Y.,  12  Aug..  1838.  His  parents  were  of
German  extraction,  and  his  grandfather  served  as
a  colonel  in  the  Revolutionary  army.  Warner  was
graduated  at  Union  in  1860.  He  enlisted  a  few
months  later  as  a  private  in  a  New  York  cavalry
regiment,  served  under  Gen.  Philip  H.  Sheridan  in
the  Shcnandoah  valley,  and  was  promoted  lieuten
ant.  At  the  battle  of  Winchester  he  was  taken
prisoner,  and  paroled  on  the  field.  Soon  afterward
he  was  honorably  discharged  and  went  abroad,
where  he  became  interested  in  paper-manufactur
ing,  and  on  his  return  he  established  himself  in
this  business  in  Herkimer.  N.  Y.,  where  he  still
(1888)  resides.  His  first  active  participation  in
politics  was  in  1872,  when  he  was  a  delegate  to  the
National  Republican  convention  at  Philadelphia.
He  was  in  the  legislature  in  1874-'8,  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Republican  in  1878.  and  re-elected  in
1880,  but  in  1881  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  from
New  York  to  fill  the  unexpired  term  of  Thomas  C.
Platt,  who  had  resigned.  His  term  expired  in
1887.  when  he  was  succeeded  by  Frank  Hiscock.

MILLER,  William,  foundeV  of  the  sect  of  Ad-
ventists.  or  ••  Millerites,"  b.  in  Pittsfield.  Mass.,  5
Feb.,  1782;  d.  in  Low  Hampton,  N.  Y.,  20  Dec.,
1849.  His  father,
Capt.  William  Mil
ler,  was  a  soldier  of
the  Revolution  and
of  the  war  of  1812.
His  mother  was  the
daughter  of  Elnathan
Phelps,  of  Pittsfield,
Mass..  a  popular  Bap
tist  clergyman.  Re
ligious  meetings  were
often  held  in  his  fa
ther's  house,  and  the
zeal  of  the  exhorters
and  revivalists  had
much  to  do  with  shap
ing  the  boy's  career,
who  had  little  else  to
break  the  monotonv

of  his  farm  life.  The  few  books  he  could  borrow
were  mainly  religious,  stimulating  the  morbid
tendency  of"  his  mind:  but  he  earned  copies  of
"  Robinson  Crusoe  "  and  "  The  Adventures  of  Rob
ert  Boyle"  by  chopping  wood.  He  became  a  pros
perous  Green  mountain  farmer,  was  a  recruiting-
officer  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  1812,  and  a
captain  at  Plattsburg.  He  owned  a  farm  of  200  acres
unencumbered,  and  was  a  justice  of  the  peace,  con
stable,  and  sheriff.  He  was  a  ready  and  smooth  ver
sifier,  and  was  called  the  •'  poet  of  Low  Hampton."
In  his  early  manhood  he  read  Hume,  Voltaire,  and
Tom  Paine,  and  advocated  their  teachings.  He


330


MILLER


MILLET


afterward  professed  faith  in  Christianity,  uniting
with  the  Baptist  church  at  Low  Hampton,  when
his  absorbing  study  of  the  Bible  began.  "I  lost  all
taste  for  other  reading,"  he  wrote  of  this  period.
He  began  with  Genesis,  and  left  not  a  sentence  un
studied,  accepting  no  help  or  direction  beyond
the  concordance  and  the  reference  of  his  polyglot
Bible.  He  was  guided  in  his  interpretation  entirely
by  his  private  judgment,  and  ultimately  concen
trated  his  attention  upon  the  prophecies,  particu
larly  those  of  the  second  coming.  In  1831  he  rose
from  his  prolonged  study  under  a  solemn  convic
tion  that  to  him  had  been  given  the  key  unlocking
the  prophetical  numbers,  and  that  he  must  go  forth
and  proclaim  to  a  doomed  world  that  in  twelve
years,  at  longest,  the  end  of  all  things  would  come  ;
that  some  time  between  21  March,  1843,  and  21
March,  1844,  Jesus  Christ  would  appear  in  person
to  judge  the  world.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  by
the  Baptist  church  at  Low  Hampton,  but  was
never  ordained.  Multitudes  pressed  to  hear  him
wherever  he  went,  and  he  could  not  respond  to  the
numerous  invitations  he  received  to  lecture  upon
the  prophecies.  He  paid  his  own  expenses  as  a
rule,  and  there  was  no  admission-fee  to  his  lectures.
Churches  were  thrown  open  to  him  everywhere  at
first — excepting  those  of  the  Episcopalians  and
Roman  Catholics — and  many  prominent  clergymen
became  advocates  of  his  doctrine.  The  tide  of  his
popularity  turned  when  some  of  his  converts  fas
tened  the  name  of  "  Babylon  "  upon  the  churches,
calling  upon  "  believers  in  the  blessed  hope "  to
"come  out  of  her"  if  they  would  be  saved.  Father
Miller's  lectures  were  illustrated  by  great  charts,
upon  which  were  depicted  the  apocalyptic  beasts,
Nebuchadnezzar's  image,  etc.  These  charts  pre
sented  a  mathematical  demonstration  of  the  mys
tical  problem  of  the  2.300  days  of  Daniel's  vision,
showing  just  when  "  the  third  woe ''  must  be
sounded,  and  the  seventh  trumpet,  and  just  when
the  stone  must  smite  the  image,  etc.  The  vital
point  of  his  argument  was  the  connection  between
the  seventy  weeks  of  Daniel  and  the  2,300  days,
and  therein  was  the  revelation  of  the  exact  time  of
the  end.  The  grand  culmination  of  the  fanaticism
was  24-25  Oct.,  1844,  "  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh
month"  excitement.  The  mistake  in  fixing  upon
1843,  it  was  shown,  grew  out  of  a  neglect  to  con
sider  the  difference  between  Roman  and  Jewish
time ;  1843  Jewish  time  was  1844  Roman  time,  and
the  new  revelation  had  given  not  only  the  year
but  the  month  and  the  day,  "and  probably  the
hour  even."  The  clew  had  been  found  in  the  fact
that  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month  was  that
of  the  great  day  of  the  atonement.  The  literature
of  the  "  tenth-day  excitement "  may  be  found  in
the  many  publications  of  the  sect  at  the  time,  and
is  by  no  means  discreditable  to  its  authors.  Natu
rally  there  was  intense  excitement  among  the  be
lievers,  until  not  only  the  month  of  October  but
that  of  November  had  passed.  They  gathered
themselves  together  in  great  multitudes,  and  hun
dreds  were  baptized  by  immersion.  They  did  not
array  themselves  in  ascension-robes,  as  has  been
universally  believed.  The  offshoots  of  the  fanati
cism  were  many,  each  founded  on  some  interpre
tation  of  Scripture  according  to  private  judg
ment.  One  Mrs.  Miner,  of  Philadelphia,  went  to
Palestine  to  make  ready  that  land  for  the  tarry
ing  Messiah.  There  was  a  "shut-door"  faction,
which  asserted  that  Christ  came  spiritually  on  the
tenth  day,  and  had  "  shut  too  the  door  "  against  all
unbelievers.  The  "  Feet- Washers  "  were  another
phase  of  the  reaction  from  disappointment.  There
was  a  marked  drift  to  the  Shakers,  while  many


went  back  to  "  Babylon,"  thankful  for  the  refuge.
But  the  majority  of  Father  Miller's  converts.  50,000
or  more,  did  not  forsake  their  leader,  nor  give  up
their  faith  in  the  speedy  appearing.  On  25  April,
1845,  he  called  a  convention  of  his  followers,  a  decla
ration  of  faith  was  agreed  upon,  and  the  name  of
"Adventist"  was  adopted  by  the  new  sect,  which,
under  various  names,  has  been  increasing  ever
since.  Father  Miller  published  many  sermons  and
lectures,  and  his  "  Dream  of  the  Last  Day  "  had
a  large  circulation.  See  "  Memoirs  of  William
Miller,"  by  Sylvester  Bliss  (Boston,  1853).

MILLER, 'William,  English  soldier,  b.  in  Wing-
ham,  Kent,  2  Dec..  1795;  d.  at  sea  in  October,  1801.
He  entered  the  British  army,  and  served  in  Spain
and  North  America  till  1817,  when  he  went  to
South  America  and  joined  the  Peruvians  in  their
struggle  for  independence.  He  became  an  intimate
friend  of  Simon  Bolivar,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  a
general  of  division  of  Peru.  He  was  chief  of  cav
alry  under  Bolivar  at  the  battle  of  Junin,  6  Aug.,
1824,  and  to  commemorate  his  services  Bolivar
gave  to  Miller's  regiment  the  name  of  "ilusares  de
Junin."  His  most  gallant  exploit  was  a  charge
that  he  made  at  the  head  of  these  hussars  at  the
battle  of  Ayacucho,  9  Dec.,  1824.  He  was  many
times  severely  wounded,  and  at  the  battle  of  Pisco
nearly  lost  his  life,  yet  shortly  afterward  he  was
one  of  the  leaders  in  Lord  Cochrane's  daring  cap
ture  of  Valdivia.  In  an  attack  on  Chiloe  a  grape-
shot  passed  through  one  thigh,  and  his  right  instep
was  crushed  by  a  cannon-ball.  In  1825  he  was  gov
ernor  of  Potosi,  but  in  1826  he  returned  to  Eng
land,  and  in  1843  became  British  consul-general  to
the  Pacific  islands,  lie  was  given  450,000  acres  in
the  Argentine  Republic  for  his  services  in  South
America,  and  his  deeds  have  been  celebrated  by
South  American  poets.  His  "  Memoirs  in  the  Ser
vice  of  Peru,  1817-'2G "  were  published  by  his
brother  (2  vols.,  London,  1828).  See  also  Cyrus
Redding's  "Personal  Reminiscences"  (1867).

MILLER,  William,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Antigonish,  Nova  Scotia,  12  Feb.,  1835.  He  was
educated  at  St.  Andrew's  grammar-school,  Anti
gonish  academy,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  of  Nova  Scotia  in  1860.  He  was  a  repre
sentative  in  the  Nova  Scotia  assembly  from  1863
till  1867,  and  while  in  the  house  supported  the
union  project.  Though  in  favor  of  confederation,
he  was  opposed  to  the  financial  conditions  and
oilier  details  of  the  Quebec  scheme  of  union,  and
it  was  upon  his  suggestion  and  with  his  assistance
that  the  compromise  was  effected  whereby  the  dele
gation  to  London  was  appointed  in  1866.  He  was
nominated  a  delegate  to  the  London  colonial  con
ference  of  1866-'7,  but  declined.  Mr.  Miller  was
called  to  the  senate  in  1867,  and  was  speaker  of
that  body  from  17  Oct.,  1883,  until  the  dissolution
of  parliament  in  1887.  He  was  offered  a  seat  on
the  bench  by  Premier  Alexander  Mackenzie,  but
declined  it,  as  he  did  a  similar  offer  that  was  after
ward  made  by  Sir  John  A.  Macdonald.

MILLET,  'Bamlouin  Henry  (mil-lay),  Flemish
adventurer,  b.  in  Malines  in  1583 ;  d.  there  in
1651.  The  early  part  of  his  life  is  unknown,  ex
cept  that  he  served  in  the  Spanish  army,  and  after
ward  in  the  expedition  of  the  French  to  Brazil  in
1613  under  La  Renardiere.  Pie  received  in  1629
from  the  Company  of  the  Indies  the  command  of
an  expedition  for  the  discovery  of  the  fabulous  El
Dorado  and  the  gold  lake  of  Parima,  which  was
then  supposed  to  exist  somewhere  in  southern
Guiana.  The  explorers  advanced  as  far  as  Urari-
quira  river,  and  descended  it  to  the  Marafion,  but,
the  want  of  provisions  and  hostile  Indians  delay-


MILLET


MILLS


331


ing  their  progress,  they  returned  to  Guiana,  and
only  five  reached  Europe,  the  others  having  died
from  want  and  exhaustion  during  the  journey.
When  the  French  settled  again  in  Cayenne  in  1643,
Millet  accompanied  the  expedition,  and,  a  few
years  later,  undertook  a  second  journey  for  the  dis
covery  of  the  El  Dorado.  He  met  with  no  better
success  and  returned  to  the  colony,  where  his
knowledge  of  the  Indian  dialects  secured  him  em
ployment.  The  troubles  that  ruined  the  colony
decided  him  to  leave,  as  he  had  made  a  small  for
tune  in  his  tradings  with  the  Galibis,  and  he  re
turned  to  his  native  town.  He  published  "  Voy
age  de  1'ile  de  Cayenne,  entrepris  par  des  Francais
en  1643,"  which  contains  a  vocabulary  of  the  Gali-
bi  dialect  (Malines,  1649);  "Relation  de  1'expedi-
tion  entreprise  par  les  Fran£ais  au  Bresil  en  1613"
(1650);  and  "Voyages  a  la  decouverte  de  1'Eldo-
rado  et  du  lac  d'or  de  Pariine"  (1651).

MILLET,  Francis  Davis,  artist,  b.  in  Matta-
noisett,  Mass.,  3  Nov.,  1846.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1869.  and  then  studied  art  in  Antwerp
under  Van  Lerius  and  De  Keyser,  winning  silver
and  gold  medals  of  honor  in  1872  and  1873.  In
the  latter  year  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  the
Massachusetts  commission  to  the  World's  fair  in
Vienna,  and  was  also  a  juror  at  that  exhibition.
Mr.  Millet  was  correspondent  of  the  London
"Daily  Xews"  during  the  war  between  Turkey
and  Russia  in  1877-'8,  and  received  the  Roumanian
iron  cross  in  1877,  and  the  war  medals  of  Russia
and  Roumania  in  1878,  also  the  orders  of  chevalier
of  St.  Anne  and  of  St.  Stanislas  from  the  Russian
government  in  1877.  He  was  juror  of  fine  arts  in
the  World's  fair  in  Paris  in  1878,  in  1885  received
a  medal  at  Xew  Orleans,  and  in  1887  one  from  the
American  art  association.  His  literary  work  in
cludes  contributions  to  the  daily  journals  as  corre
spondent,  various  critical  articles  and  short  sto
ries  in  magazines,  and  a  translation  of  Leo  Tol
stoi's  "Sebastopol"  (Xew  York,  1887).  He  de
signed  the  costumes  for  the  representation  of  the
"  CEdipus  Tyrannus"  of  Sophocles  that  was  given
in  Cambridge  by  Harvard  students  in  1880.
Among  his  paintings  are  portraits  of  Charles  Fran
cis  Adams,  Jr.,  and  of  Samuel  L.  Clemens,  exhib
ited  at  the  Xational  academy  in  Xew  York  in  1877 ;
also  "  Bashi  Bazouk  "  (1878)";  "  The  Window-Slat "
(1884^ :  and  "  A  Difficult  Duet  "  (1886).

MILLET,  Pierre,  French  missionary,  b.  in
France  in  1631;  d.  in  Quebec,  Canada,  11  Jan.,
1711.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1667,  and  was
soon  afterward  sent  to  establish  a  mission  in  Onon-
daga,  laboring  there  and  in  Oneida  till  1684,  and
making  some  converts.  In  1688  he  returned  to
Oneida.  but  was  not  successful  on  account  of  Eng
lish  influence.  He  served  as  chaplain  at  Fort
Frontenac  in  1690,  and  while  there  was  made  cap
tive  by  the  Indians.  The  Christian  Oneidas  claimed
him,  and  he  was  sent  to  them  and  finally  adopted
into  the  tribe.  Efforts  were  made  to  induce  the
Oneidas  to  give  him  up,  but  they  refused,  and  he
remained  with  them  till  October,  1694.  to  the  an
noyance  of  the  Xew  York  authorities,  who  endeav
ored  to  effect  his  release,  while  those  of  Canada  did
their  best  to  prevent  it.  His  account  of  his  cap
tivity  has  been  published  (Xew  York,  1865).

MILLKiAN,  Robert,  educator,  b.  in  County
Tyrone.  Ireland,  25  July,  1814 ;  d.  in  Lexington,
Ky.,  20  March,  1875.  "He  came  to  the  United
States  in  1818  with  his  parents,  who  settled  in
Trumbull  county,  Ohio.  After  spending  several
years  in  teaching,  he  was  graduated  at  Washing
ton  college  in  1840,  where  he  then  held  the  chair
of  English  literature  until  1850,  and  that  of  chem


istry  for  two  years  longer.  In  1852  he  was  called
to  the  professorship  of  mathematics  at  Indiana
university,  and  in  1853  he  was  transferred  to  that
of  natural  philosophy  and  chemistry,  after  which,
in  1854— '9,  he  held  the  chair  of  mathematics  and
astronomy  at  Bethany  college.  He  then  accepted
the  presidency  of  Kentucky  university,  with  the
professorship  of  biblical  literature  and  mental
philosophy,  while  it  was  situated  at  Ilarrodsburg,
W.  Va.,  in  1859-'65,  and  after  its  removal  to  Lex
ington.  Ky.,  and  its  successful  inauguration  in  the
new  locality,  he  retired  from  the  general  manage
ment  and  took  the  presidency  of  its  theological
department,  known  as  the  College  of  the  Bible,
with  the  chair  of  sacred  literature.  President
Milligan  was  a  member  of  the  Christian  denomi
nation,  and  in  1844  entered  its  ministry,  preaching
with  regularity,  although  he  regarded  his  special
vocation  as  that  of  an  educator.  In  addition  to
the  duties  of  his  chair  while  at  Bethany,  he  was
associate  editor  of  the  "Millennial  Harbinger,"  of
which  Alexander  Campbell  was  the  founder  and
chief  editor.  He  published  "  A  Brief  Treatise  on
Prayer "  (Cincinnati.  1863);  "Reason  and  Revela
tion"  (1867);  "The  Scheme  of  Redemption"
(1868);  "The  Great  Commission"  (Lexington,
1871) ;  "Analysis  of  the  Xew  Testament  "  (Cincin
nati,  1874) ;  and  "  Commentary  on  the  Epistle  to
the  Hebrews  "  (1875).

MILLS,  Abraham,  educator,  b.  in  Dutchess
county,  X.  Y.,  in  1796 ;  d.  in  Xew  York  city,  8
July,  1867.  He  received  an  academic  education,
came  to  Xew  York  city,  and  studied  law,  but
adopted  teaching  as  a  profession.  He  established
a  classical  and  mathematical  school  in  Warren
street,  but  was  soon  called  to  the  chair  of  mathe
matics  and  philosophy  in  the  Baptist  literary  and
theological  institute  in  Xew  York  city.  This  pro
fessorship  he  held  until  1823,  when  the  institute
was  transferred  to  Hamilton,  X.  Y..  and  there  be
came  Madison  university,  while  Prof.  Mills  re
mained  in  Xew  York  as  a  teacher  of  rhetoric  and
literature  in  various  schools.  Meanwhile  he  also
turned  his  attention  to  editing,  and  published
American  revisions  of  "  Burke  on  the  Sublime  and
Beautiful"  (Xew  York,  1829);  Blair's  "Lectures
on  Rhetoric  and  Belles-Lettres "  (1829);  "Alison
on  Taste"  (1830):  and  Lord  Kames's  " Elements
of  Criticism  "  (1833).  These  editions  became  popu
lar  at  once,  and  were  widely  adopted  as  text-books.
Subsequently  he  published  "  Literature  and  Lit
erary  Men  of  Great  Britain'and  Ireland"  (2  vols.,
Xew  York,  1851) ;  "  Outlines  of  Rhetoric  and  Belles-
Lettres  "  (1854) ;  "  Poets  and  Poetry  of  the  Ancient
Greeks"  (Boston,  1854);  and  a  "Compendium  of
the  History  of  the  Ancient  Hebrews"  (1856).

MILLS.  Clark,  sculptor,  b.  in  Onondaga  county,
X.  Y.,  1  Dec..  1815;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  12
Jan.,  1883.  He  was  left  an  orphan  at  the  age  of
five  years,  and  then  lived  with  a  maternal  uncle,
but,  becoming  dissatisfied  with  his  home,  ran  away
in  1828.  After  a  hard  experience  working  on  a
farm,  cutting  cedar  posts  in  a  swamp,  and  learning
the  millwright's  trade,  he  reached  Xew  Orleans,
La.,  where  he  stayed  a  year  and  then  went  to
Charleston,  S.  C.  "  Here  "he  learned  the  stucco
business,  which  he  followed  until  1835.  when  he
discovered  a  new  method  of  taking  a  cast  from
the  living  face,  which  enabled  him  to  make  busts
so  cheaply  that  he  soon  had  as  much  work  as  he
could  do."  He  then  resolved  to  try  cutting  in  mar
ble,  and  began  a  bust  of  John"  C.  Calhoun,  for
which  he  was  awarded  a  gold  medal  by  the  city
council  of  Charleston,  and  it  was  placed  by  them
in  the  city  hall.  Subsequently  he  executed  busts


332


MILLS


MILLS


of  John  Preston,  Wade  Hampton,  and  other  emi
nent  South  Carolinians.  He  was  invited  in  1848
to  furnish  a  design  for  an  equestrian  statue  of  An
drew  Jackson,  to  be  erected  in  Washington.  He
completed  his  model  in  eight  months,  and  it  was
accepted.  His  treatment  was  entirely  original.  The
statue  was  unveiled  on  the  anniversary  of  the  bat
tle  of  New  Orleans,  in  1853.  It  stands  on  Lafay
ette  square,  and  was  cast  from  cannon  taken  from
the  British  during  the  war  of  1812.  Later  he  ob
tained  a  second  commission  for  a  colossal  eques
trian  statue  of  George  Washington,  and  purchased
ground  in  the  vicinity  of  Washington,  where  he
built  a  complete  foundry.  His  statue  of  Washing
ton  represents  a  scene  in  the  battle  of  Princeton.
It  was  dedicated  in  Washington  on  22  Feb.,  1800.
Meanwhile  Mr.  Mills  also  executed  a  replica  of  his
Jackson  statue  for  the  city  of  New  Orleans.  La.  In
1800  he  began  his  statue  of  "  Freedom,"  after
Thomas  Crawford's  designs,  which  was  completed
in  1803,  and  now  stands  above  the  dome  of  the
capitol.  The  latter  part  of  his  life  was  spent  in
making  busts,  and  he  invented  a  method  of  put
ting  plaster  on  the  face  of  his  subjects,  thereby
adding  greatly  to  the  truthfulness  of  his  casts.

MILLS,  Darius  Ogrden,  banker,  b.  in  North
Salem,  Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,  5  Sept..  1825.  His
father  died  when  he  was  sixteen,  and,  later  invest
ments  having  proved  unfortunate,  the  lad  was  left
without  resources.  He  soon  found  a  clerkship  in
New  York,  and  at  twenty-two  became  cashier  and
one-third  owner  of  a  small  bank  in  Buffalo.  Two
years  later  he  was  one  of  the  earliest  victims  of  the
gold  fever,  sailing  for  California  in  December,  1848.
He  soon  began  business  in  Sacramento,  and  the
Gold  bank  of  I).  0.  Mills  and  Co.,  then  established,
is  still  flourishing  and  still  under  his  control — the
oldest  bank  of  unbroken  credit  in  the  state.  He
was  immediately  and  conspicuously  successful.
The  "luck  of  D.'O.  Mills"  became  a"  proverb,  but
it  was  Attended  with  a  reputation  for  judgment,
rapid  decision,  boldness,  and  absolute  integrity.
He  became  largely  interested  in  mines  on  the  great
Comstock  lode,  secured  control  of  the  Virginia  and
Truckee  railroad  leading  to  it.  and  of  the  immense
forests  about  Lake  Tahoe  which  supplied  it,  ac
quired  a  large  share  in  the  chief  quicksilver-mines,
and  bought  extensive  ranches  and  other  property,
but  dealt  in  everything  on  his  principles  as  a
banker,  boldly,  but  rarely  in  a  speculative  way.  In
1864  he  founded  the  Bank  of  California,  in  San
Francisco,  heading  the  subscription  for  the  capital
and  assuming  the  presidency.  It  became  one  of
the  best- known  banks  of  the  country,  with  the
highest  credit  in  the  financial  centres  both  of  Eu
rope  and  Asia.  Desiring  finally  to  retire  from
business,  Mr.  Mills  resigned  the  presidency  in  1873,
leaving  the  bank  with  a  capital  of  $5,000.000,  large
surplus,  profitable  business,  first-rate  organization,
and  unlimited  credit.  Two  years  later  he  was
called  back  to  find  it  with  liabilities  of  $13,500,000
above  its  capital  and  surplus,  with  only  $100,000
in  its  vaults,  and  with  many  doubtful  assets.  His
old  cashier,  William  C.  Ralston,  had  been  president
meantime.  He  had  lent  Ralston  the  capital  on
which  the  latter  began  business  in  San  Francisco,
and  had  trusted  him.  Mr.  Mills  had  resigned  his
directorship  in  the  bank  when  retiring  from  its
management,  and  finally  had  sold  his  stock ;  but
Ralston,  against  his  wishes,  had  continued  to  have
him  elected  a  director,  buying  enough  of  Mr.
Mills's  stock  to  qualify  lor  a  directorship,  and
keeping  it  in  Mr.  Mills's  name,  without  his  knowl
edge.  Mr.  Mills  returned  from  Europe  shortly  be
fore  the  crash,  and  was  first  appealed  to  by  Will


iam  Sharon  to  save  Ralston's  personal  credit.  He
at  once  responded,  loaning  Mr.  Ralston  $400,000
that  day,  and  $350,000  more  within  the  week.  It
subsequently  appeared,  that  this  money  was  used
to  take  up  fraudulent  over-issues  of  the  bank's
stock.  A  few  days  later  the  bank  failed,  creating
an  excitement  that  convulsed  the  Pacific  coast.
Mr.  Ralston  committed  suicide,  and  Mr.  Mills  was
recalled  to  the  presidency.  lie  headed  the  new
subscription  with  $1,000,000,  raised  nearly  $7,000,-
000  more,  and  opened  the  doors  of  the  bank  one
month  and  five  days  after  they  had  been  closed.
He  insisted  on  holding  the  presidency  now  without
pay,  and  resigned  peremptorily  within  three  years,
as  soon  as  he  felt  that  the  bank  was  firmly  re
established.  Afterward  he  uniformly  refused  the
care  of  any  business  but  his  own.  He  gradually
transferred  heavy  investments  to  the  east,  erected
the  largest  office-building  in  New  York,  and  finally
returned  to  reside  near  his  birthplace.  He  had
been  regent  of  the  University  of  California,  and
when  he  resigned  this  place  he  gave  an  endowment
of  $75,000  to  found  the  Mills  professorship  of
moral  and  intellectual  philosophy.  About  the
same  time  he  presented  to  the  state  the  marble
group  "Columbus  before  Queen  Isabella,"  by
Larkin  G.  Meade,  which  now  stands  in  the  centre
of  the  state-house  rotunda  at  Sacramento.  In  New
York  he  presented  to  the  city  a  building  on  the
Bellevue  hospital  grounds,  costing  $100,000,  for  the
training  of  male  nurses.  He  has  been  an  active
trustee  of  the  Lick  estate  and  Lick  observatory  in
California,  of  the  Metropolitan  museum,  of  the
Museum  of  natural  history,  and  also  of  the  Ameri
can  geographical  society.

MILLS,  Elijah  Hunt,  senator,  b.  in  Chester
field.  Mass..  1  Dec.,  1770  ;  d.  in  Northampton,  Mass.,
5  May,  1829.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in
1797,  studied  law,  settled  in  Northampton,  and  was
for  several  years  district  attorney  for  the  county  of
Hampshire.  He  was  elected  to  the  state  senate  in
1811 ,  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Federalist,  serving
from  4  Dec.,  1815,  till  3  March,  1819,  and  then  was
elected  to  fill  a  vacancy  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  serving
with  re-election  from  1  Dec.,  1820,  till  3  March,
1827.  In  1824  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  Williams.  He  published  an  oration  (1813).

MILLS,  Robert,  architect,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C.,  12  Aug.,  1781 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C..  3
March,  1855.  He  studied  architecture  under  Ben
jamin  II.  Latrobe,  and  designed  several  buildings
in  Pennsylvania,  among  which  were  the  fire-proof
wings  of  Independence  hall,  Philadelphia,  the  capi
tol  in  Harrisburg.  and  the  single-arch  bridge  across
the  Schuylkill.  Subsequently  he  erected  several
U.  S.  custom-houses  and  marine  hospitals.  In  1820
he  returned  to  South  Carolina,  and  there  became
state  architect  and  engineer.  He  was  recalled  to
Washington  in  1830,  appointed  U.  S.  architect,  and
supervised  the  building  of  the  U.  S.  post-office,
patent-office,  and  treasury  buildings.  The  original
design  of  the  Washington  monument,  the  loftiest
structure  ever  erected  by  man.  was  made  by  him.
It  included  a  granite  shaft  faced  with  white  marble,
"COO  feet  high,  55  feet  square  at  the  base,  30  feet
square  at  the  top,  surrounded  at  its  base  by  a  cir
cular  colonnade  or  pantheon,  in  which  to  place  stat
ues  of  the  nation's  illustrious  dead,  with  vaults
beneath  for  the  reception  of  their  remains."  The
plan  for  the  circular  colonnade  was  never  carried
out,  but,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Washington
national  monument  society,  the  construction  of
the  monument  was  begun  in  1848  on  the  very  spot
selected  by  Washington  himself  for  a  memorial  of
the  American  Revolution.  Funds  amounting  to


MILLS


M1LMORE


333


nearly  $250,000  were  contributed  by  the  people  of
the  United  States  of  all  ages  and  from  all  quarters
of  the  Union,  and  the  construction  continued  until
1850,  when  it  reached  a  height  of  over  150  feet.
The  financial  embarrassments  of  the  time  led  to
the  discontinuance  of  the  work,  and  it  was  not

until  1877  when,  by  act  of

congress,  its  completion
was  authorized,  and  Col.
Thomas  L.  Casey,  of  the
U.  S.  engineers,  placed  in
charge.  Various  modifi
cations  of  the  original  plan
were  made  by  him,  includ
ing  the  building  of  an  en
tire  new  base,  which  was
found  to  be  necessary,  un
til  finally  it  was  dedicated,
in  the  presence  of  Presi
dent  Arthur  and  his  cabi
net,  on  22  Feb.,  1885.  The
address  of  the  occasion  was
written  by  liobert  C.  Win-
throp,  who  in  1848  had  de
livered  an  oration  on  the
laying  of  the  corner-stone.
As  shown  in  the  accom
panying  illustration,  the
monument  is  555  feet  5£
inches,  the  shaft  being  500
feet  5J-  inches  high,  and
the  pyramidion  55  feet.
The  topmost  point  is  597
feet  3  inches  above  mean
low  water  in  the  Potomac,
and  596  feet  9'30  inches

above  the  mean  level  of  the  Atlantic  at  Sandy
Hook,  N.  Y.,  as  determined.  1  Dec.,  1884,  by  the  U.  S.
coast  and  geodetic  survey.  Mr.  Mills  published  '•  Sta
tistics  of  South  Carolina  "  with  "Atlas  of  South  Caro
lina"  (Charleston,  1826) ;  "The  American  Pharos
or  Light-house  Guide  "  (Washington,  1832) ;  and
"  Guide  to  the  National  Executive  Offices  "  (1842).
MILLS,  Samuel  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Kent,
Conn.,  16  May,  1743  ;  d.  in  Torringford,  Conn.,  11
May,  1833.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1764,
and  then  studied  theology.  On  29  June,  1769,  he
was  ordained  in  Torringford,  and  remained  in
charge  of  that  parish  until  his  death,  He  out
lived  all  of  his  college  classmates,  and  became  gen
erally  known,  on  account  of  his  great  age,  as  "  Fa
ther  Mills."  For  many  years  he  edited  the  "Con
necticut  Evangelical  Magazine,"  and,  in  addition  to
various  sermons  that  he  preached  on  special  occa
sions,  he  published  a  volume  of  "  Sermons  Col
lected  "  (1797).— His  son,  Samuel  John,  clergy
man,  b.  in  Torringford,  Conn.,  21  April,  1783;  d.
at  sea,  16  June,  1818,  was  graduated  at  Williams
in  1809,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in
1812.  While  in  college  he  determined  to  devote
his  life  to  missionary  work,  and  in  1810  addresses
that  he  and  several  of  his  classmates  made  before
the  General  association  of  Massachusetts  resulted
in  the  formation  of  the  American  board  of  com
missioners  for  foreign  missions.  During  1812-'13
he  was  exploring  agent  of  the  Massachusetts  and
Connecticut  missionary  societies  in  the  west  and
southwest,  and  in  1814-'15  missionary  and  Bible
agent  in  the  southwest.  While  in  New  Orleans
during  the  early  part  of  1815  he  was  unable  to
purchase  a  single  Bible  in  that  city,  and,  in  conse
quence,  he  procured  a  supply  in  both  the  French
and  English  languages,  and  distributed  many.
Finding  that  seventy  or  eighty  thousand  families
at  the  south  and  west  were  destitute  of  a  Bible,  he


suggested  the  formation  of  a  national  society.  His
efforts  contributed  to  the  establishment  of  the
American  Bible  society  in  May,  1810,  and  mean
while,  on  21  June,  1815,  he  was  ordained.  Subse
quently  the  education  of  the  colored  people  claimed
his  attention,  and  in  1816  the  synod  of  New  York
and  New  Jersey  established  a  school  for  the  edu
cation  of  young  men  of  color  that  wished  to  be
preachers  and  teachers  of  their  race.  After  the
school  was  established  Mr.  Mills  became  its  agent
in  the  middle  states,  and  was  successful  in  obtain
ing  funds  for  its  support.  The  American  coloni
zation  society  was  founded  on  1  Jan.,  1817,  and
Mr.  Mills  was  chosen  to  explore  in  its  behalf  the
coast  of  western  Africa,  and  select  the  most  eligible
site  for  a  settlement.  He  reached  Africa  in  March,
1818,  spent  two  months  on  that  continent,  and  be
gan  his  homeward  voyage  in  May.  Mr.  Mills  was
called  the  "  Father  of  foreign  mission  work  in
Christian  America."  He  published  an  account  of
his  two  visits  to  the  south  (Andover,  1815).  See
"Memoirs  of  the  Rev.  Samuel  J.  Mills,"  by  Gard
ner  Spring  (New  York,  1854).

MILLS,  Thomas  Wesley,  Canadian  physician,
b.  in  Brockville,  Ont.,  22  Feb.,  1847.  He  was'gradu-
ated  at  the  University  of  Toronto  in  1871,  and  in
medicine  at  McGill  university  in  1878.  He  after
ward  studied  for  a  year  in  Germany  and  England.
He  was  appointed  demonstrator  of  physiology  in
McGill  university  in  1882,  lecturer  on  physiology
in  1884,  and  professor  of  that  branch  in  1886.  He
is  president  of  the  Society  for  the  study  of  com
parative  psychology.  In  1883  Prof.  Mills  published
the  results  of  original  investigation  on  the  physi
ology  of  the  voice,  in  which  he  maintained  views  in
opposition  to  generally  received  opinion.  He  has
also  published  "Outlinesof  Lectures  on  Physiology"
(Montreal,  1880),  contributed  to  Buck's'  "Hand
book  of  Medical  Sciences,"  and  has  written  many
articles  for  medical  journals.

MILMORE,  Joseph,  sculptor,  b.  in  Sligo,  Ire
land,  22  Oct.,  1842;  d.  in  Geneva,  Switzerland,  10
Jan.,  1886.  He  was  taken  to  Boston,  Mass.,  when
an  infant,  attended  the  Brimmer  and  Quincy
schools,  and  was  apprenticed  to  a  cabinet-maker.
Disliking  that  vocation,  he  abandoned  it  to  become
a  marble-cutter,  in  which  employment  he  devel
oped  a  marked  taste  for  architectural  work.  He
then  associated  himself  with  his  brother,  Martin,
and  together  they  executed  the  "Sphinx"  in  Mount
Auburn  cemetery,  and  designed  and  executed  the
statuary  in  connection  with  Horticultural  hall,
Boston,  and  a  large  number  of  soldiers'  monu
ments  throughout  the  country,  the  most  note
worthy  of  which  is  that  on  Boston  common. — His
brother,  Martin,  sculptor,  b.  in  Sligo,  Ireland,  14
Sept.,  1844 ;  d.  in  Boston  Highlands,  Mass.,  21  July,
1883.  emigrated  with  his  family  to  Boston  in  1851,
and  took  lessons  in  wood-carving  in  early  life  from
his  elder  brother,  Joseph.  After  his  graduation  at
the  Latin-school  in  1860.  he  entered  the  studio  of
Thomas  Ball,  and  several  years  later  established
himself  in  a  studio  of  his  own  in  Boston.  In  1863
he  cut  for  the  Sanitary  fair  a  statuette  entitled
"  Devotion."  He  received  the  contract  from  the
city  for  the  soldiers'  and  sailors'  monument  on  the
common.  He  then  went  to  Rome  and  studied
for  some  time,  completing  designs  for  some  parts
of  the  monument  while  there.  It  was  unveiled  in
1877.  (See  illustration.)  While  in  Rome,  Mr.
Milmore  modelled  busts  of  Pope  Pius  IX..  Charles
Sumner,  Wendell  Phillips.  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson,
and  other  eminent  men.  He  designed  the  soldiers'
monument  at  Forest  Hill  cemetery,  and  also  the
one  at  Charlestown.  Among  his  works  are  busts


334


MILNE


of  Longfellow,  Theodore  Parker,  and  George  Tick-
nor,  in  the  public  library,  and  the  large  ideal  fig
ures  "  Ceres,"  "  Flora,"  and  "  Pomona,"  in  granite
on  Horticultural  hall.
His  bust  of  Charles
Simmer,  which  was
presented  to  George
William  Curtis  by  the
state  of  Massachusetts
after  the  delivery  of
the  latter's  eulogy  be
fore  the  legislature  in
1878,  has  been  placed
by  Mr.  Curtis  in  the
Metropolitan  museum.
Among  Milmore's  oth
er  public  works  are  his
statue  of  "America"
at  Fitchburg,  soldiers'
and  sailors'  monuments
in  many  cities,  statue  of
Gen.  Sylvanus  Tliayer
at  West  Point,  and  the
"  Weeping  Lion "  at
Waterville,  Me.  He
designed,  with  his
brother,  the  granite
'•Sphinx"  at  Mt.  Auburn  cemetery.  Mr.  Mil
more's  last  work  was  a  bust  of  Daniel  Webster,
which  had  been  ordered  by  New  Hampshire  for
the  state-house  at  Concord.

MILNE,  Sir  David,  English  naval  officer,  b.  in
Musselburgh.  Scotland,  in  May,  1703;  d.  at  sea  in
May,  1845.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman
in  1778,  and  served  in  the  West  indies  in  1778-'83.
As  commander,  on  5  June,  1 795,  he  obtained  a  victory
over  a  French  division  off  Porto  Kico,  and  he  aided
in  1790  in  the  capture  of  Demerara,  Essequibo,  and
Berbice,  in  Dutch  Guiana,  of  which  he  became  the
governor.  In  1797  he  defeated  a  French  division
in  the  pass  of  Mona  off  Santo  Domingo,  and  he
afterward  co-operated  in  the  expedition  against
Santo  Domingo  till  1799.  He  was  appointed  to
command  the  station  in  Canada  in  1804,  took  part
in  the  war  of  1812,  and,  after  being  commissioned
rear-admiral.  14  June,  1814,  commanded  the  station
of  Halifax  from  1817  till  1820.  He  was  promoted
vice-admiral  in  1825.

MILNE,  Sir  Robert  Shore,  lieutenant-gover
nor  of  Canada,  b.  in  England  in  174G  ;  d.  there
about  1836.  He  spent  his  early  life  as  an  officer  in
the  Royal  regiment  of  horse-guards.  In  1795  he
was  appointed  governor  of  the  island  of  Martin
ique,  and  in  1799-1803  he  was  lieutenant-governor
of  Canada  and  acting  governor-general  during  the
absence  of  Gen.  Robert  Prescott.  He  was  not  popu
lar.  During  his  administration  the  government
took  possession  of  the  property  of  the  Jesuits.

M1LNOR,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  20  June,  1773:  d.  in  New  York  city,  8  April,
1844.  His  parents  were  members  of  the  Society
of  Friends.  He  entered  the  University  of  Penn
sylvania,  but,  owing  to  family  embarrassments,
was  not  graduated.  He  began  the  study  of  law  in
1789,  in  Philadelphia,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1794.  He  began  practice  in  Norristown,  Pa.,
but  removed  to  Philadelphia  in  1797,  where  he  soon
obtained  a  large  practice.  In  1805  he  entered  po
litical  life.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  select
council  of  his  native  city,  re-elected  for  three  years
in  1807,  and  became  president  of  the  council  in
1808.  He  was  then  chosen  a  member  of  congress,
serving  from  4  Nov.,  1811,  till  3  March.  1813,  and,
being  strongly  Federalist  in  his  principles,  opposed
the  second  war  with  Great  Britain,  in  1812.  Soon


after  returning  home  he  became  a  candidate  for
orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  While
studying  for  the  ministry  he  busied  himself  effect
ively  as  catechist  and  lay  reader.  He  was  made
deacon,  14  Aug.,  1814,  and  priest,  27  Aug.,  1815,  by
Bishop  White.  He  was  elected  assistant  minister
in  St.  Peter's  and  the  United  churches,  Philadel
phia,  in  1814,  but  two  years  later  he  accepted  the
rectorship  of  St.  George's  church,  New  York  city,
where  he  remained  until  his  death.  lie  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of  Penn
sylvania  in  1819.  He  visited  Europe  in  1830  as
delegate  to  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  society.
His  remaining  years  were  spent  in  parochial  work
and  in  aiding  the  various  charitable  institutions
in  Philadelphia.  Dr.  Milnor's  publications  were
"Oration  on  Masonry,"  before  the  Grand  lodge  of
Pennsylvania (1811) ;  "Thanksgiving-Day  Sermon "
(1817)";  "A  Plea  for  the  American  Colonization
Societv  "  (New  York,  1826) ;  "  Sermon  on  the  Death
of  De  \VTitt  Clinton,  Governor  of  New  York  "  (New
York,  1828);  and  "A  Charitable  Judgment  of  the
Opinions  and  Conduct  of  Others  Recommended,"
which  was  delivered  on  the  Sunday  before  his  death
(1844).  See  a  "Memoir,"  by  the  Rev.  John  S.  Stone,
D.  D.  (New  York,  1855).

M1LROY,  Robert  Huston,  soldier,  b.  in  Wash
ington  county,  Ind.,  11  June,  1816.  He  was  grad
uated  at  Norwich  university,  Vt.,  in  1843,  taking
degrees  both  in  the  classical  and  military  depart
ments.  In  the  war  with  Mexico  he  served  as  cap
tain  in  the  1st  Indiana  volunteers.  He  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1849,  and  in  1850
was  graduated  at  the  law  department  of  Indi
ana  university.  lie  was  a  member  of  the  Constitu
tional  convention  of  Indiana  in  1849-'50,  and  in
1851  was  appointed  judge  of  the  8th  judicial  circuit
court  of  Indiana.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  issued  a  call  for  volunteers  and  was  made  a
captain,  becoming  colonel  of  the  9th  Indiana  vol
unteers  on  26  April,  1861.  He  served  in  western
Virginia  under  Gens.  George  B.  McClellan  and  Wil
liam  S.  Rosecrans,  receiving  a  commission  as
brigadier-general  on  6  Feb..  1862,  and  thereafter
continued  in  various  commands  in  Virginia  under
Gens.  John  C.  Fremont  and  Franz  Sigel,  until  10
March,  1863,  when  he  was  made  major-general  of
volunteers.  In  this  capacity  he  had  charge  of  the
2d  division  of  the  8th  army  corps,  and  was  stat  ioned
at  Winchester,  Va.  Here,  on  15  June,  1863,  he
was  attacked  by  nearly  the  whole  of  Lee's  army,
which  was  marching  toward  Pennsylvania.  Gen.
Milroy  resisted  this  superior  force  for  three  days,
until  his  ammunition  and  provisions  were  ex
hausted,  and  then  cut  his  way  out  by  night,  losing
a  large  portion  of  his  forces.  He  claims  that  this
detention  of  Lee's  army  at  Winchester  enabled
Gen.  Meade  to  fight  advantageously  at  Gettysburg,
when  otherwise  the  great  battle  would  have  taken
place  farther  north.  His  conduct  was  made  the
subject  of  investigation,  and  in  1865  he  resigned
from  the  army.  In  1868  he  became  a  trustee  of
the  Wabash  and  Erie  canal,  which  place  he  held
for  sometime.  He  was  appointed  superintendent
of  Indian  affairs  in  Washington  territory,  and  con
tinued  in  that  office  until  1874.  He  was  appointed
Indian  agent  in  1875,  and  reappointed  until  1885,
when,  consequent  upon  a  change  in  the  adminis
tration,  he  lost  the  office.

MILTENBERUER,  George  Warner,  physi
cian,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  17  March,  1819.  He
entered  the  University  of  Virginia  and  began
medical  studies  in  Baltimore  in  1836,  and  was
graduated  in  1840.  He  was  then  elected  demon
strator  of  anatomy  by  the  faculty  of  the  Univer-


MILTOX


MIXER


335


sity  of  Maryland,  which  place  he  continued  to  fill
until  1852. "  In  1847  the  faculty  of  the  university
placed  under  his  charge  the  surgical  wards  of  the
infirmary,  and  gave  him  the  chair  of  pathological
anatomy.  In  1849  he  was  appointed  an  attending
physician  at  the  Baltimore  city  and  county  alms-
house.  He  now  turned  his  attention  to  general
practice,  and  particularly  to  obstetrics.  In  1852
he  succeeded  to  the  chair  of  materia  medica,  thera
peutics,  and  pathology,  and  in  1858  he  was  elect
ed  professor  of  obstetrics,  which  post  he  still
(1888)  occupies.  In  1855  he  was  chosen  dean  of
the  faculty.  Dr.  Miltenberger  has  been  a  large
contributor  to  medical  literature.

MILTON,  John,  soldier,  b.  about  1740.  He
fought  during  the  Revolutionary  war,  and  had  at
tained  the  rank  of  lieutenant,  when,  in  February,
1777,  at  the  surrender  of  Fort  Howe,  Ga.,  to  the
British  and  Indians,  he,  with  Lieut.  William  Cald-
well,  was  given  up  as  a  hostage,  and  confined  nine
months  in  the  castle  at  St.  Augustine,  Fla.  He
afterward  became  a  captain,  and  was  secretary  of
state  of  Georgia,  when,  on  6  Dec.,  1778,  he  removed
the  public  records  to  Purrysburg,  by  order  of  the
governor,  at  the  approach  of  the  British.  At  the
close  of  the  war  he  became  a  planter,  and  was  ac
tive  in  politics.  He  was  again  chosen  secretary  of
state  by  the  legislature  in  1781  and  in  1783,  and  in
1789  he  received  two  votes  of  the  Georgia  electors
for  first  president  of  the  United  States.

MIMEl  RE,  Victor  Emmanuel  Leon  de,  Ca
nadian  missionary,  b.  in  Quebec  in  1723  ;  d.  in  Di-
nan,  Brittany,  in  1791.  He  was  the  son  of  the
Marquis  de  Mimeure,  who  at  his  death  was  a  lieu
tenant-general  and  in  command  of  Fort  Oswego
on  Lake  Ontario.  The  son  entered  the  army  as
lieutenant  in  1740,  but,  resigning  a  few  years  later,
became  a  Jesuit,  and  was  employed  in  the  Uru
guay  missions  till  1767,  when,  owing  to  the  ruin
of  his  establishments  by  the  Portuguese  army  un
der  Freire  de  Andrada  (q.  v.),  he  returned  to  France.
He  lived  in  his  castle  near  Dinan  till  1791,  when
he  was  killed  during  the  riots  in  the  latter  city.
He  published  "Histoire  des  etablissements  de  la
compagnie  de  Jesus  dans  les  provinces  du  Para
guay  et  de  P Uruguay "  (2  vols.,  Dinan,  1781);
"  Origine,  histoire.  description  et  statistique  du
pays  des  Sept  missions,"  which  may  be  considered
as  an  official  history  of  the  Jesuit  domination  in
south  Uruguay  (2  vols..  Dinan,  1785);  "Histoire
des  etablissements  fondes  par  les  Jesuits  dans
I'Amerique  du  Sud,  depuis  sa  decouverte  jnsqu'en
1750"  (4  vols.,  Dinan,  1787);  and  other  works.

MIXA,  Francisco  Javier  (mee'-nah).  Spanish
revolutionist,  b.  in  Idocin,  Spain,  in  December,
1789;  d.  in  San  Gregorio.  Mexico,  11  Xov.,  1817.
He  was  destined  by  his  parents,  who  were  small
farmers,  for  a  legal  career,  but  abandoned  it  on
the  invasion  of  Spain  by  Napoleon,  and  formed  in
his  native  province  of  Xavarra  bands  of  guerillas
against  the  French.  In  1812  he  was  taken  pris
oner  and  did  not  return  to  his  country  till  1814.
With  his  uncle,  Gen.  Espoz  y  Mina.  he  was  con
cerned  in  the  revolutionary  movement  of  Pamplo
na  to  force  Ferdinand  VII.  to  grant  a  constitution,
and  on  its  failure  they  emigrated  to  France.  4  Oct.,
1814.  Young  Mina  visited  London,  where  he  met
several  Mexican  patriots,  and  resolved  to  assist  in
the  liberation  of  Mexico.  He  went  to  Xew  Or
leans.  23  Feb.,  1817.  where  he  gathered  a  force  of
adventurers  and  landed  with  about  500  men  in  the
roadstead  of  Soto  la  Marina  on  15  April.  After
the  desertion  of  some  of  his  volunteers  he  marched
in  May  with  about  300  men  toward  San  Luis  Po-
tosi,  and  met  on  8  June  the  division  of  Gen.  Ar-


minan.  whom  he  defeated.  He  captured  the  fort
of  Sombrero,  in  the  Comanja  range,  on  the  15th,
defeated  Ordonez  at  San  Felipe  on  the  20th,  and
captured  the  estate  of  Jaral,  which  had  been  aban
doned  by  the  owner,  the  Marquis  of  Moncada,  ob
taining  a  quantity-  of  arms  and  140,000  francs  in
silver.  He  afterward  took  the  rich  city  of  Leon,
and  then  retired  to  the  fort  of  Sombrero,  where  on
1  Aug.  he  was  besieged  by  the  enemy.  After  nine
teen  days  Mina  made  a  sortie,  but  was  defeated,
and  with  100  men  took  refuge  in  San  Gregorio.
He  afterward  captured  San  Luis  de  la  Paz  and  en
tered  the  city  of  Guanajuato,  but  his  men,  scatter
ing  for  pillage,  were  defeated,  and  Mina  barely
escaped  with  fifty  men  to  the  farm  of  Venadito.
There  he  was  surprised,  on  27  Oct.,  by  a  force  of
500  under  Orrantia,  captured  after  a  desperate  re
sistance,  court-martialed,  carried  to  Fort  San  Gre
gorio,  and  shot  there  with  twenty-five  companions.
The  news  of  his  capture  was  celebrated  in  the  capi
tal  by  the  ringing  of  bells  and  firing  of  cannon,
and  the  viceroy  was  created  Count  of  Venadito.

MIXARD,  Abel,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Massa
chusetts,  25  Sept.,  1814 ;  d.  in  Morristown,  X.  J.,
31  Jan.,  1871.  He  was  early  left  an  orphan,  but
attained  wealth  by  persistent  effort,  first  learning
the  trade  of  a  tanner,  and  afterward  engaging  in
commerce.  He  went  to  California  in  1846,  re
moved  to  Lockport,  X.  Y.,  in  1856,  and  in  1866
settled  in  Morristown.  X.  J.  Besides  giving  to  vari
ous  charitable  objects,  he  founded  the  Minard  home
in  Morristown,  at  an  expense  of  §50.000,  for  the  edu
cation  of  female  orphans  of  Methodist  clergymen.

MIXER,  Alonzo  Ames,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lemp-
ster,  X.  H.,  17  Aug.,  1814.  His  grandfather,
Charles,  was  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution.  Alonzo
received  an  academical  education,  and  was  a  teach
er  at  intervals  between  1830  and  1835.  He  was
principal  of  an  academy  at  Unity,  X.  II.,  in  1835-'9,
and  in  June  of  the  latter  year  was  ordained  as  a
Universalist  clergyman,  afterward  holding  pastor
ates  at  Methuen,  Lowell,  and  Boston.  He  was
president  of  Tufts  college,  Medford,  Mass..  from
July,  1862,  till  Xovember.  1874,  when  he  returned
to  his  former  charge  in  Boston.  He  has  been  a
member  of  the  Massachusetts  board  of  education
since  18C9,  chairman  of  the  board  of  visitors  of
the  State  normal  art-school  since  1873,  is  president
of  the  State  temperance  alliance,  and  was  Prohibi
tion  candidate  for  governor  in  1878.  He  was  the
original  projector  of  the  Universalist  publishing-
house,  Boston,  edited  "  The  Star  of  Bethlehem,"
has  contributed  to  periodicals,  and  has  been  well
known  as  an  anti-slavery  and  temperance  lecturer.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Harvard  in
1863,  and  was  elected  by  the  legislature  an  over
seer  of  that  institution  the  same  year.

MIXER,  Charles,  journalist,  b.  in  Xorwich,
Conn.,  1  Feb.,  1780;  d.  in  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  26
Oct.,  1865.  In  1799  he  removed  to  the  Wyoming
valley,  where  with  his  brother  he  established  the
"  Luzerne  Federalist/'  This  was  superseded  by
the  ''Gleaner,"  for  which  he  wrote  a  series  of  hu
morous  sketches,  which  were  widely  read.  He
subsequently  became  assistant  editor  of  the  "  Po
litical  and  Commercial  Register"  of  Philadelphia,
and  later  with  his  brother  established  in  West
Chester  the  "  Village  Record,"  for  which  he  wrote
over  the  signature  of  "John  Harwood."  In  1825
he  was  elected  to  congress  from  Pennsylvania,  and
served  from  5  Dec.  of  that  year  till  3  March,  1829,
when  he  declined  re-election,  owing  to  deafness.
He  was  opposed  to  slavery  and  friendly  to  agri
culture  and  the  silk-growing  interest,  which  latter
i  he  introduced  in  the  United  States  and  popular-


336


MINER


MINOR


ized  by  his  writings.  He  drew  up  and  introduced
into  congress  the  first  resolutions  on  the  culture  of
silk  and  wrote  the  report  that  was  introduced  by
Gen.  Stephen  Van  Ronsselaer  as  chairman  of  the
committee  on  agriculture.  He  returned  to  the
Wyoming  valley  in  1832.  Mr.  Miner  published  a
"  History  of  Wyoming,"  in  which  the  account  of
the  Wyoming  massacre  was  detailed  from  the  tes
timony  of  eye-witnesses  (Philadelphia,  1845) :  "  Es
says  from  the  Desk  of  Poor  Robert  the  Scribe,"
which  was  first  contributed  to  the  "Gleaner":  and
the  ballad  of  "James  Bird."

MINER,  Myrtilla,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Brook-
field,  Madison  co.,  N.  Y.,  4  March,  1815;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C.,  17  Dec.,  1864.  She  began
teaching  when  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  was  after
ward  employed  in  a  school  for  the  education  of
planters'  daughters  in  Whitesville,  Wilkinson  co.,
Miss.  She  remained  there  two  years,  became  fa
miliar  with  the  evils  of  slavery,  and  determined  to
devote  her  life  to  the  elevation  of  the  negro  race.
She  decided  to  found  a  normal  school  for  free  col
ored  girls  in  Washington,  although  she  had  but
$100  with  which  to  meet  expenses.  On  5}  Dec.,
1851,  the  school  was  opened  in  a  small  apartment
with  six  pupils.  During  the  second  month  the
number  of  pupils  increased  to  forty,  and  in  1853  a
permanent  location  for  the  school  with  increased
accommodation  was  purchased  for  $4.300,  Harriet
Beecher  Stowe  contributing  $1,000  from  the  pro
ceeds  of  the  sale  of  "  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin."  Thence
forth  the  school  was  a  great  success.  In  1800  in
dications  of  approaching  civil  war  led  to  the  tem
porary  abandonment  of  the  school,  and  in  1801
Miss  Miner  went  to  California  for  the  benefit  of
her  health,  but  met  with  an  accident  there  and  re
turned  to  die  in  Washington.  While  she  was  ab
sent  in  California  in  1863,  congress  passed  an  act
for  the  incorporation  of  her  normal  school.  She
had  suffered  severe  persecution  in  consequence  of
her  efforts  to  elevate  the  colored  people.

MINER,  Thomas,  physician,  b.  in  Middletown,
Conn.,  15  Oct.,  1777;  d.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  23
April,  1841.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1796,
taught  in  Goshen,  N.  Y.,  and  studied  law,  which
in  1803  he  abandoned  for  medicine.  In  the  spring
of  1807  he  began  practice  at  Middletown,  and  in
the  autumn  of  1808  settled  at  Lynn,  Mass.  In
1809  a  malignant  epidemic  called  spotted  fever
prevailed  in  the  Connecticut  valley,  and  in  com
bating  it  he  adopted  a  new  method  of  treatment,
which  was  the  cause  of  much  discussion.  His  in
firm  state  of  health  prevented  his  engaging  in  the
active  pursuit  of  his  profession  otherwise  than  in  a
desultory  manner.  He  was  a  founder  of  Yale
medical  school  and  of  the  Connecticut  retreat  for
the  insane,  and  was  president  of  the  Connecticut
medical  society  in  1834-'7.  Dr.  Miner  contributed
to  periodicals  biographical  sketches  of  Connecticut
physicians,  medical  essays,  and  translations  from
French  medical  works.  With  Dr.  William  Tully
he  published  "  Essays  upon  Fevers  and  other  Medi
cal  Subjects "  (Middletown,  1823)  and  "  Account
of  Typhus  Syncopalis"  (1825).

MINES,  Flavel  Scott,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lees-
burg,  Va.,  31  Dec.,  1811 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,
in  1852.  He  was  the  son  of  John  Mines,  D.  D.,  a
Presbyterian  clergyman  of  Virginia,  and  was  grad
uated  at  Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1830.
He  was  pastor  of  Laight  street  Presbyterian  church.
New  York  city,  but  resigned  his  charge  in  1841,  and
in  1842  took  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church.  In  1849  he  organized  at  San  Francisco,
Cal.,  the  first  Protestant  Episcopal  congregation  on
the  Pacific  coast,  and  built  Trinity  church,  under


the  chancel  of  which  he  was  buried.  He  was  the
author  of  "A  Presbyterian  Clergyman  looking  for
the  Church"  (New  York,  1850). — His  son,  John
Flavel,  author,  b.  in  Paris,  France,  27  Jan.,  1835,
was  graduated  at  Trinity  in  1854,  and  at  Berkeley
divinity-school  in  1857.  He  entered  the  army  as
chaplain  in  May,  1861,  but  later  retired  from 'the
ministry,  was  given  a  commission  and  was  mus
tered  out  in  May,  1865.  as  a  lieutenant-colonel.
He  has  been  a  contributor  to  various  New  York
newspapers,  and  has  published  "The  Heroes  of  the
Last  Lustre,"  a  poem  (New  York,  1858),  and  "A
Tour  around  New  York  by  Mr.  Felix  Oldboy "
(1888). — Another  son,  Flavel  Scott,  clergyman.'!),
in  St.  Croix,  W.  I.,  24  July,  1843;  d.  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  14  Sept.,  1878,  was  educated  at  Trinity,  and
graduated  at  the  General  theological  seminary,
New  York,  in  1855.  He  early  espoused  what  is
known  as  the  catholic  school  of  thought  in  the
Episcopal  church,  and  was  for  several  years  one  of
its  most  active  advocates  in  the  city  of  New  York.
He  held  pastorates  in  Cherry  Valley,  N.  Y.,  East-
port,  Me.,  before  being  called  to  New  York,  and
left  that  city  in  1874  to  take  charge  of  a  church  in
Peoria,  111.,  whence  he  was  called  in  1876  to  Trinity
church.  Mason,  Tenn.  When  "  The  Church  Month
ly  "  was  developed  into  "  The  Church  Weekly
Newspaper,"  he  became  one  of  its  editors.

MINIFIE,  William,  author,  b.  in  Devonshire.
14  Aug.,  1805;  d.  in  Baltimore,  24  Oct.,  1880.  He
came  to  the  United  States  in  1828  and  established
himself  as  an  architect  and  bookseller  in  Baltimore.
Mr.  Minifie  was  curator  of  the  Maryland  academy
of  sciences,  and  professor  of  drawing  at  the  Mary
land  institute  schools  of  art.  He  was  the  author  of
"Text-Book  of  Mechanical  Drawing"  (Baltimore,
1849);  " Text-Book  of  Geometrical  Drawing:  Per
spective  and  Shadows  "  (1853) ;  "  Essay  on  the  The
ory  and  Application  of  Color  "  (1854) ;  and  "  Popu
lar  Lectures  on  Drawing  and  Design  "  (1854).

MINOR,  Lucian,  writer,  b.  in  Louisa  county,
Va.,  in  1802:  d.  in  Williamsbiirg.  Va.,  in  1858.
He  was  graduated  in  law  at  William  and  Mary  in
1823,  and  was  commonwealth  attorney  for  Louisa
county,  Va.,  from  1828  till  1852.  In' 1855  he  was
elected  professor  of  law  in  William  and  Mary,
which  chair  he  filled  till  his  death.  He  was  a
strong  advocate  of  temperance,  and  published
many  addresses  and  contributed  to  periodicals.
He  is  the  author  of  part  of  John  A.  G.  Davis's
"Guide  to  Justices"  (1838),  and  added  notes  to
Daniel  Call's  "  Virginia  Reports."  lie  also  con
densed  the  four  volumes  of  Hening  and  Mum-
ford's  "  Reports  "  into  one,  adding  subsequent  de
cisions  and  enactments,  and  wrote  a  tract,  "  Rea
sons  for  Abolishing  the  Liquor  Traffic,"  which
had  a  sale  of  30,000.  His  interesting  notes  of
travel  in  New  England  were  published  under  the
supervision  of  James  Russell  Lowell  in  the  "At
lantic  Monthly"  after  his  death. — His  brother,
John  Barbee,  lawyer,  b.  in  Louisa  county,  Va.,  2
June,  1813,  was  educated  at  Kenyon  college,  Ohio,
and  at  the  University  of  Virginia,  where  he  was
graduated  in  law  in  1834.  He  was  professor  of
law  in  the  University  of  Virginia  from  1845  till
1854,  and  then,  upon  the  introduction  of  another
professor  into  the  department,  assumed  the  chair
of  common  and  statute  law,  which  he  now  (1888)
holds.  lie  is  the  author  of  "  The  Virginia  Report
of  1799-1800"  (Richmond,  1850);  "Synopsis  of
the  Law  of  Crimes  and  Punishments  "  (i860) ;  and
"  Institutes  of  Common  and  Statute  Law"  (1875).

MINOR,  Robert  Crannell,  artist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  30  April,  1840.  He  studied  six  years
in  Belgium,  France,  and  Italy,  and  in  1874  was


MINOR


MIXTO


337


vice-president  of  the  Societe  artistique  et  litteraire
of  Antwerp.  On  his  return  to  the  United  States
he  opened  a  studio  in  New  York,  where  he  has
since  resided.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Society  of
American  artists,  and  has  exhibited  in  Xew  York,
Brooklyn,  Chicago,  and  elsewhere  in  this  country,
as  well  as  in  the  Royal  academy  of  London  and
the  salons  of  Paris  and  Antwerp.  His  works
include  "  Evening  "  ;  "  Dawn  "  ;  "  Studio  of  Co-
rot  " ;  and  "  Under  the  Oaks "  (1878).  Among
those  of  his  later  paintings  that  he  has  shown  at
the  National  academy  are  "  The  Wold  of  Kent,
England"  (1884);  "The  Cradle  of  the  Hudson"
<1885);  "The  Close  of  Day"  (1886);  and  "A
Mountain  Path"  (1887).

MINOR,  Virginia  Louisa,  reformer,  b.  in
Goochland  county,  Va.,  27  March,  1824.  She  was
educated  in  part  at  an  academy  for  young  ladies
in  Charlottesville,  Va.,  married'  Francis  Minor,  a
relative  of  the  same  name  in  1843,  and  removed  in
1846  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  she  has  since  resided.
During  the  civil  war  she  devoted  herself  to  aid  the
sick  and  wounded  soldiers  in  the  camps  and  hos
pitals  around  St.  Louis.  She  originated  the  wom
an  suffrage  movement  in  Missouri  in  1866,  organ
ized  the  Woman  suffrage  association  in  1867,  and
presided  over  the  Convention  of  woman  suffragists
in  St.  Louis  in  1869.  She  was  the  first  woman  in
the  United  States  to  claim  suffrage  as  a  right,  and
not  as  a  favor.  With  this  end  in  view,  in  1872
she  brought  the  matter  before  the  courts,  taking
it  finally  to  the  U.  S.  supreme  court.

MINOR,  William  Thomas,  jurist,  b.  in  Stam
ford,  Conn.,  3  Oct.,  1815.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1834,  taught  at  Stamford  from  that  year
till  1841,  studying  law  in  the  mean  time,  and  was
admitted  to  practice  in  1840.  He  was  a  member
of  the  legislature  of  Connecticut  for  eight  years,
governor  of  that  state  in  1856-'8,  and  consul-gen-
oral  at  Havana  from  1864  till  1867,  when  he  resigned.
In  1868  he  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  superior
court  of  his  native  state,  but  resigned  in  1873.

MINOT,  Charles,  railroad  official,  b.  in  Haver-
hill,  Mass.,  30  Aug.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Somerville,  Mass..
10  Dec.,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1828,  studied  law,  and  after  his  admission  to  the
bar  practised  in  Suffolk  county  for  many  years.
In  1841  he  was  appointed  superintendent  of  the
Boston  and  Maine  railroad,  and  after  a  year  ac
cepted  a  similar  appointment  with  the  Erie  railway
company.  This  office  he  held  until  1854,  when  he
became  attached  to  the  Michigan  Southern  railroad.
In  185!)  he  returned  to  the  Erie  as  superintendent,  I
which  place  he  then  filled  until  about  1864,  after  I
which  his  services  were  retained  in  a  consulting
capacity  by  that  road.  Mr.  Minot  was  one  of  the
best  known  railroad  officers  in  the  United  States,
and  attained  a  high  reputation  as  a  manager.
Many  of  the  present  officers  of  railways  in  the
United  States  began  their  careers  under  his  in-  '
structions. — His  brother,  George,  lawyer,  b.  in
Haverhill,  Mass.,  5  Jan.,  1817;  d.  in  Reading,  Mass.,
15  April,  1856,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1836,
and  at  the  law  department  in  1838.  His  legal
studies  were  completed  with  Rufus  Choate.  and  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1839.  He  settled  in
Boston,  and  soon  became  prominent  in  his  profes
sion,  being  for  many  years  solicitor  of  the  Boston
and  Maine  railroad"  company.  Mr.  Minot  edited
"  Digest  of  the  Decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  of
Massachusetts"  (Boston,  1844:  supplement,  1852),
and  rendered  valuable  aid  to  Richard  Peter,  Jr.,  in
the  preparation  of  the  first  eight  volumes  of  the
"  U.  S.  Statutes  at  Large  "  (1848),  the  index  of  which
he  prepared.  Subsequently,  for  ten  years,  he  was
VOL.  iv. — 22


editor  of  that  work,  and  was  associate  reporter  of
the  decisions  of  the  first  circuit.  He  also  edited
'•English  Admiralty  Reports"  (9  vols.,  l853-'4).

MINOT,  George  Richards,  jurist,  b.  in  Bos
ton,  Mass.,  22  Dec.,  1758 :  d.  there,  2  Jan.,  1802.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1778,  and,  after
studying  law  with  Fisher  Ames,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  practised  his  profession  in  Boston.
In  1781  he  was  made  clerk  of  the  Massachusetts
house  of  representatives,  and  in  1702  he  was  ap
pointed  probate  judge  for  the  county  of  Suffolk,
also  serving,  meanwhile,  as  secretary  of  the  con
vention  that  adopted  the  U.  S.  constitution.  He
was  made  chief  justice  of  the  court  of  common
pleas  in  1799.  and  judge  of  the  municipal  court  of
Boston  on  its  establishment  in  1800,  which  office
he  held  until  his  death.  Judge  Minot  was  one  of
the  founders  of  the  Massachusetts  historical  so
ciety,  and  edited  three  volumes  of  its  "  Collec
tions."  He  delivered  the  oration  on  the  anniver
sary  of  the  Boston  massacre  on  5  March,  1782;  an
address  to  the  Charitable  fire  society  (1795);  and  a
"  Eulogy  on  Washington  "  (1800).  In  addition  to
many  fugitive  pieces  in  the  newspapers  and  maga
zines,  he  published  "  History  of  the  Insurrection  in
Massachusetts  in  1786"  (Worcester,  1786),  and
"Continuation  of  the  [IlutchinsonV]  History  of
Massachusetts  Bay  from  the  Year  1748,  with  an
Introductory  Sketch  of  Events  from  its  Original
Settlement "  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1798  and  1803).— His
grandson,  Francis,  physician,  b.  in  Boston.  Mass.,
12  April,  1821,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1841,
and  at  the  medical  department  in  1844,  and  has
since  practised  his  profession  in  Boston.  In  1871
he  was  made  assistant  professor  of  the  theory  and
practice  of  medicine,  and  clinical  lecturer  on  the
diseases  of  women  and  children,  in  the  medical
department  of  Harvard,  which  places  he  held  until
1874,  when  he  was  made  full  professor  of  the  the
ory  and  practice  of  physic.  Dr.  Minot  was  visit
ing  physician  of  the  Massachusetts  general  hospital
from  i858  till  1887,  and  has  since  continued  his
connection  with  that  institution  in  a  consulting
relation.  He  is  a  member  of  various  scientific  or
ganizations,  and  has  contributed  papers  to  profes
sional  journals. — Francis's  nephew,  Charles  Sedg-
ivick,  biologist,  b.  in  West  Roxbury  (now  part  of
Boston),  Mass.,  23  Dec.,  1852.  He  was  graduated
in  the  chemical  course  at  the  Massachusetts  insti
tute  of  technology  in  1872.  and  then  devoted  his
attention  to  biology,  studying  that  science  in
Leipsic,  Paris,  and  Wurzburg,  and  receiving  his
doctorate  at  Harvard  in  1878.  In  1880  he  became
lecturer  on  embryology  in  Harvard  medical  school
and  instructor  in  oral  pathology  and  surgery.
These  appointments  he  held  until  1883,  when  he
became  assistant  professor  of  histology  and  em
bryology  at  that  institution.  Dr.  Minot  is  a  mem
ber  of  scientific  societies,  and  in  1885  was  general
secretary  of  the  American  association  for  the  ad
vancement  of  science.  His  researches  have  been
principally  on  the  physiology  of  the  muscles  and
respiration,  in  general  biology,  particularly  con
cerning  growth  and  death,  and  in  human  embry
ology,  concerning  which  he  has  published  more
than  eighty  papers  in  scientific  journals.

MINTO,  Walter,  mathematician,  b.  in  Cowden-
ham,  Scotland,  6  Dec.,  1753:  d.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,
21  Oct.,  1796.  After  his  graduation  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Edinburgh,  he  became  tutor  to  the  two
sons  of  George  Johnstone,  a  member  of  parlia
ment,  who  was  commissioner  to  this  country  in
1778,  and  went  with  them  to  Italy.  In  Pisa  he
resided  in  the  family  of  Dr.  Guiseppe  Slop,  the
astronomer,  and  througli  him  became  familiar  with


338


MINTURN


MIRAM6N


the  then  new  application  of  mathematics  to  the
motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  He  subsequently
gave  up  his  pupils,  owing  to  a  disagreement  with
their  father,  and  returned  to  Scotland,  where  he
became  a  teacher  of  mathematics  at  Edinburgh.
He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1786,  and  in  178?
became  professor  of  mathematics  and  natural  phi
losophy  in  Princeton,  which  post  he  held  till  his
death.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the
University  of  Aberdeen,  about  1787.  Dr.  Minto
published  "  Demonstration  of  the  Path  of  the  New
Planet " ;  "  Researches  into  Some  Parts  of  the  The
ory  of  Planets  "  (London,  1783; :  "  An  Account  of
the  Life,  Writings,  and  Inventions  of  Napier  of
Merchiston,"  with  Lord  Buchau  (Edinburgh,  1787) ;
and  his  "  Inaugural  Oration  on  the  Progress  and
Importance  of  the  Mathematical  Sciences"  (1788).

MINTURN,  Robert  Bowne,  merchant,  b.  in
New  York  city,  16  Nov..  1805;  d.  there,  9  Jan.,
1866.  He  received  an  English  education,  and,
though  compelled  by  the  death  of  his  father  to
leave  school  at  the  age  of  fourteen  and  enter  a
counting-house,  spent  his  leisure  in  study,  so  that
he  gained  an  extensive  acquaintance  with  general
literature.  He  was  received  into  partnership  in
1825  with  Charles  Green,  whose  clerk  he  had  been,
and  in  1830  entered  the  firm  of  Fish  and  Grinnell,
which  was  afterward  known  as  Grinnell,  Mint  urn
and  Co.  He  declined  all  public  office  except  the
post  of  commissioner  of  emigration,  which  he  ac
cepted  from  a  wish  to  secure  the  rights  of  emi
grants.  He  was  an  active  manager  of  many  chari
table  associations  in  New  York  city,  aided  in
establishing  the  Association  for  improving  the
condition  of  the  poor,  and  was  a  founder  of  St.
Luke's  hospital.  He  was  the  first  president  of  the
Union  league  club. — His  son.  Robert  liowno,  b.
in  New  York  city.  21  Feb.,  21, 1836,  was  graduated
at  Columbia  in  1856.  He  is  the  author  of  "  New
York  to  Delhi "  (New  York,  1858).

MINTY,  Robert  Horatio  George,  soldier,  b.
in  County  Mayo,  Ireland,  4  Dec.,  1831.  He  entered
the  British  army  as  ensign  in  184!),  and  served  in
the  West  Indies  and  Honduras  and  on  the  African
coast,  but  retired  from  the  service  in  1853,  and,
coining  to  the  United  States,  settled  in  Michigan.
He  became  major  of  the  2d  Michigan  cavalry  and
then  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  3d  at  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war,  was  made  colonel  of  the  4th  in
1862,  and  in  1863-'5  commanded  a  cavalry  brigade
that  was  known  as  the  "  Sabre  brigade,"  capturing
Shelbyville,  Tenn.,  on  27  June,  1863.  He  com
manded  the  cavalry  on  the  left  at  Chickamauga,
and  afterward  covered  Gen.  Thomas's  retreat  to
Chattanooga.  He  also  did  good  service  at  New
Madrid,  Farmington,  the  pursuit  of  Bragg,  Stone
River,  and  the  Atlanta  campaign,  and  led  a  divis
ion  in  Kilpatrick's  raid  around  that  city.  At  the
close  of  the  war  he  received  the  brevets  of  briga
dier-general  and  major-general  of  volunteers,  and
declined  a  major's  commission  in  the  regular  army.
Five  horses  were  killed  under  him  during  the  war.

MINUIT,  or  MINNEWIT,  Peter,  colonist,
b.  in  Wesel,  Rhenish  Prussia,  about  1580;  d.  in
Fort  Christiana,  New  Sweden  (now  Delaware),  in
1641.  He  was  of  a  good  family,  and  had  been
a  deacon  in  the  Walloon  church  in  his  native
town,  but  removed  to  Holland  and  had  re
sided  there  several  years,  when,  on  19  Dec.,  1625,
he  was  appointed  by  the  Dutch  West  India  com
pany  its  director  in  New  Netherlands.  This  office
had  been  held  first  by  Cornells  Mey,  and  then  by
William  Van  Hulst,  'but  the  company  now  or
dained  a  more  formal  government,  with  enlarged
powers,  so  that  Minuit  may  be  called  the  first  gov


ernor  of  New  Netherlands.  lie  sailed  from  Am
sterdam  in  the  "  Sea  Mew,"  landed  on  Manhattan
island,  4  May,  1626,  and  purchased  it  from  the  In
dians  for  trinkets  that  were  valued  at  about  twenty-
four  dollars.  The  ship  that  bore  the  news  of  this
purchase  to  Holland  carried  back  8,250  beaver,  otter,
mink,  and  wild-cat  skins,  and  much  oak  and
hickory  timber.  Minuit  built  Fort  Amsterdam
and  a  warehouse  and  mill,  and  by  the  arrival  of
new  vessels  the  population  of  the  island  was  soon
inci'eased  to  about  200.  In  1627  the  director  ex
changed  several  letters  with  Gov.  William  Brad
ford,  of  Plymouth,  which  resulted  in  the  establish
ment  of  commercial  relations  between  the  two
colonies.  Minuit  governed  with  energy  and  skill
till  August,  1631,  when  he  was  recalled,  the  West
India  company  holding  him  responsible  for  the
accumulation  of  land  in  the  hands  of  the  patroons.
He  sailed  for  home  in  March,  1632,  and  in  April  put
into  Plymouth,  England,  where  his  ship  was  at
tached  by  the  council  of  New  England  on  a  charge
of  illegally  trading  in  the  English  dominions.
This  led  to  a  brisk  diplomatic  correspondence,  and
on  27  May  the  vessel  was  quietly  released,  though
the  English  did  not  abandon  their  claims.  Minuit,
after  unsuccessful  endeavors  to  regain  his  office,
offered  his  services  to  the  Swedish  government,  and
the  chancellor,  Oxenstiern,  renewed  in  1633  the
charter  of  the  Swedish  West  India  company,  which
had  been  formed  in  1626.  Under  its  auspices
Minuit  set  sail  from  Gothenburg  in  1637  witli  a
body  of  Swedish  and  Finnish  colonists  in  two  ves
sels,  the  "Key  of  Calmar"  and  the  "Griffin."
They  ascended  Delaware  bay.  purchased  from  the
natives  the  land  from  the  southern  cape  to  the  falls
near  Trenton,  and  in  March,  1638,  began  to  build
Fort  Christiana,  near  the  present  city  of  Wilming
ton.  This  was  the  first  permanent  European  settle
ment  on  Delaware  river.  Gov.  Kiet't,  of  New
Netherlands,  protested  in  a  letter  to  Minuit  that
the  land  bordering  on  the  Delaware  "  has  been  our
property  for  many  years,  occupied  with  forts  and
sealed  by  our  blood,  which  also  was  done  when
thou  wast  in  the  service  of  New  Netherland,  and
is  therefore  well  known  to  thee."  This  protest
was  disregarded,  and  the  colony  remained  a  Swed
ish  possession  till  it  wras  captured  by  the  Dutch
fourteen  years  after  Minuit's  death.  In  1640  it
narrowly  escaped  abandonment.  It  had  been  more
than  a  year  since  the  colonists  had  heard  from
home,  and  their  necessities  had  become  so  pressing
that  they  applied  to  the  authorities  at  Manhattan
for  permission  to  remove  thither,  but,  on  the  day
before  the  one  that  had  been  fixed  upon  for  the
change,  a  ship  laden  witli  provisions  arrived  in
Delaware  river.  Minuit  displayed  much  skill  in
keeping  the  settlers  together  and  in  avoiding  hos
tilities  with  the  Indians  and  the  Dutch,  and  the
success  of  the  colony  was  undoubtedly  due  to  his
energy.  He  is  described  as  robust,  with  somewhat
dull  black  eyes  and  brusque  manners.

MIRABEAU,  Boniface  Riquetti,  Vicomte  de,
French  soldier,  b.  in  1754 ;  d.  in  Friburg  in  Octo
ber,  1792.  He  was  a  younger  brother  of  the  cele
brated  orator.  He  entered  the  French  army,  and
served  under  Rochambeau  in  the  war  of  American
independence  as  colonel  of  the  Tourairie  regiment.
On  his  return  he  opposed  the  French  revolution,
emigrated  in  1790,  and  joined  the  Royalist  army
on  the  Rhine.  He  was  a  man  of  wit  and  courage,
but  so  addicted  to  drink  that  he  was  given  the
name  of  "  Barrel  Mirabeau."

MIRAMON,  Miguel  (me-rah-mong),  Mexican
soldier,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  29  Sept.,  1832 ;  d.
in  Queretaro,  19  June,  1867.  He  was  of  French


MIRAM6N


MIRANDA


339


ancestry.  He  entered  the  government  military
academy  in  1846,  and  participated  with  his  class
mates,  in  September,  1847,  in  the  defence  of  Molino
del  Key  and  Chapultepec  against  the  U.  S.  forces.
He  was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner,  but  returned  to
the  academy  after  the  treaty  of  Guadalupe  Hidalgo,
and  completed  his  studies  with  honor.  He  entered
the  army  in  1852,  and  served  in  the  states  of  Mex
ico  and  Jalisco  against  local  insurrections  until
Gen.  Juan  Alvarez  in  1854  declared  in  favor  of
the  plan  of  Ayutla.  Miramon  served  as  captain

in  the  expedition
that  was  sent  to
the  state  of  Guer
rero  in  October  of
that  year,  taking
a  creditable  part
in  the  action  of
Temajalco.  In
July,  1855,  he  was
promoted  colonel,
and  when  Alvarez,
in  October  of  that
year,  became  pres
ident,  Miramon
was  unwilling  to
serve  under  his
formerantagonist,
and,  while  he  was
inarching  as  sec
ond  in  command
against,  the  rebels

of  Zacapoaxtla  in  December,  he  imprisoned  his
chief  and,  joining  the  revolutionary  party,  occupied
Puebla.  A  government  was  organized  there  under
Haro  y  Tamariz  (q.  v.),  but  the  city  was  taken  in
March,  1856,  and  Miramon  was  made  prisoner,
but  he  escaped,  and,  in  October,  with  Gen.  Orihue-
Ja,  pronounced  against  Comonfort,  and  defended
Puebla  a  second  time  during  a  siege  of  forty-three
days.  He  escaped  shortly  before  the  surrender,  and
with  his  followers  began  a  guerilla  warfare,  captur
ing  Toluca  in  January,  1857.  Being  made  prisoner
soon  afterward,  he  escaped  in  September,  joined
the  insurgents  of  the  south,  and  seized  the  town  of
Cuernavaca.  When  Zuloaga  pronounced  against
Comonfort  at  Tacubaya  on  17  Dec.,  and  the  fight
in  the  streets  of  Mexico  began,  Miramon  hastened
thither  and  took  part  against  the  government  till
Comonfort  left  the  capital  on  21  Jan.,  1858.  Zulo
aga,  becoming  president,  promoted  Miramon  briga
dier-general,  and  in  the  ensuing  three  years'  "  war  of
reform  "  the  latter  took  an  active  part  with  the  reac
tionary  or  Church  party.  After  the  death  of  Osol-
lo,  Miramon  became  the  leader  of  the  reactionary
party,  and  defeated  the  Liberal  forces  in  many  en
gagements,  notably  at  Ahualulco  in  September,  and
Atequiza  in  December.  When  the  government  of
Zuloaga  was  overthrown  by  the  "  plan  de  Navidad,"
24  Dec.,  1858,  headed  by  Gen.  Robles  Pezuela,  the
junta  de  notables,  that  "convened  in  January,  1859,
elected  Miramon,  who  had  just  gained  the  victory
of  San  Joaquin,  provisional  president,  and  recalled
him  from  the  interior.  On  his  arrival  in  Mexico  on  21
Jan.  he  disapproved  the  revolution  and  reinstated
Zuloaga,  who  resigned  and  appointed  Miramon  his
substitute,  and  on  2  Feb.  the  latter  took  charge  of  the
executive.  He  first  attempted  to  wrest  Vera  Cruz
from  the  Liberal  government,  and  invested  the  city
on  16  Feb.,  but  he  raised  the  siege  on  29  March,
and,  to  hide  his  failure,  joined  the  forces  of  Leo
nardo  Marquez  (q.  v.)  in  fhe  hour  of  victory  at  Ta
cubaya  on  1 1  April.  But  the  Liberal  government,
by  the  law  of  the  nationalization  of  church  prop
erty,  had  cut  off  the  principal  resources  of  the  Con


servatives,  and,  as  the  Juarist  forces  were  aug
mented,  Miramon  was  forced  to  head  the  cam
paign  against  them  in  person.  With  Gen.  Tomas
Mejia's  forces  he  defeated  Santos  Degollado's
army  at  Estancia  de  las  Vacas  on  13  Nov.,  1859,
and  on  23  Dec.  he  gained  a  victory  over  Gen.
Rocha  at  Tonila.  He  now  decided  to  make  a  final
effort  to  capture  Vera  Cruz,  which  he  surrounded
on  2  March,  1860,  and,  although  two  steamers,
bringing  supplies  for  him  from  Havana,  were  cap
tured  on  2  March  at  Anton  Lizardi  by  the  U.  S.
frigate  •'  Saratoga,"  he  bombarded  the  city  from
15  to  20  March  ;  but  after  a  final  and  unsuccessful
assault  he  raised  the  siege  on  21  March,  and  re
turned  to  the  capital.  He  attacked,  defeated,  and
captured  Gen.  Uruaga,  who  was  besieging  Guadala
jara  on  25  May.  but  suffered  a  defeat  at  Silao  on
10  Aug.,  and  after  Gen.  Marquez's  rout  at  Tolot-
lan  on  10  Nov.  the  capital  was  soon  surrounded  by
Liberal  forces,  and  the  situation  of  the  Conserva
tive  government  became  critical.  Notwithstanding
a  partial  success  at  San  Bartolo  on  1  Dec.,  and  his
surprise  on  8  Dec.  of  the  city  of  Toluca,  -where  he
captured  several  Liberal  officers,  Miramon  was  soon
forced  to  make  a  final  effort  to  break  through  the  lines
of  his  assailants,  and  left  the  capital  with  his  forces
on  20  Dec.,  but  on  the  22d  he  was  totally  defeated
at  Calpulalpam  by  Gonzalez  Ortega.  He  returned
to  Mexico  on  the  23d,  and  after  the  Liberal  general
had  refused  a  capitulation  fled,  and,  reaching  the
coast  in  safety,  sailed  on  a  French  vessel  for  Europe.
In  January,  1862,  when  the  allied  forces  occupied
Vera  Cruz,  he  attempted  to  return,  but  was  not  per
mitted  to  land,  and  went  to  Havana.  After  the
installation  of  the  regency  he  reached  the  capital
from  the  American  frontier  on  28  July.  1863,  to
offer  his  services.  They  were  not  accepted,  and  he
had  to  leave  the  country  again.  Afterward  Maxi
milian  accepted  Miramoirs  offer,  but,  fearing  that
his  popularity  might  embarrass  the  government,
requested  him  to  remain  abroad  to  study  Prussian
military  tactics.  In  November,  1866,  he  returned
with  Marquez  to  Mexico,  and  when  Maximilian
abandoned  his  intention  of  abdicating  he  was  sent
to  the  capital  to  take  command  of  a  division  with
which  he  marched  at  the  close  of  the  year  toward
Zacatecas.  He  was  defeated  by  Escobedo  (q.  v.)  at
San  Jacinto,  1  Feb.,  1867,  and  retired  to  Queretaro,
where  he  was  one  of  the  most  able  aids  of  Maximil
ian  during  the  siege.  He  was  taken  prisoner,  con
demned  to  death,  and  shot  with  Mejia  and  the  em
peror,  the  latter  yielding  to  him  the  place  of  honor.
MIRANDA,  Francisco  (me-ran'-dah),  Vene
zuelan  soldier,  b.  in  Caracas,  9  June,  1756:  d.  in
Cadiz.  Spain,  14  July,  1816.  He  entered  the  Span
ish  military  service  as  a  cadet  at  the  age  of  seven
teen  years,  and,  after  attaining  the  rank  of  captain,
served  in  theL'nited  States  in  1779  and  1781.  He
was  then  sent  to  Cuba,  where  Manuel  Cajigal,  the
captain-general,  became  his  firm  friend,  but,  on
account  of  trading  illegally,  he  was  forced  to  fly
to  Europe,  where  he  travelled  through  England,
Turkey,  Germany,  and  Russia.  He  served  in  the
French  revolution,  and  reached  the  rank  of  major-
general.  In  the  campaign  of  1793  he  was  taken
prisoner  at  Neerwinden,  and  brought  to  trial  for
mismanagement,  but  was  acquitted.  The  name
of  Miranda  is  on  the  "  arc  de  triomphe  "  in  Paris
among  those  of  the  great  captains  that  fought  in
the  revolution.  In  1797  he  was  condemned  by  the
Directory,  and  escaped  to  England,  where  in  1803
he  vainly  endeavored  to  prevail  on  William  Pitt
to  aid  him.  He  then  went  to  the  United  States,
where  he  found  means  to  fit  out  two  vessels  and
about  200  volunteers,  with  whom  he  sailed  for


340


MIRANDA


MITCH EL


Venezuela,  with  the  object  of  securing  the  inde
pendence  of  that  country.  At  Ocuniarc,  25  March.
1800,  he  was  attacked,  and  lost  a  great  number  of  |
his  men,  and  the  captain-general  caused  him  to  be
burned  in  effigy,  offering  $50,000  for  his  head.  Be
tween  4  and  8  Aug.  of  the  same  year  Miranda  took
the  town  of  Coro,  but,  seeing  that  the  people  did
not  take  an  active  part  in  his  favor,  he  left  for
Europe,  where,  with  Simon  Bolivar,  he  sought  aid
for  his  enterprise.  They  returned  together  on  5  [
Dec.,  1810,  to  Caracas,  where  Miranda  organized
the  government  that  had  its  origin  in  the  revo
lution  of  19  April,  became  vice-president  of  con
gress,  and  signed  the  constitution  of  21  Dec.  and
the  act  of  independence  of  5  July,  1811.  He
took  the  command-in-chief  of  the  army,  forced
the  surrender  of  Valencia,  13  Aug..  1811,  and
made  his  triumphant  entry  into  Caracas.  20
April,  1812.  By  the  treachery  of  Pedro  Ponce,  he
lost  the  battle  of  Valencia,  14  May,  1812,  and  re
treated  to  Cabrera,  laying  siege  to  Maracay  and
Victoria,  instead  of  giving  the  necessary  aid  to
Puerto  Cabello.  This  caused  discontent  among
his  companions  of  the  junta.  He  was  finally
forced  to  capitulate  in  Victoria,  25  July,  1812,  and,
accused  of  being  a  traitor,  he  was  taken  prisoner
on  30  July,  by  the  revolutionary  authorities  in
Laguayra.  He  afterward  fell  into  the  hands  of  the
Spanish  authorities,  and  was  sent  in  1813  to  Cadiz,
where  he  died  in  the  dungeons  of  the  Inquisition
with  a  chain  around  his  neck.

MIRANDA,  Pedro  de,  clergyman,  b.  in  Spain
about  1510;  d.  in  Santa  Fe  de  Bogota,  New  Grana-
da,  in  1509.  He  was  elected,  in  1551,  vicar-general
of  the  Dominion  of  New  Granada,  sailed  from  Se-
villo,  accompanied  by  twenty  monks,  and  arrived
in  St.  Martha  in  1552.  After  placing  his  mission
aries  where  they  were  most  needed,  lie  passed  over
to  Cartagena,  whence  he  went  to  Bogota,  with  the
intention  of  visiting  all  the  missions  in  the  colony.
When  his  inspection  was  finished,  he  decided  on
forming  great  central  convents,  with  training-
schools  for  the  Indian  missions.  He  built  the
great  convent  of  San  Rosario  in  Bogota,  which  be
came  the  centre  of  the  Dominican  order  in  New
Granada,  and  proceeded  to  erect  convents  in  other
parts  of  the  province  whenever  a  re-enforcement
of  monks  arrived.  He  also  founded  houses  for  the
instruction  of  missionaries.  Under  his  administra
tion  the  province  of  New  Granada  developed  rap
idly,  and  most  of  the  Indians  were  converted  to
Christianity.  At  his  death  his  order  possessed  four
teen  regular  convents  and  forty  training-schools
for  the  Indian  missions.

MIRANDA-RIBEIRO,  Jos6  Cesario,  Brazil
ian  statesman,  b.  in  Minas  in  1792 ;  d.  in  Rio  Janeiro,
7  May,  1850.  He  received  his  early  education  in
his  native  country,  and  in  1816  entered  the  Univer
sity  of  Coimbra,  Portugal,  where  he  was  graduated
and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1819.  This  same  year
his  province  elected  him  its  representative  to"  the
constituent  assembly  of  Lisbon,  but  the  affairs  of
Brazil  attracted  his  attention,  and  he  returned  in
January,  1822.  He  was  appointed  judge  of  the
district  of  S.  Joao  d'El  Rei,  and  in  1824  of  the  city
of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  and  in  that  year  was  elected
representative  to  the  assembly,  where  by  his  devo
tion  to  the  public  welfare  he  gained  the  confidence
of  all  parties.  He  was  appointed  inspector  of  dia
monds  in  the  city  of  Diamantina  in  1826  and  held
office  until  1828,  when  he  was  called  to  be  councillor
of  state.  In  1831  he  resigned  to  devote  himself
exclusively  to  calming  the  public  excitement  of
that  time,  and  thus  prevented  a  general  revolution
in  1836.  He  was  appointed  president  of  the  prov


ince  of  S.  Paulo,  and  of  Minas  in  1837,  and  in
both  he  gained  reputation  by  his  financial  measures,
which  caused  general  prosperity.  He  was  elected
senator  for  the  province  of  S.  Paulo,  22  Feb.,  1844,
and  in  the  senate  his  advice  was  much  esteemed,
above  all  in  connection  with  education.  In  1839
he  was  an  active  member  of  the  Institute  geo-
graphieo  Brasileiro,  which  is  indebted  to  him  for
many  services,  and  he  also  belonged  to  other  scien
tific  and  literary  societies.

MIRE1L.  Jules  Cesar  (me- ray),  Canadian  poet,
b.  in  Sault  Sainte  Marie  in  1699;  d.  in  Versailles,
France,  in  1703.  He  was  the  son  of  a  well-known
Canadian  officer,  and.  entering  the  army  as  a  lieu
tenant  in  1718.  served  in  the  regiment  d'Auvergne
in  Canada  for  several  years,  afterward  on  the  con
tinent  in  Germany,  and  again  in  Canada  in  1757
as  major  of  the  regiment  of  Mont  calm.  He  gal
lantly  defended  Fort  St.  George,  and  was  wounded
during  the  siege  of  Quebec  in  1759,  and  made  a
prisoner,  but  was  exchanged  in  1700.  Resigning
after  the  conclusion  of  peace,  he  retired  to  Versailles,
where  he  died  a  few  months  later.  He  published
two  volumes  of  poetry,  "  Les  coraplaintes  Indi-
ennes,"  in  which  he  translated  into  French  verses
the  Indian  recitatives  that  are  chanted  at  funerals
and  weddings  (Paris,  1742),  and  "Fleurs'du  Non-
veau  Monde"  (1751).

MISSIESSY,  Edouard  Thomas  Bunnies,
Comte  de  (mis-see-see),  French  naval  officer,  b.  in
Forcalquier,  Provence,  in  October,  1754;  d.  in
Toulon  in  February,  1832.  He  entered  the  navy
in  1709,  became  a  lieutenant  in  1778.  and  served
during  the  whole  of  the  war  of  American  independ
ence.  He  became  rear-admiral  in  1794,  -and  in
1805  was  given  the  command  of  the  squadron  that
assembled  at  Rochefort.  He  was  to  co-operate  in
the  great  expedition  of  Napoleon  against  the
English  fleet,  and  was  ordered  to  sail  for  the  West
Indies  to  await  there  the  arrival  of  Villeneuve.  and
with  him  to  clear  the  Atlantic  of  English  ships.
Missiessy  sailed  on  11  May,  and,  eluding  the  pursuit
of  a  superior  English  fleet,  arrived  on  20  June  off
Fort  de  France.  After  landing  troops  and  taking
supplies  at  Guadeloupe,  he  sailed  for  Dominique,
and  bombarded  Les  Roseaux,  on  which  he  levied  an
enormous  contribution  in  July,  1805.  He  also  took
Nevis,  St.  Christopher,  St.  Lucia,  and  in  Santo  Do
mingo  forced  Dessalines  to  raise  the  siege  of  Cape
Franyais,  but,  not  receiving  any  tidings  of  Ville
neuve,  he  returned  to  France,  thus  causing  the
ruin  of  the  whole  plan.  Napoleon  in  his  "Memo
rial"  has  bitterly  reproached  Missiessy  for  this
breach  of  faith,  although  in  1809  he  promoted  him
to  vice-admiral.  Missiessy  defended  Antwerp  in
1814,  and  in  the  same  year  was  maritime  governor
of  Toulon.  He  wrote  technical  works  on  the  navy,
and  "Ma  justification:  Pourquoi  je  n'ai  pas  at-
tendu  Villeneuve  aux  Antilles"  (Paris,  1828).

M ISSROON,  John  Stoney,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C.,  in  1810;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  23
Oct.,  1805.  He  was  educated  in  Liverpool,  Eng
land,  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  midshipman,  27
June,  1824,  and  became  passed  midshipman,  20
Feb.,  1830,  lieutenant,  31  Dec.,  1833,  commander,
14  Sept.,  1855,  and  commodore,  16  July,  1862.  At
the  time  of  his  death  he  was  ordnance-officer  at
the  Boston  navy-yard,  and  he  had  received  special
commendation  in  the  last  report  of  the  chief  of  the
bureau  of  ordnance.

MITCHEL,  Charles  Burton,  senator,  b.  in  Gal-
latin.  Tenn.,  19  Sept.,  1815 ;  d.  in  Washington,  Ark.,
20  Sept.,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Univer
sity  of  Nashville  in  1833,  and  at  Jefferson  medical
college,  Philadelphia,  in  1836.  Removing  to  Wash-


MITCHEL


MITCH EL


341


ington,  Ark.,  in  1835,  he  there  practised  his  pro
fession  for  more  than  twenty  years.  In  1848  he
was  elected  to  the  legislature,  and  in  1852  appointed
receiver  of  public  money  in  Washington,  which
office  he  held  for  four  years.  He  was  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate  from  Arkansas  for  six  years,  begin
ning  on  4  March.  1861,  and  held  his  seat  until  May,
when  he  went  south,  and  was  expelled  on  11  July,
1801.  Dr.  Mitchel  then  represented  his  state  in
the  Confederate  senate  from  its  first  organization
until  the  time  of  his  death.

MITCHEL,  John.  Irish  patriot,  b.  in  Dungiven,
County  Deny,  Ireland,  3  Nov.,  1815;  d.  in  Cork,  20
March,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Trinity  college,
Dublin,  in  183G.  studied  law,  and  practised  for  sev
eral  years  at  Banbridge.  In  1845  his  "  Life  of
Hugh  O'Neil,  Prince  of  Ulster,"  was  published  in
Dublin,  and  gave  him  great  reputation  as  a  writer
and  nationalist.  He  became  a  contributor  to  the
'•  Irish  Nation.''  and  after  the  death  of  Thomas
Davis  was  its  chief  Writer.  In  1846  he  opposed  the
peace  resolutions  of  the  O'Connells,  and  strongly
advocated  the  absolute  independence  of  Ireland.
He  was  a  Protestant,  and  warned  the  Irish  Catho
lics  from  driving  the  Irish  Protestants  from  the
[tat  riot  cause  by  needless  tests.  Early  in  1848  he
withdrew  from  the  "Nation"  and  founded  the
"  United  Irishman."  as  the  organ  of  the  advanced
Young  Ireland  party.  His  fervid  appeals  in  this
paper  aroused  the  insurrectionary  spirit  of  the  Irish
people,  and.  to  put  him  down,  the  treason-felony
bill  was  passed  by  the  British  parliament.  On  13
May,  1848,  he  was  arrested  under  the  provisions  of
the  new  act,  and  on  26  May  he  was  convicted  and
sentenced  to  fourteen  years'  banishment.  He  was
first  taken  to  Bermuda,  where  he  passed  a  year  of
"  suspense,  agony,  and  meditation."  Thence  he  was
transported  to  Van  Diemen's  Land.  Assisted  by
friends  in  America,  he  escaped  in  the  summer  of
1853,  and  on  12  Oct.  landed  in  San  Francisco,  re
ceiving  there  an  enthusiastic  welcome.  In  a  short
time  he  went  to  New  York,  where  he  published
his  "Jail  Journal,  or  Five  Years  in  British  Pris
ons"  (1854).  In  1855  he  established  -'The  Citi
zen',"  in  which  he  published  his  celebrated  letter  to
Henry  Ward  Beecher  in  defence  of  slavery.  lie
also  had  a  controversy  with  Archbishop  Hughes  on
the  subject  of  the  independence  of  Roman  Catholics
in  political  matters.  These  discussions  lost  Mitch-
el  many  friends  in  the  northern  states,  and  he  was
obliged  to  stop  "  The  Citizen."  He  then  went  to
Knoxville,  Tenn.,  and  in  1857  established  the
"Southern  Citizen,"  which  failed.  During  the
civil  war  he  edited  the  Richmond  "  Enquirer,"  in
which  he  advocated  the  cause  of  the  south  with  en
thusiasm.  After  the  war  he  returned  to  New  York
and  began  to  publish  the  "  Irish  Citizen,"  which,
like  all  his  newspaper  enterprises  in  this  country,
failed  on  account  of  his  sturdy  independence.  In
1874  he  returned  to  Ireland,  but  was  not  molested.
The  same  year  he  was  elected  to  parliament  from
Tipperary,  but  was  declared  ineligible,  and  not  al
lowed  to  take  his  seat.  He  was  again  elected,  but
died  before  any  action  was  taken  in  his  case.  Be
sides  the  books  mentioned  above,  he  published
"  The  Last  Conquest  of  Ireland  (Perhaps) ''  (Dublin,
1861),  '•  History  of  Ireland  from  the  Treaty  of  Lim
erick"  (New  York.  1868);  and  "Life  and  Times  of
Aodh  O'Neill,  Prince  of  Ulster"  (1868);  and  he  ed
ited  the  poems  of  Thomas  Davis  (New  York,  1856)
and  James  C.  Mangan  (1859).  with  biographies.

MITCHEL,  Ormsby  MacKniffht,  astronomer.
b.  in  Morganfield,  Ky.,  28  July,  1809:  d.  in  Beau
fort,  S.  C.,  30  Oct.,  1862.  He"  received  his  early
education  in  Lebanon,  Ohio,  and  when  thirteen


years  old  became  a  clerk  in  a  country  store. In

1825  he  received  an  appointment  to  the  U.  S.  mil

itary  academy,  where  he  was  graduated  four  years

later,  standing  fifteenth  in  the  class  that  includ

ed  Robert  E.  Lee  and  Joseph  E.  Johnston. He

was  made  2d  lieutenant  in  the  artillery,  and  as

signed  to  duty  as

assistant  professor

of  mathematics  at

the  Military  acad

emy until 1832,

after  which  he  was

stationed  at Fort

Marion, St. Au

gustine,  Fla.,  but

resigned in Sep

tember of that

year. Subsequent

ly  he  studied  law

in  Cincinnati  and

was admitted to

the  bar.  meanwhile

also  holding  theap-


.

Little  Miami  rail

road.  He  was  professor  of  mathematics,  philoso
phy,  and  astronomy  in  Cincinnati  college  from
1836  until  1844,  when  he  proposed  the  establishment
of  an  observatory  at  Cincinnati,  and,  after  raising
nearly  all  of  the  funds  through  his  own  exertions,
was  made  its  director.  The  corner-stone  of  the
pier  which  was  to  sustain  the  great  refracting  tele
scope  was  laid  by  John  Quincy  Adams,  with  an
oration,  on  9  Nov.,  1843,  and  the  apparatus  for  the
proper  equipment  of  the  observatory  was  obtained
by  Prof.  Mitchel  during  a  visit  to  Europe  in  1842
for  that  purpose.  This  was  the  first  of  the  larger
observatories  to  be  built  in  the  United  States.

He  invented  in  1848  a  chronograph  for  automati
cally  measuring  and  recording  right  ascensions  by
an  electro-magnetic  mechanism,  similar  to  that
constructed  by  John  Locke  (q.  v.).  In  1849  he  de
vised  an  apparatus  for  the  accurate  measurement
of  large  differences  of  declination,  which,  after  suc
cessful  improvement,  was  in  1854  attached  to  the
equatorial.  During  1854—'9  he  made  nearly  50.000
observations  of  faint  stars.  His  other  work  includ
ed  the  discovery  of  the  duplicity  of  certain  stars,
notably  Antares,  observations  of  nebula?,  solar  spots,
double  stars,  and  comets,  the  determination  of  the
longitude  of  Cincinnati  with  reference  to  Wash
ington  and  St.  Louis,  and  the  invention  of  an  ap
paratus  for  finding  the  personal  equation.  He  was
also  adjutant-general  of  Ohio  in  1847-'8.  and  chief
engineer  of  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  railroad  in
1848-'9  and  1852-3.  In  1859  he  was  called  to  the
charge  of  the  Dudley  observatory  in  Albany,  where
he  remained  until  1861,  retaining  during  the  inter
val  his  connection  with  the  observatory  in  Cincin
nati.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was
made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  from  Ohio,
and  at  first  reported  to  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan,
who  assigned  him  to  the  command  of  Gen.  William
B.  Franklin's  brigade  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,
but  at  the  request  of  the  citizens  of  Cincinnati  he
was  transferred  to  that  city,  where  his  duties  large
ly  consisted  in  fortifying  the  city  and  in  prepara
tion  of  recruits  for  the  field.  He  served  with  the
Army  of  the  Ohio  during  the  campaigns  of  Tennes
see  and  northern  Alabama  in  the  winter  of  1861-'2,
and  occupied  Bowling  Green,  Ky.,  and  Nashville,
Tenn.,  in  February.  1862,  after  which  he  partici
pated  in  the  action  near  Bridgeport.  Ala.,  taking
possession  of  the  railroad  from  Decatur  to  Stephen-


342


MITCHELL


MITCHELL


son,  in  one  of  the  most  famous  raids  of  the  early
history  of  the  civil  war,  and  is  best  known  as  the
"  locomotive  chase."  See  "  Daring  and  Suffering :
a  History  of  the  Andrews  Railroad  Raid  into  Geor
gia  in  1802,"  by  William  Pittenger  (New  York,
1887).  These  services  gained  for  him  the  rank  of
major-general  of  volunteers  on  11  April,  1802;  and
anxious  to  advance  into  the  heart  of  the  south,  he
was  restrained  by  his  superior  officer  until  finally
he  asked  to  be  relieved.  Returning  to  Washing
ton,  he  was  selected  by  the  president  for  the  com
mand  of  an  expedition  to  the  Mississippi ;  but  the
necessary  order  was  refused  by  Gen.  Henry  M.  Hal-
leek,  and  he  remained  inactive  until  September,
when  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  Department
of  the  South,  in  South  Carolina,  at  Hilton  Head,
where  he  was  stricken  with  yellow  fever  and  died.
He  was  popularly  known  in  the  army  as  "Old
Stars."  Prof.  Mitchel  lectured  extensively  during
the  years  1842-'8  in  the  principal  cities  of  the
United  States.  He  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.
from  Harvard  in  1851,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from
Washington  in  1853  and  from  Hamilton  in  1850,
and  was  also  a  member  of  various  scientific  societies,
both  in  the  United  States  and  Europe.  He  pub
lished  a  popular  astronomical  journal,  entitled
"  The  Sidereal  Messenger,"  in  1840-'8,  and  also  a
revised  edition  of  Elijah  II.  Burritt's  "  Geography
of  the  Heavens."  His  own  works  include  "  The
Planetary  and  Stellar  Worlds"  (New  York.  1848);
"  The  Orbs  of  Heaven"  (1851) ;  "A  Concise  Element-
ary  Treatise  of  the  Sun,  Planets,  Satellites,  and
Comets"  (1800);  and  "The  Astronomy  of  the  Bible"
(1803).  See  "Ormsby  Mac-Knight  Mitchel,"  by  his
son,  Frederick  A.  Mitchel  (Boston,  1887).

MITCHELL,  Alexander,  financier,  b.  near  Kl-
lon,  Scotland,  18  Oct.,  1817;  d.  in  New  York  city,  19
April,  1887.  He  was  educated  at  the  parish-schools
of  Aberdeenshire,  and  subsequently  studied  law,
but  after  two  years  entered  a  banking-house  in
Peterhead.  In"l839  he  came  to  the  United  States
and  settled  in  Milwaukee,  under  an  engagement  to
act  as  secretary  of  the  Wisconsin  marine  and  fire
insurance  company,  which  had  just  been  organized
under  the  presidency  of  George  Smith,  and  which,
though  nominally  an  insurance  company,  did  a
large  banking  business.  In  1853  the  company  was
reorganized  under  the  state  law  as  a  bank.  Dur
ing  the  financial  difficulties  of  1801  which  were
caused  by  the  repudiation  of  the  southern  bonds,
Mr.  Mitchell's  judicious  recommendations  resulted
in  saving  many  of  the  western  banks  from  ruin.
In  1801  he  became  the  first  commissioner  of  the
board  of  the  Milwaukee  debt  commission,  which
office  he  held  until  his  death.  That  city's  credit
was  restored  largely  through  his  influence,  and  its
present  high  financial  standing  has  resulted  there
from.  He  became  largely  interested  in  the  devel
opment  of  the  railroad  systems  that  centre  around
Milwaukee,  and  after  the  consolidation  of  the  va
rious  lines  that  form  the  Milwaukee  and  St.  Paul
railway  he  was  made  its  president.  Later,  by  fur
ther  consolidations  and  enlargements,  this  corpora
tion  became  the  Chicago,  Milwaukee  and  St.  Paul
railway  company,  and  it  now  owns  more  miles  of
track  than  any  other  railroad  company  in  the  world.
Mr.  Mitchell  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,
and  served  from  4  March,  1871,  to  3  March,  1875.
He  was  president  of  the  Chicago  and  Northwestern
railway  company  in  1801).  of  the  Western  Union
railroad  company,  and  of  the  Northwestern  national
insurance  company,  and  president,  director,  or  trus
tee  of  many  local  institutions.  Pie  was  the  richest
man  in  the  northwest,  and  his  residence  in  Milwau
kee  was  among  the  finest  in  the  state.


MITCHELL,  David,  soldier,  b.  in  Cumberland
county,  17  July,  1742;  d.  in  Juniata,  Pa.,  25  May,
1818.  He  served  under  Gens.  Henry  Bouquet  and
John  P"orbes  in  the  campaign  against  the  Ohio
Indians  in  1704,  and  altogether  was  engaged  in
twenty-seven  actions  with  the  Indians,  becoming
also  a  friend  of  the  Indian  chief  Logan.  He  fought
throughout  the  entire  Revolutionary  Avar,  serving
as  a  major  in  Col.  John  Watts's  battalion  in  the
battle  of  Long  Island.  He  represented  his  county
in  the  Pennsylvania  legislature  from  1780  till  1805,
and  served  as  a  presidential  elector  in  1813  and  in
1817.  In  May,  1800,  he  was  appointed  brigadier-
general  of  the  militia  of  Cumberland  and  Franklin
counties,  Pennsylvania.

MITCHELL,"  David  Bradie,  lawyer,  b.  in
Scotland,  22  Oct.,  1700;  d.  in  Milledgeville,  Ga.,
22  April,  1837.  He  came  to  Savannah,  Ga.,  in
1783,  to  take  possession  of  property  that  had  been
left  him  by  his  uncle,  David  Bradie,  who  died  from
close  confinement  in  a  prison-ship.  After  studying
law  with  William  Stephens,  he  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  in  1795  elected  solicitor-general  of  Georgia.
In  1790  he  became  a  member  of  the  legislature,  and
in  1804  was  appointed  major-general  of  militia.
Subsequently  he  was  elected  governor  of  the  state,
and  held  that  office  in  1809-' 13  and  again  in
1815-'17.  During  the  war  of  1812  he  was  vigilant
in  protecting  the  state  against  invasion.  On  the
completion  of  his  term  of  office  as  governor  he  was
appointed  U.  S.  agent  to  the  Creek  Indians,  with
whom,  on  22  Jan.,  1818,  he  concluded  a  treaty.
Gov.  Mitchell  was  much  interested  in  the  cause  of
public  education. — His  grandson,  Edward  Coppf'e,
lawyer,  b.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  24  July,  1830;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  25  Jan.,  1887.  He  was  educated
at  Trinity  and  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1855,  after  which  he
studied  law  and  was  admitted  in  1858  to  the  Phil
adelphia  bar.  In  1873  he  was  chosen  professor  of
the  law  of  real  estate,  conveyancing,  and  equity
jurisprudence  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
and  from  1874  until  his  death  he  was  dean  of  its
law  department.  From  1877  he  was  also  a  vice-
provost  of  the  Law  academy  of  Philadelphia.  In
his  knowledge  of  the  law  of  real  estate  he  stood  at
the  head  of  his  profession  in  Pennsylvania.  He
was  a  member  of  the  state  board  of  charities,  and
from  1884  till  1887  of  the  Fairmount  park  com
mission.  In  1870  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  I).
from  Hobart  college.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Sepa
rate  Use  in  Pennsylvania "  (Philadelphia,  1875) ;
"Contracts  for  the  Sale  of  Lands  in  Pennsylvania"
(1877);  and  "The  Equitable  Relation  of  the  Buyer
and  Seller  of  Land  under  Contract  and  before
Conveyance,"  two  lectures  delivered  before  the
Law  academy  (1877).  Also,  he  edited  "  Tudor 's
Leading  Case's  "  (1884).

MITCHELL,  Elisha,  educator,  b.  in  Washing
ton,  Conn.,  19  Aug.,  1793;  d.  on  Black  mountain,
N.  C.,  27  June,  1857.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1813,  and  after  teaching  on  Long  Island  returned
to  Yale  as  a  tutor.  In  1817  he  was  called  to  the
chair  of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in
the  University  of  North  Carolina,  but  first  spent
some  months  in  Andover  theological  seminary,  and
after  being  licensed  to  preach  entered  on  his  work
at  Chapel  Hill  in  January,  1818.  Pie  was  ordained
by  the  presbytery  of  I  lillsborough,  N.  C.,  in  August,
1821,  and  in  1825  was  transferred  to  the  professor
ship  of  chemistry,  mineralogy,  and  geology,  which
he  filled  until  his  death.  During  many  years  he
held  the  office  of  state  surveyor,  and  in  that  ca
pacity  visited  the  principal  mountains  of  that  state.
His  observations  showed  that  the  highest  moun-


MITCHELL


MITCHELL


343


tains  in  the  United  States  east  of  the  Rocky
mountains  are  those  of  North  Carolina.  Black
Dome,  or  Mitchell's  High  peak,  he  found  to  be  the
highest  of  the  group,  and  while  endeavoring  to
ascertain  its  exact  altitude  he  was  overtaken  "by  a

storm,  and  fall
ing  over  a  preci
pice  into  a  pool
wasdrowned.  His
body  was  first
taken  to  Ashe-
ville  for  burial,
but  in  1858,  in
response  to  the
desires  of  the
mountaineers,  it
was  re-entombed
on  the  highest
point  of  the  moun
tain,  and  his  last
resting-place  is
shown  in  the  ac-
companyingillus-
tration.  A  large
number  of  citi
zens  were  pres
ent,  and  Bishop  Otey,  of  Tennessee,  pronounced  the
funeral  oration.  lie  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  the  University  of  Alabama  in  1838,  and  con
tributed  various  articles  to  the  "American  Journal
of  Science."  He  also  published  reports  on  the  geol
ogy  of  Xorth  Carolina  (1826-'7),  and  "Elements  of
Geology,  with  an  Outline  of  the  Geology  of  North
Carolina"  (1842).  The  Elisha  Mitchell  scientific
society  of  the  University  of  North  Carolina  has  re
cently  been  established  at  Chapel  Hill  in  his  honor.
MITCHELL,  Hinckley  Gilbert,  clergyman,  b.
in  Lee,  N.  Y.,  22  Feb..  1846.  He  was  graduated  at
Wesleyan  in  1873  and  at  the  school  of  theology  of
Boston  university  in  1870,  and  afterward  studied
Old  Testament  exegesis  in  the  University  of  Leip-
sic,  where  in  1879  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  I).
On  his  return  he  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Meth
odist  Episcopal  church,  and  in  1879-'80  was  sta
tioned  in  Fayette,  N.  Y.  In  1880  he  returned  to
Wesleyan  university  as  tutor  in  Latin  and  in
structor  in  Hebrew,  and  in  1881  was  called  to  be
instructor  in  Hebrew  and  Old  Testament  exegesis
in  Boston  university,  where  in  1884  he  was  made
professor  of  these  subjects.  Dr.  Mitchell  is  secre
tary  of  the  Society  of  biblical  literature  and  exe
gesis,  whose  "Journal"  he  publishes.  He  is  the
author  of  "  Final  Constructions  of  Biblical  He
brew  "  (Leipsic.  1879) ;  "  Hebrew  Lessons  "  (Boston,
1884) :  and  "  Hebrew  Introduction"  ( Andover,  1884).
MITCHELL,  James  C.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Mecklen
burg  county,  N.  C.,  about  1790";  d.  near  Jackson,
Miss.,  7  Aug.,  1843.  He  removed  to  eastern  Ten
nessee  at  an  early  age,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  attained  note  in  his  profession.  He  served
two  terms  in  congress  in  1825-'9,  and  was  an  un
successful  candidate  for  re-election.  While  in  con
gress  his  eccentric  humor  made  him  popular,  and
he  was  intimate  with  Gen.  Samuel  Houston,  whom
he  resembled  in  personal  appearance.  The  two
were  often  known  as  "  the  couple."  Afterward
Mr.  Mitchell  became  a  circuit  judge  in  Tennessee  ;
but  about  1837  he  removed  to  Hinds  county,  Miss.,
where  he  engaged  in  agriculture  and  took  some
part  in  local  politics.  He  was  the  author  of
"Mitchell's  Justice."

MITCHELL,  James  Tyndale,  jurist,  b.  in
Belleville,  111.,  9  Nov.,  1834.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1855  and  at  the  law  department  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1857,  was  admitted


to  the  bar  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  was  soon  af
terward  chosen  assistant  city  solicitor,  and  held
the  office  three  years.  From '1861  till  1887  he  ed
ited  the  "American  Law  Register."  In  1871  he
was  elected  a  judge  of  the  district  court  of  Phila
delphia,  and  in  1875,  under  the  new  constitution,
he  was  transferred  to  the  bench  of  the  court  of
common  pleas,  which  place  he  still  (1888)  holds,
having  been  re-elected  in  1881  by  the  unanimous
request  of  both  political  parties.  Under  a  resolu
tion  of  the  legislature,  he  was  appointed  by  Gov.
Robert  E.  Pattison  one  of  three  commissioners  to
report  what  acts  of  the  Colonial  assembly  have  not
been  printed,  and  made  a  report  in  1886  which  led
to  the  act  of  1887  authorizing  their  publication
under  the  direction  of  the  commissioners.  He  is
a  vice-provost  of  the  Law  academy  of  Philadelphia
and  president  of  the  council  of  the  Pennsylvania
historical  society.  In  1872  he  received  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  from  Jefferson  medical  college.  He  has
edited  "  Williams  on  Real  Property  "  (Philadelphia,
1872),  and  is  the  author  of  "  A  History  of  the  Dis
trict  Court "  (1875),  and  of  "  Mitchell  on  Motions
and  Rules  "  (1879).

MITCHELL,  John,  physician,  b.  in  England ;
d.  there  in  March,  1768.  He  studied  medicine  and
came  to  this  country  about  1700,  settling  in  Ur-
bana,  near  Richmond,  Va.  Dr.  Mitchell  acquired
considerable  reputation  by  his  researches  in  bot
any,  and  gave  much  valuable  information  on
American  flora  to  Linna?us,  who  bestowed  Mitch
ell's  name  on  the  "  Mitchella  repens."  Among  his
researches  in  this  science  are  "  Dissertatio  brevis
de  Principio  Botanicorum  et  Zoologorum,"  dedi
cated  to  Sir  Hans  Sloane,  and  dated  Virginia,  1738.
and  "  Nova  Plantarum  Genera,"  dedicated  to  Peter
Collinson  (1741).  These  were  afterward  collected
and  published  (Nuremberg,  1769).  Mitchell  was  a
fellow  of  the  Royal  society  and  contributed  to  its
"  Transactions  """  Essay  on  the  Causes  of  Different
Colors  of  People  in  Different  Climates,"  in  which
he  argues  that  influence  of  climates  and  modes  of
life  are  sufficient  to  account  for  differences  of  color
(1744) ;  "  Essay  on  the  Preparations  and  Uses  of
Various  Kinds  of  Potash"  (1748);  and  "Letter
Concerning  the  Force  of  Electrical  Cohesion."
Among  his  manuscript  papers  was  one  on  the
"Yellow  Fever  in  Virginia  in  1737-'42,"  with  cor
respondence  with  Benjamin  Franklin,  which  was
published,  with  additional  papers  on  this  subject,
by  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush  in  the  fourth  volume  of  the
"American  Medical  and  Philosophical  Register"
(1755).  He  is  also  credited  with  the  authorship  of
"  A  Map  of  the  British  and  French  Dominions  in
North  America"  (London,  1755);  "The  Contest  in
America  between  Great  Britain  and  France "
(anonymous,  about  1757);  and  "The  Present  State
of  Great  Britain  and  North  America"  (1767).

MITCHELL,  John  Hippie,  senator,  b.  in  Wash
ington  county,  Pa.,  22  J  une,  1835.  He  was  educated
at  \Vitherspoon  institute,  subsequently  studied  law,
and  soon  after  his  admission  to  the  bar  went  to
California  and  followed  his  profession,  first  in  San
Luis  Obispo  and  then  in  San  Francisco.  In  1860
he  removed  to  Portland,  Oregon,  where  in  1861  he
was  elected  corporation  attorney.  He  was  elected
to  the  state  senate  in  1862  and  served  for  four  years,
becoming  its  presiding  officer  in  1864.  In  1873  he
was  elected  as  a  Republican  to  the  U.  S.  senate,
serving  from  4  March,  1873,  to  3  March,  1879,  and
he  was  afterward  elected  again  for  six  years,  taking
his  seat  on  17  Dec.,  1885.  Senator  Mitchell  has
held  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  Oregon
militia,  and  in  1867-'71  was  professor  of  medical
jurisprudence  in  Willamette  university,  Salem,


344


MITCHELL


Oregon.  His  law  practice  has  included  lucrative
connections  with  western  railroads,  gaining  for
him  a  large  fortune.

MITCHELL,  John  Insclio,  senator,  b.  in  Tio-
ga,  Pa.,  '28  July,  1880.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  and  spent  the  years  1857-'9  in
the  University  of  Lewisburg.  Subsequently  he
taught,  but,  soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war,  .he  joined  the  136th  Pennsylvania  regiment
and  became  captain  of  his  company.  He  then
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  18(54.
He  was  district  attorney  of  Tioga  county  in
1868-71,  and  in  1870  edited  "  The  Tioga  County
Agitator."  During  1872-'6  he  was  a  member  of
the  Pennsylvania  house  of  representatives,  and
served  as  chairman  of  the  judiciary  and  ways
and  means  committees.  lie  was  then  elected  to
congress  as  a  Republican,  and  served,  with  re-
elections,  from  4  March,  1877,  till  4  March,  1881,
when  he  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator,  and  served  un
til  4  March.  1887.

MITCHELL,  John  Kearsley,  physician,  b.  in
Shepherdstown,  Jefferson  c.o.,  Va.,  12  May,  1798  ;  d.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  4  April,  1858.  He  was  edu
cated  at  Ayr  and  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  whither  he

had  been  sent  at  the
age  of  eight,  and  on
his  return  to  this
country  studied  med
icine  under  Dr.  Na
thaniel  Chapman,
and  was  graduated
at  the  medical  de
partment  of  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsyl-
^^^^_  vania  in  1819.  Im-
j  I  ^-i'/i  ^FJP-  paired  health  led  to

his  accepting  the  ap
pointment  of  ship-
surgeon, and  he  made
three  voyages  to
China  and  the  East
Indies,  but  in  1822
he  settled  in  Phila
delphia  as  a  general  practitioner.  In  1824  he
was  called  to  lecture  on  the  institutes  of  medi
cine  and  physiology  at  the,  Philadelphia  medical
institute,  and  in  1826  he  became  professor  of
chemistry  in  that  institution.  He  was  appointed
to  the  chair  of  chemistry  at  the  Franklin  insti
tute  in  1883,  and  for  five  vears  thereafter  deliv
ered  annually  courses  of  lectures  on  chemistry
applied  to  medicine  and  the  arts.  In  1841  he  was
chosen  professor  of  the  theory  and  practice  of
medicine  in  Jefferson  medical  college,  which  chair
he  held  until  his  death.  He  was  visiting  physician
to  the  Pennsylvania  and  City  hospitals,  and  his
services  during  seasons  of  pestilence  were  twice  re
warded  by  municipal  gifts.  Dr.  Mitchell  prepared
numerous  professional  papers  which  appeared  in
medical  journals,  and  he  was  the  author  of  several
popular  lectures  on  scientific  subjects  which  were
published  in  magazines.  He  was  also  the  author
of  "  Saint  Helena."  a  poem  "  by  a  Yankee  "  (1821) ;
"  Indecision,  a  Tale  of  the  Far  West,  and  other
Poems"  (Philadelphia,  1839);  "On  the  Wisdom,
Goodness,  and  Power  of  God  as  illustrated  in  the
Properties  of  Water  "  (1834);  "On  the  Cryptoga-
mous  Origin  of  Malarious  and  Epidemic  Fevers."
which  was  a  theoretical  anticipation  of  the  recent
views  as  to  the  causes  of  many  diseases  (1849) ;
and  "  Five  Essays  on  Various  Chemical  and  Medi
cal  Subjects"  (1858),  issued  posthumously  by  his
son. — His  son,  Silas  Weir,  physician,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  15  Feb.,  1829,  was  educated  at  the


University  of  Pennsylvania,  but  left  during  his
senior  year  on  account  of  illness,  and  was  gradu
ated  at  Jefferson  medical  college  in  1850.  Dr.
Mitchell  has  attained  a  high  reputation  by  his
physiological  researches,  and  early  began  the  pub
lication  of  papers  on  this  subject.  His  first  in
vestigations  were  largely  devoted  to  the  chemical
nature  of  the  venom  of  serpents,  and  he  issued
through  the  Smithsonian  institution  "Researches
on  the  Venom  of  the  Rattlesnake,"  with  an  inves
tigation  of  the  anatomy  and  physiology  of  the  or
gans  concerned  (1860),  and,  with  George  It.  Moor-
house,  "  Researches  on  the  Anatomy  and  Phys
iology  of  Respiration  in  the  Chelonia "  (1863).
During  the  civil  war  he  had  charge  of  the  U.  S.
army  hospital  wards  for  diseases  and  injuries  of
the  nervous  system  at  Turner's  lane  hospital,  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  and  was  associated  at  that  time  in  the
preparation  of  valuable  papers  on  "  Reflex  Pa
ralysis,"  "Gunshot  Wounds  and  other  Injuries  of
Nerves,"  and  "  On  Malingering,  especially  in  re
gard  to  Simulation  of  Diseases  of  the  Nervous  Sys
tem."  Subsequently  he  became  president  of  the
Philadelphia  college  of  physicians.  His  papers
treat  chiefly  of  physiology,  toxicology,  and  ner
vous  diseases,  on  which  subjects  he  is  an  acknowl
edged  authority.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  I),
from  Harvard  in  1886,  and  in  1865  was  elected  to
the  National  academy  of  sciences.  He  also  holds
similar  relations  to  many  other  societies,  includ
ing  the  British  medical  association.  He  has  de
livered  various  orations  and  addresses  before  medi
cal  faculties,  and  the  titles  of  his  papers  exceed
one  hundred  in  number.  Dr.  Mitchell  first  turned
his  attention  to  fiction  during  the  civil  war,  when
he  wrote  "  The  Children's  Hour,"  the  sales  of  which
were  in  aid  of  the  Sanitary  commission  fair  in
Philadelphia,  Subsequently  he  wrote  short  stories
for  the  Children's  hospital,  and  in  1880  published
his  first  novel.  Since  then  he  has  also  produced  ;i
volume  of  verse.  His  works  include  "The  Won
derful  Stories  of  Fuz-bu/  the  Fly,  and  Mother
Grabem  the  Spider"  (Philadelphia,  1867);  "Wear
and  Tear,  or  Hints  for  the  Overworked"  (1871):
"  On  Injuries  of  the  Nerves  and  their  Consequences  "
(1872);  "  Fat  and  Blood,  and  How  to  make  Them  "
(1877) ;  "  Nurse  and  Patient,  and  Croup  Cure "
(1877);  "Diseases  of  the  Nervous  System,  especially
of  Women  "  (1881) ;  "  Ilephzibah  Guinness,'  "  Thee
and  You,"  and  "  A  Draft  on  the  Bank  of  Spam  "  (1
vol.,  1880) ;  "  The  Hill  of  Stones,  and  other  Poems  "
(1882);  "In  War-Time"  (Boston,  1884);  "Roland
Blake"  (1886);  "A  Masque  and  other  Poems"
(1887);  "  Prince  Littleboy  and  other  Tales  out  of
Fairyland"  (Philadelphia,  1888),  and  "  Doctor  and
Patient,  a  Series  of  Essays  "  (Boston,  1888).

MITCHELL,  Jonathan,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hali
fax,  England,  in  1624;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass..  9
July,  1668.  He  came  to  this  country  with  his
parents  in  the  ship  with  Richard  Mather,  reaching
Boston  on  17  Aug.,  1635.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1647,  and  on  24  June,  1649,  preached
at  Hartford,  and  was  invited  to  succeed  Thomas
Hooker.  This  offer  he  declined,  and  after  being
ordained  at  Cambridge  on  21  Aug.,  1650,  succeeded
Thomas  Shepard  as  pastor  of  that  place.  Soon  after
his  settlement,  Henry  Dunster  (q.  v.),  president  of
Harvard  college,  his  old  preceptor,  openly  an
nounced  his  conversion  to  the  doctrines  of  the
Baptists,  and  Mr.  Mitchell  found  it  necessary  to
expose  what  was  regarded  as  the  inconsistency  of
his  action.  This  duty  he  performed  so  delicately
that  he  retained  the  friendship  of  Mr.  Dunster,
although  the  latter  was  obliged  to  resign  his  office.
In  1662  he  was  a  member  of  the  synod  that  met  in


MITCHELL


MITCHELL


345


Boston  to  discuss  and  settle  questions  of  church
membership  and  discipline,  and  its  report  was
written  chiefly  by  him.  The  adoption  by  this
synod  of  the  so-called  half-way  covenant  (see
EDWARDS,  JONATHAN)  was  due  to  him  more  than
to  any  other  man.  He  was  elected  a  fellow  of
Harvard  in  1650,  and  continued  so  until  his  death.
He  published  several  letters  and  sermons,  among
which  were  "  Letter  of  Counsel "  to  his  brother
(1664):  '-An  Election  Sermon  "  (1667) :  "A  Letter
concerning  the  Subjects  of  Baptism''  (1675);  and
'•  A  Discourse  of  the  Glory  to  which  God  hath  called
Believers  by  Jesus  Christ,"  which  was  printed  at
London  after  his  death,  with  the  letter  to  his
brother  affixed  and  reprinted  (Boston,  1722).

MITCHELL.  Marsraret  Julia,  actress,  b.  in
Xew  York  city  in  1832.  She  is  best  known  as
Maggie  Mitchell,  and  has  been  on  the  stage  since
an  early  age,  having  played  child's  parts  in  the  Old
Bowery  theatre.  In  1851  she  made  a  successful
appearance  as  Julia  in  "  The  Soldier's  Daughter,''
at  Burton's  Chambers  street  theatre,  after  which
she  played  in  "  Kathie  O'Shiel,"  "  Satin  in  Paris,''
"  The  Young  Prince,"  "  The  French  Spy."  and  simi
lar  plays.  Her  first  appearance  in  Philadelphia
was  at  the  Chestnut  street  theatre  in  1854,  where
she  played  Constance  in  "  Love's  Chase."  In  June,
1862,  she  introduced  her  best  known  part  of  "Fan-
chon  "  at  the  Olympic  theatre  in  Xew  York  city,
and  she  has  also  appeared  in  "  Mignon,"  "  Pearl
of  Savoy,"  "Little  Barefoot,''  and  "Jane  Eyre."
Since  then  she  has  travelled  extensively  through
the  United  States  as  a  star,  under  the  management
of  Henry  Paddock,  whom  she  married  on  15  Oct.,
1868.  She  has  achieved  great  success  in  plays  that
have  been  specially  adapted  for  her,  and  has  ac
quired  a  fortune.  Her  sisters  MARY  and  EMMA  are
also  actresses  of  some  note.

MITCHELL,  Nahnni,  jurist,  b.  in  East  Bridge-
yrater,  Mass.,  12  Feb.,  1709 ;  d.  there,  1  Aug.,  1853.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1789,  and  after
studying  law  in  Plymouth,  Mass.,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  November,  1792.  He  settled  in  the  prac
tice  of  his  profession  in  his  native  place,  and  was
elected  to  both  houses  of  the  legislature  between
1803  and  1824.  He  was  also  elected  to  congress,
serving  from  17  Oct.,  1803,  till  3  March,  1805,  and
was  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in
1811 -'21,  the  last  two  years  of  which  he  was  chief
justice.  He  was  a  member  of  the  governor's  coun
cil  in  1814-'20.  During  1822-'7  he  was  treasurer
of  Massachusetts,  and  in  1827  chairman  of  the
commission  for  exploring  and  surveying  the  coun-  j
try  from  Boston  and  Albany  for  a  railroad  route.
Judge  Mitchell  was  one  of  the  commission  to  settle
the  boundary  -  lines  between  Massachusetts  and
Rhode  Island,  and  later  for  settling  the  line  be
tween  Massachusetts  and  Connecticut.  He  was
librarian  and  treasurer  of  the  Massachusetts  his
torical  society,  and  long  president  of  the  Bible
society  in  Plymouth  county.  His  love  of  music
began  in  early  life,  and  never  left  him.  He  was
leader  of  the  church  choir  in  his  native  town  and
a  teacher  of  music.  He  was  also  well  known  as  a
composer,  and  much  of  his  work  became  exceed
ingly  popular.  Judge  Mitchell  prepared  a  "  Gram
mar  of  Music,"  and  published  in  the  Boston  "  Eu-
terpeiad"  a  series  of  articles  on  the  "  History  of
Music."  Besides  this,  he  published  two  volumes
of  church  music,  "  The  Brattle  Street  Collection  "
(Boston.  1810)  and  ''The  Bridgewater  Collection  of
Sacred  Music  "  (1812).  More  than  100,000  copies
of  this  were  sold.  His  "History  of  the  Early
Settlement  of  Bridgewater"  (Boston,  1840)  is  a  ,
valuable  contribution  to  the  history  of  New  Eng-  j


land.— His  grandson.  Edward  Ciishinsr,  educator,
b.  in  East  Bridgewater.  Mass.,  20  Sept.,  1829.  He
was  graduated  at  "Waterville  college.  Me.,  in  1849,
and  at  Newton  theological  seminary  in  1853,  or
dained  to  the  Baptist  ministry  in  Calais,  Me.,  in
1854,  and  was  a  pastor  there  for  three  years,  and
subsequently  in  Rockford,  111.,  for  five  years.  In
1862-:9  he  was  professor  of  biblical  interpretation
in  Shurtleff  college.  111.  In  1870  he  accepted  the
professorship  of  Hebrew  in  the  Baptist  theological
seminary  at  Chicago,  where  he  continued  for  eight
years.  He  then  served  for  some  time  as  professor
of  biblical  interpretation  in  Regent's  park  Baptist
college,  London,  England,  and  afterward  became
president  of  the  Baptist  theological  school  of  Paris,
France,  which  post  he  resigned  in  1882.  In  1884-'.>
he  was  president  of  Roger  Williams  university,
Nashville,  Tenn..  and  in  1887  became  president  of
Leland  university.  New  Orleans,  La.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Colby  university  in  1870.
Dr.  Mitchell  delivered  in  1883  the  course  of  lectures-
on  "  Biblical  Science  and  Modern  Discovery  "  be
fore  the  Lowell  institute,  Boston,  and  edited  during
1883-'4  "The  Present  Age."  He  has  published
"  Guide  to  the  Authenticity,  Canon,  and  Text  of
the  New  Testament  "  (Andover,  1881);  "  Les  sources
du  Nouveau  Testament  "  (Paris,  1882) ;  and  "  He
brew  Introduction"  (Andover,  1883);  and  edited
Benjamin  Davies's  Hebrew  lexicon  (1880)  and  his-
edition  of  Gesenius's  Hebrew  grammar  (1881).

MITCHELL,  Peter,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Newcastle,  New  Brunswick,  4  Jan..  1824.  He  re
ceived  a  grammar-school  education,  and  after
studying  law  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1848.
Subsequently  he  turned  his  attention  to  ship
building,  and  was  successful  in  that  pursuit.  In
1856  he  was  elected  from  Northumberland  county
to  the  New  Brunswick  parliament,  and  after  serv
ing  for  five  years  was  appointed  a  life  member  of
the  legislative  council.  He  was  a  member  of  the
executive  of  that  province  from  1858  till  1865,
when  his  government  was  defeated  on  the  question
of  the  confederation  of  the  British  American  prov
inces.  Mr.  Mitchell  was  then  selected  with  Rob
ert  D.  Wilmot  to  form  an  administration  to  test
the  province  on  confederation,  and  was  appoint
ed  president  of  the  executive  committee,  which
office  he  held  until  the  organization  of  the  Domin
ion  government  in  July.  1867.  Mr.  Mitchell  was
an  ardent  advocate  of  the  union,  and  did  much  by
his  writings  and  speeches  in  and  out  of  parliament
to  promote  it.  In  1867  he  was  made  senator,  but
he  resigned  in  1872.  He  held  the  office  of  minis
ter  of  marine  and  fisheries  in  the  cabinet  under
Sir  John  A.  Macdonald  until  5  Nov.,  1873.  He
was  returned  to  the  Canadian  parliament  in  1872T
re-elected  in  1874.  and  chosen  again  in  1882  from
his  native  county  of  Northumberland,  and  took
an  active  part  in  the  settlement  of  the  fisheries-
dispute  between  Canada  and  the  United  States  in
1878.  Mr.  Mitchell  was  three  times  appointed
delegate  to  C'anada  and  England  from  New  Bruns
wick,  with  the  view  of  obtaining  the  construction
of  the  Intercolonial  railway  from  Halifax  to  Que
bec,  and  the  confederation  of  the  provinces.  He
has  been  president  of  the  Mitchell  steamship  com
pany,  and  recently  has  been  active  in  operations
connected  with  the  establishment  of  the  Cana
dian  Pacific  railway.  In  1885  he  bought  the  Mon
treal  "  Herald."  and  he  is  now  president  of  the
"  Herald  "  publishing  company.  He  is  the  author
of  "  A  Review  of  President  Grant's  Recent  Mes
sage  to  the  United  States  Congress  relative  to  the
Canadian  Fisheries,  and  the  Navigation  of  the  St.
Lawrence  River"  (Ottawa,  1870).


346


MITCHELL


MITCHELL,  Robert  B.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Rich-
land  county,  Ohio,  4  April,  1823  ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C.,  20  Jan..  1882.  He  was  educated  at  Washing
ton  college,  Pa.,  and  then  studied  law.  During
the  Mexican  Avar  he  served  in  the  Ohio  volunteers
as  1st  lieutenant,  and  on  its  conclusion  he  resumed
the  practice  of  his  profession.  In  1856  he  moved  to
Kansas,  and  took  an  active  part  with  the  free-state
men  in  their  struggle  with  the  pro-slavery  party.
He  was  a  member  of  the  territorial  legislature  in
1857-'8.  and  treasurer  in  1858-'61.  At  the  begin
ning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  made  colonel  of  the
"2d  Kansas  volunteers,  and  was  severely  wounded
at  the  battle  of  Wilson's  Creek.  On  his  recovery
he  raised  a  regiment  of  cavalry,  and  was  commis
sioned  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  8  April,
1862.  He  was  given  command  of  the  13th  division
of  Gen.  Don  Carlos  Buell's  army,  and  participated
in  the  battle  of  Perryville.  During  18(i5-'7  he  was
governor  of  New  Mexico,  and,  after  completing  his
term  of  office,  settled  in  Washington,  I).  C.,  where
he  remained  until  his  death.

MITCHELL,  Samuel  Augustus,  geographer,
b.  in  Bristol.  Conn..  30  March,  1 792  :  d.  in  Philadel
phia.  Pa.,  20  Dec.,  1868.  He  early  devoted  his  at
tention  to  teaching,  and  attained  reputation  in  that
occupation.  The  imperfection  of  the  common  text
books  on  geography  led  him  to  prepare  better
•works.  For  forty  years  he  resided  in  Philadelphia,
making,  revising,  and  improving  his  various  geog
raphies,  atlases,  and  maps,  until  his  publications
— twenty-four  in  number — had  an  aggregate  sale
of  400,000  copies  annually.  He  also  published
"  General  View  of  the  World,  Physical,  Political,
and  Statistical"  (Philadelphia,  1846),  and  "New
Travellers'  Guide  through  the  United  States "
(1850),  as  well  as  an  edition  of  John  James  Audu-
bon's  "  Birds  of  America."

MITCHELL,  Samuel  Thomas,  educator,  b.  in
Toledo,  Ohio,  24  Sept.,  1851.  He  was  graduated
at  Wilberforce  university,  Xenia,  Ohio,  in  1873,
and  in  1875-'80  taught  in  Springfield,  Ohio.  In
1879  he  became  principal  of  Lincoln  institute,
Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  where  he  remained  until  1884,
and  he  has  since  been  president  of  Wilberforce
university.  Mr.  Mitchell  presided  over  the  Mis
souri  state  teachers'  association  in  Jefferson  City  in
1875.  was  a  member  of  the  general  conference  of
the  African  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1884,
and  founded  the  present  educational  system  in
that  denomination.

MITCHELL,  Stephen  Mix,  jurist,  b.  in
Wethersfield,  Conn.,  9  Dec.,  1743  ;  d.  there.  30
Sept.,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1763,
and,  after  holding  the  office  of  tutor  there  during
1766-'9,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1772.  Settling  in  Wethersfield,  he  there  began
the  practice  of  his  profession,  and  in  1783  was
elected  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress,  and
re-elected  in  1785  and  1787.  He  was  appointed
associate  justice  of  the  Hartford  county  court  in
1779,  and  in  1790-'5  was  presiding  judge.  He  was
then  made  judge  of  the  superior  court,  and  became
its  chief  justice  in  1807.  On  the  death  of  Roger
Sherman  he  was  elected  to  fill  his  seat  in  the  U.  S.
senate,  and  served  from  2  Dec.,  1793,  till  3  March,
1795.  It  was  largely  owing  to  his  efforts  that
<Jonnecticut  was  able  to  establish  her  title  to  the
tract  of  land  in  Ohio  known  as  the  Western  Re
serve,  which  was  subsequently  sold  and  the  pro
ceeds  devoted  to  the  school  fund.  In  1805  he  was
a  presidential  elector,  and  in  1807  Yale  conferred
on  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D. — His  son,  Alfred,
clergyman,  b.  in  Wethersfield,  Conn.,  19  May,
1790;  d.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  19  Dec.,  1831,  was


graduated  at  Yale  in  1809,  studied  theology  under
Rev.  Ebenezer  Porter  and  at  Andover  theological
seminary,  and  preached  for  a  short  time  in  Bridge-
water,  Mass.  He  was  ordained  on  27  Oct.,  1814,  in
Norwich,  Conn.,  where  he  had  been  called  in  charge
of  the  Congregational  church,  and  he  continued
there  until  his  death.  His  publications  include
several  sermons,  mostly  memorial,  and  were  print
ed  in  the  "  Evangelical  Magazine." — Alfred's  son,
Donald  (irant,  author,  b.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  12
April,  1822,  was  fitted  for  college  at  Ellington,
Conn.,  at  the  academy  of  Dr.  John  Hall,  who  fur
nished  some  traits  to  the  portrait,  of  the  hero  of  his
only  novel,  "  Doctor  Johns."  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1841,  and
after  leaving  college
worked  three  years,
for  the  benefit  of  his
health,  on  a  farm  be
longing  to  his  mater
nal  grandfather,  in  the
neighborhood  of  Nor
wich.  He  acquired  at
this  time  that  taste  for
agricultural  pursuits  to
which  he  afterward
gave  pleasant  expres
sion  in  his  "  Edge-
wood  "  books.  He
gained  the  prize  of  a
silver  medal  from  the
New  York  agricultural
society  for  plans  of
farm-buildings,  and  be
came  a  correspondent  of  the  "Albany  Cultivator."
to  which  he  subsequently  contributed  letters  from
abroad.  His  health  continuing  delicate,  he  went  to
Europe  in  1844,  and  spent  two  years  in  England,
the  island  of  Jersey,  and  on  the  continent,  return
ing  to  the  United  States  in  1846  with  the  materials
for  his  first  book,  "  Fresh  Gleanings,  or  a  New
Sheaf  from  the  Old  Field  of  Continental  Europe"
(New  York,  1847).  The  study  of  law  in  New  York
city  proving  too  confining,  he  went  abroad  again  in
1848,  travelled  through  England  and  Switzerland,
and  was  residing  in  Paris  at  the  time  of  that  out
break  of  June,  1848,  which  is  forecast  in  "  The  Bat
tle  Summer"  (New  York,  1849).  Returning  once
more  to  New  York,  he  issued,  first  in  weekly  num
bers  and  afterward  in  a  volume,  "  The  Lorgnette,
or  Studies  of  the  Town,  by  an  Opera-Goer"  (2
vols.,  1850).  This  was  a  series  of  satirical  sketches,
something  after  the  plan  of  Irving's  '•Salma
gundi."  The  same  year  saw  the  publication  of  his
most  popular  book,  "  Reveries  of  a  Bachelor."  the
nucleus  of  which  was  a  paper  entitled  "  A  Bache
lor's  Reverie,"  originally  contributed  to  the  "  Sout  h-
ern  Literary  Messenger."  "Dream  Life"  (1851),
written  in  similar  strain,  succeeded  the  "  Reveries  "
in  1851.  In  both  of  these  the  history  of  a  life  is
told  in  a  series  of  dissolving  views,  and,  as  the  titles
imply,  with  the  haziness  and  remoteness  of  effect
that  is  produced  by  a  dream.  They  were  something
between  the  formal  novel  and  such  studies  of  life
as  Irving's  "  Sketch-Book,"  which  they  resembled
not  a  little  in  their  tender  and  genial  sentiment  and
in  their  chastely  delicate  English.  In  May,  1853,
Mr.  Mitchell  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Venice.
On  the  31st  of  the  same  month  he  married  Mary
F.  Pringle,  of  Charleston,  S.  C.,  and  sailed  at  once
for  Europe.  At  Venice  he  began  collecting  mate
rial  for  a  history  of  the  Venetian  republic,  which
was  never  written,  although  traces  of  his  Venetian
studies  appear  in  his  later  writings,  such  as  "  Titian
and  his  Times,"  a  lecture  before  the  Yale  art-school,


MITCHELL


MITCHELL


347


which  is  included  in  his  late  volume  of  miscel
lanies,  "Bound  Together"  (1884).  In  1855  he
bought  a  farm  of  about  200  acres  near  New  Haven,
Conn.,  which  he  has  since  made  well  known  to  the
public  through  a  series  of  books  on  the  practical
and  aesthetic  aspects  of  rural  life,  which  come  mid
way  between  gossipy  chronicles  like  Willis's  "  Let
ters  from  under  a  Bridge  "  and  more  technical
works,  such  as  Downing's  "  Landscape  Garden
ing."  These  are  "  My  Farm  of  Edgewood  "  (1863) ;
•'  Wet  Days  at  Edgewood  "  (1865) ;  and  "  Rural
Studies,  with  Hints  for  Country  Places"  (1867).
Mr.  Mitchell  has  been  a  member  of  the  council  of
the  Yale  art-school  since  its  establishment  in  1865.
He  edited  the  "Atlantic  Almanac  "  for  1868-'9,  and
"  Hearth  and  Home,"  a  weekly  paper  published  at
New  York,  in  1869.  He  was  one  of  the  judges  of
industrial  art  at  the  Centennial  exhibition  of  1876
and  LT.  S.  commissioner  at  the  Paris  exposition  of
1878.  In  the  latter  year  he  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Yale.  He  has  been  a  contributor  to
the  "Atlantic  Monthly,"  "Harpers'  Magazine,"
and  other  periodicals,  and  has  given  lectures  and
addresses  at  New  Haven  and  elsewhere  on  subjects
connected  with  literature  and  agriculture.  Besides
the  books  mentioned  above  he  has  published  "  The
Seven  Stories  with  Basement  and  Attic,"  a  series
of  tales  of  travel  (1864);  one  novel,  "Dr.  Johns,
being  a  Narrative  of  Certain  Events  in  the  Life  of
a  Congregational  Minister  of  Connecticut"  (New
York,  1866) ;  and  a  juvenile,  "  About  Old  Story-
Tellers  "  (1877).  He  has  also  compiled  from  ma
terial  collected  by  his  brother,  Louis  Mitchell  (b.
1826  ;  d.  1881),  an  elaborate  genealogy  of  his  moth
er's  family,  "  The  Woodbridge  Record "  (New
Haven,  1883) ;  and  "  Daniel  Tyler,  a  Memorial  Vol
ume  "  (1883).  Many  of  his  works  have  been  writ
ten  under  the  pen-name  of  "Ik  Marvel."  Mr.
Mitchell's  skill  in  landscape  gardening  has  been
called  into  play  in  the  city  park  at  East  Rock,
New  Haven,  and  in  the  treatment  of  many  private
estates  and  public  grounds.  He  still  resides  at
Edgewood.  Descriptions  and  views  of  his  farm
are  contained  in  "Pictures  of  Edgewood"  (1869).

MITCHELL,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Chester,
Conn.,  9  Dec.,  1793 ;  d.  in  Corpus  Christi,  Tex.,  1
Aug.,  1867.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1818,
and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1821.  Af
ter  serving  as  home  missionary  and  being  or
dained  on  20  Oct.,  1824,  he  was  pastor  of  churches
in  Newtown,  Conn.,  Rutland,  Vt.,  and  Wallingford,
Yt.  In  1853-'8  he  was  successively  secretary  of
the  Vermont,  New  York,  and  New  Jersey  coloni
zation  societies.  In  1859  he  removed  to  Texas  and
had  charge  of  churches  in  Casa  Blanca  and  Corpus
Christi.  The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him
in  1833  by  Middlebury  college,  of  which  he  was  one
of  the  trustees.  He  contributed  to  periodicals,  and,
besides  pamphlet  discourses,  published  "  A  Doc
trinal  Guide  for  Young  Christians "  (New  York,
1833),  and  "  Coleridge  and  the  Moral  Tendency  of
his  Writings"  (New  Haven). — His  brother,  John,
clergyman,  b.  in  Chester,  Conn.,  29  Dec.,  1794;
d.  in  Stratford,  Conn.,  28  April.  1870.  was  gradu
ated  at  Yale  in  1821,  and  studied  for  a  year  at
Andover  theological  seminary.  lie  was  licensed
to  preach  in  1829.  and  in  1830  ordained  pastor  of
the  1st  Congregational  church  in  Fair  Haven,
Conn.,  where  he  remained  for  six  years.  He  was
invited  to  the  charge  of  the  Edwards  church  in
Northampton,  Mass.,  in  1838,  but  resigned  in  1842
on  account  of  failing  health.  After  travelling
abroad  he  settled  in  Stratford,  and,  unable  to  re
sume  the  cares  of  pastoral  work,  devoted  himself
to  literary  pursuits,  and  in  his  later  years  was  a


member  of  the  Connecticut  legislature.  During
1823-"8  he  edited  the  "  Christian  Spectator,"  and,
besides  sermons  and  contributions  to  newspapers
and  periodicals,  he  published  "  A  Guide  to  the
Principles  and  Practices  of  the  Congregational
Churches  of  New  England  "  (Northampton,  Mass.,
1838) ;  "  Letters  to  a  Disbeliever  in  Revivals "
(1841) ;  "  Notes  from  over  the  Sea,  consisting  of
Observations  made  in  Europe  in  1843-'4  "  (2  vols..
New  York,  1845) ;  "  Reminiscences  of  Scenes  and
Characters  in  College  "(New  Haven,  1847);  "My
Mother,  or  Recollections  of  Maternal  Influence"
(New  York,  1849) :  and  "  Rachel  Kell,  or  the  Dis
owned  "  (1853).  See  "  Derwenl,  or  Recollections  of
Young  Life  in  the  Country  "  (New  York,  1872).

MITCHELL,  William,  astronomer,  b.  in  Nan-
tucket,  Mass.,  20  Dec.,  1791;  d.  in  Poughkeepsie,
N.  Y.,  19  April,  1868.  He  was  fitted  for  college,
and  it  was  intended  to  send  him  to  Harvard,  but
the  war  of  1812  prevented.  Subsequently  he
taught  for  several  years  and  developed  a  fondness
for  astronomy,  having  only  a  rude  telescope  made
by  a  clock-maker.  He  then  became  cashier  of  the
Pacific  bank  in  Nantucket,  and,  with  a  much  bet
ter  equipped  observatory,  made  systematic  deter
minations  in  connection  with  the  U.  S.  coast  sur
vey.  Investigations  in  astronomy  and  mathematics
were  the  pastimes  of  his  busy  life,  and  were  con
tinued  until  his  death.  Mr.  Mitchell  received  the
degree  of  A.  M.  from  Brown  in  1848,  and  from
Harvard  in  1860,  being  also  overseer  of  the  latter
university  for  some  years,  serving  as  chairman  of
the  committee  to  visit  the  observatory  in  Cam
bridge.  He  was  a  member  of  scientific  societies,
and  contributed  astronomical  articles  to  the
"  American  Journal  of  Science  "  and  other  similar
periodicals. — His  daughter,  Maria,  astronomer,  b.
in  Nantucket,  Mass.,  1  Aug.,  1818,  early  made  such
progress  in  mathematical  and  astronomical  studies
as  to  be  able  to  assist  her  father  in  his  investiga
tions,  meanwhile  acquiring  her  education  under
his  tuition.  Later  she  studied  under  Charles
Peirce,  becoming
his  assistant  in  the
school  at  Nantuck
et.  She  was  ap
pointed  librarian
of  the  Nantucket
at.hemrum,  an  office
which  she  held  for
many  years,  and
since  she  was  sev
enteen  years  old
she  has  regularly
earned  a  salary.
Her  interest  in  as
tronomy  was  not
relaxed,  and  she
made  many  care
ful  observations  by
herself,  and  devoted  considerable  time  to  the  ex
amination  of  nebula?  and  the  search  for  comets.
Her  efforts  proved  successful,  and,  besides  find
ing  small  nebulae,  on  1  Oct.,  1847,  she  discov
ered  a  comet,  for  which  she  received  a  gold  medal
from  the  king  of  Denmark,  and  also  a  copper
medal  struck  by  the  republic  of  San  Marino,
Italy.  When  the  publication  of  the  American  nau
tical  almanac  was  begun  she  was  employed'  on
that  work,  which  she  continued  until  after  her  ap
pointment  at  Vassar.  She  went  to  Europe  in  1858
and  visited  the  principal  observatories  of  Great
Britain  and  the  continent.  Miss  Mitchell  was  the
guest  of  Sir  John  Herschel  and  Sir  George  B.  Air)r
during  her  stay  in  England,  and  also  visited  Le


348


MITCHELL


MITCH  ILL


Vcrrier  in  Paris  and  Ilumboldt  in  Berlin.  After
her  return  from  Europe  she  was  presented  with  a
telescope,  much  larger  than  any  owned  by  her
father,  by  the  women  of  America,  through  the  ex
ertions  oi  Miss  Elizabeth  Peabody,  of  Boston.  In
1805  she  was  called  to  the  professorship  of  astron
omy  at  Vassar  college,  which,  with  the  post  of  di
rector  of  the  observatory,  she  retained  until  Janu
ary,  1888,  when  she  offered  her  resignation,  but  the
trustees  refused  to  take  any  definite  action,  grant
ing  her,  however,  a  leave  of  absence.  In  addition
to  her  teaching  she  has  in  recent  years  specially
studied  the  sun-spots  and  the  satellites  of  Jupiter
and  Saturn.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred
on  her  by  Hanover  in  1852  and  by  Columbia  in
1887.  She  is  a  member  of  various  scientific  socie
ties,  having  been  elected  a  member  of  the  Ameri
can  association  for  the  advancement  of  science  in
1850,  and  a  fellow  of  that  organization  in  1874.
Miss  Mitchell  was  the  first  woman  to  be  elected
to  the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  and
she  has  been  prominent  in  the  movement  tend
ing  to  elevate  woman's  work,  having  held  the
presidency  of  the  American  association  for  the  ad
vancement  of  women  at  the  Syracuse  meeting  in
1875  and  at  the  Philadelphia  meeting  in  1876.
Her  published  writings  have  been  restricted  to
scientific  papers. — William's  son,  Henry,  hydrog-
rapher,  b.  in  Nantucket,  Mass.,  1(5  Sept.,  18:30,
was  educated  at  private  schools,  and  turned  his
attention  to  physical  hydrology  as  relating  to
rivers  and  harbors  and  their  regimen  and  control
under  the  action  of  tide-water  and  river  cur
rents.  His  earliest  work  was  performed  under
the  auspices  of  the  U.  S.  coast  survey,  near  the
islands  of  Nantucket  and  Martha's  Vineyard.
Subsequently  he  made  the  waters  of  the  vicinity  of
New  York  the  subject  of  his  investigations,  serving
as  assistant  to  the  commissioners  on  harbor  en
croachments  in  1859,  and  while  thus  employed  first
discovered  the  underflow  of  the  Hudson,  which  has
been  since  shown  by  him  to  be  a  restitution  of  equi
librium  between  river  and  sea  waters  of  different
densities,  that  changes  with  the  seasons.  In
1800-7  he  served  as  consulting  engineer  to  the
U.  S.  commission  on  Boston  harbor,  and  later  he
became  a  member  of  the  commission  itself.  He
was  called  in  as  consulting  expert  by  the  National
academy  sent  to  investigate  the  causes  of  the  de
cline  of  Greytown  harbor,  Nicaragua,  in  18(57,
and  the  report  contained  a  theory  of  the  case
that  has  since  been  confirmed  by  his  later  observa
tions  at  Greytown.  Mr.  Mitchell  has  held  gov
ernment  commissions  to  examine  the  principal  har
bors  along  the  Atlantic  coast,  including  Portland,
Me.,  Providence,  It.  I.,  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth,
Va.,  and  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  many  of  which  he  has
been  called  to  report  on  several  times.  In  1874  he
was  appointed  to  represent  the  U.  S.  coast  survey
in  the  board  of  engineers  for  the  improvement  of
the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  and  was  subsequent
ly  a  member  of  the  James  B.  Eads  advisory  board
and  of  the  Mississippi  river  commission.  He  was
invited  to  take  part  in  the  Agassiz  summer-school,
and  has  also  held  the  chair  of  physical  hydrogra
phy  in  the  Massachusetts  institute  of  technology.
He  visited  the  Suez  canal  in  1879,  and  inspected  it
under  the  authority  of  Ferdinand  de  Lesseps,
publishing  a  report  in  the  "  North  American  Re
view."  Mr.  Mitchell  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.
from  Harvard  in  1807,  is  a  member  of  the  American
society  of  civil  engineers,  and  was  chosen  to  the
National  academy  of  sciences  in  1885.  His  scien
tific  papers  have  been  published  principally  in  the
U.  S.  coast  survey  reports.  Among  the  most  im-


!  portant  are  "  Reclamation  of  Tide-Lands  and  its

!  Relation  to  Navigation  "  (1809) ;  •'  On  an  Inspec-

j  tion  of  the  Terminal  Points  of  the  proposed  Canal

through Nicaragua  and  the  Isthmus  of  Darien  "

(1874) ;  "  Notes  concerning  Alleged  Changes  in  the

Relative Elevations of Land and Sea" (1877);

"  Physical  Hydrography  of the  Gulf  of Maine ''

(1879):  "The  Estuary  of  the Delaware"  (1888);

and  "  On  the  Circulation  of  the  Sea  through  New

York  Harbor"  (1880).

MITCHELL,  William,  theatre-manager,  b.  in
Billquay,  Durham,  England,  in  1798:  d.  in  New
York  city,  12  May.  1850.  He  appeared  first  in  New-
castle-upon-Tyne  in  a  small  part  in  '•  The  Recruit
ing  Officer,"  and  afterward  acted  at  other  English
provincial  theatres.  In  1831  he  was  engaged  in
London  at  the  Strand  theatre,  making  his  debut  in
"  Professionals  Puzzled,"  and  later  he  became  stage-
manager  of  the  Coburg  theatre.  In  1830  Mitchell
came  to  this  country  under  an  engagement  with  the
lessees  of  the  old  National  theatre  in  New  York
city,  where,  on  29  Aug.,  he  made  his  dfbut  as  Jem
Baggs  in  "  The  Wandering  Minstrel,"  and  even
tually,  under  James  W.  Wallack's  direction,  became
stage-manager.  After  the  destruction  of  that  play
house  by  fire  he  assumed  control  of  the  Olympic
theatre; 'which  he  conducted  from  1839  until  1850.
This  house  was  frequented  by  the  wits  anil  men-
about-town,  and  became  popular  for  the  perform
ance  of  operas  in  miniature,  farces,  and  burlesques,
in  which  the  manager  usually  performed  the  lead
ing  parts.  Mitchell  retired  from  its  control  with
only  small  gains.  Stricken  by  disease,  he  lingered
several  years  in  reduced  circumstances.  As  a  co
median  he  was  painstaking  and  industrious,  and
had  an  artist's  conception  of  the  characters  he  rep
resented.  The  drawbacks  to  his  becoming  distin
guished  in  the  regular  line  of  comedy  were  im
mobility  of  features  and  inflexibility  of  utterance.
One  of  his  most  amusing  personifications  was  that
of  Manager  Crummies  in  a  dramatization  from
Dickens's  "  Nicholas  Nickleby."

MITCHILL,  Samuel  Latham,  scientist,  1:.  in
North  Hempstead,  L.  I.,  20  Aug.,  1704;  d.  in  New
York  city,  7  Sept.,  1831.  lie  studied  medicine
underhis  maternal  un
cle,  Samuel  Latham,
in  his  native  town  and
with  Samuel  Bard  in
New  York  city,  and
was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Edin
burgh  in  1780.  On  his
return  to  New  York  lie
devoted  part  of  his
time  to  the  study  of
law  under  Robert
Yates,  and  was  ap
pointed  in  1788  one
of  the  commissioners
to  treat  with  the  Iro-
quois  Indians  for  the
purchase  of  their  land
in  western  New  York,
being  present  at  the  council  held  at  Fort  Stan-
wix.  In  1790  he  was  elected  to  the  New  York  legis
lature.  In  1792  he  was  appointed  professor  of  nat
ural  history,  chemistry,  and  agriculture,  and  oth
er  arts  depending  thereon  in  Columbia,  and  while
holding  this  chair  he  introduced  the  chemical
nomenclature  of  Lavoisier,  but  with  a  dissent
from  some  of  the  principles  of  that  chemist.  This
action  led  to  a  controversy  with  Joseph  Priestley,
which  was  conducted  with  such  courtesy  that  it
ended  in  the  warm  personal  friendship  of  the  two.


MITRE


349


During  the  winter  of  1793-'4  he  was  associated
with  Chancellor  Robert  R.  Livingston  and  Simeon
I)e  Witt  in  the  establishment  of  the  Society  for
the  promotion  of  agriculture,  manufactures,  and
useful  arts.  Under  its  auspices  he  made  a  minera-
logical  survey  of  the  state  of  New  York,  and  his
report  in  1796  gained  for  him  a  wide  reputation  in
Europe  as  well  as  in  the  United  States.  In  1797
he  was  again  sent  to  the  legislature  from  New
York  city,  and  there  advocated,  in  the  face  of  much
ridicule  and  opposition,  the  act  of  1798  that  con
ferred  on  Robert  R.  Livingston  and  Robert  Fulton
the  exclusive  right  to  navigate  the  waters  of  New
York  by  steam.  Subsequently,  in  1807,  he  was  a
passenger  on  the  first  passage  made  in  the  "  Cler-
mont "  by  Robert  Fulton  (q.  i:).  He  retired  from
his  professorship  at  Columbia  in  1801,  having  been
elected  as  a  Democrat  to  congress,  and  served  from
1  Dec.,  1801,  till  22  Nov.,  1804.  Prof.  Mitchill
was  then  appointed  to  fill  the  vacancy  in  the  U.  S.
senate  from  Xew  York  caused  by  the  resignation
of  John  Armstrong,  and  held  that  place  until  3
March,  1809,  after  which  he  again  served  in  con
gress  till  3  March,  1813.  In  1807,  on  the  organi
zation  of  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in
Xew  York  city,  he  was  appointed  its  first  professor
of  chemistry.  This  chair  he  declined,  owing  to
his  political  duties,  but  in  1808  he  accepted  that  of
natural  history,  which  he  retained  until  1820,  when,
on  the  reorganization  of  the  college,  he  became
professor  of  materia  medica  and  botany.  This  he
held  until  1826,  when  the  entire  faculty  resigned
in  a  body,  and  Prof.  Mitchill  was  vice-president  of
the  medical  department  of  Queen's  (now  Rutgers)
college  during  1826-'30.  He  was  for  twenty  years
a  physician  of  the  Xew  York  hospital,  and  in  1818
became  surgeon-general  of  the  militia  under  Gov.
De  Witt  Clinton.  Dr.  Mitchill  was  president  of
the  County  medical  society  in  1807,  and  in  1817
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Lyceum  of  natural
history  of  the  city  of  Xew  York,  becoming  its  first
president,  and  holding  that  place  until  1823.  He
was  also  a  member  of  learned  societies  at  home
and  abroad.  His  public  addresses  were  frequent
and  numerous.  The  most  important  of  his  dis
courses  was  that  on  the  celebration  of  the  comple
tion  of  the  Erie  canal  in  1825.  In  1797  he  began  the
publication  of  the  quarterly  "  Xew  York  Medical
Repository,"  in  connection  with  Dr.  Edward  Miller
and  Dr.  Elihu  H.  Smith,  and  he  was  its  chief  edi
tor  for  more  than  sixteen  years.  His  writings  were
numerous.  Those  on  science,  especially,  were  very
valuable,  owing  to  their  presentation  of  facts  then
neglected  in  the  United  States,  and  his  researches
on  fishes  received  the  approbation  of  Cuvier.  The
latter,  as  well  as  most  of  his  papers  on  natural
history,  were  published  through  the  "Annals  of
the  Lyceum  of  Xatural  History."  His  ''Address
to  the  Fredes  or  People  of  the  United  States  "  (Xew
•  York,  1804),  in  which  he  proposed  the  name  of
Fredonia  as  a  new  and  more  appropriate  name  for
the  United  States,  became  the  subject  of  serious
debate  before  the  Xew  York  historical  society  and
elsewhere.  The  universality  of  his  knowledge  has
been  ably  described  by  Dr.  John  W.  Francis,  who
says :  "  Ancient  and  modern  languages  were  un
locked  to  him,  and  a  wide  range  of  physical  science
the  pabulum  of  his  intellectual  repast.  Pie  was
now  engaged  with  the  anatomy  of  the  egg,  and
now  deciphering  a  Babylonian  brick  ;  now  involved
in  the  nature  of  meteoric  stones ;  now  in  the  dif
ferent  species  of  brassica ;  now  in  the  evaporiza-
tion  of  fresh  water ;  now  in  that  of  salt ;  now
scrutinizing  the  geology  of  Xiagara :  now  anato
mizing  the  tortoise;  now  offering  suggestions  to


[  Garnet,  of  Xew  Jersey,  the  correspondent  of  Mark
I  Akenside,  on  the  angle  of  the  windmill ;  and  now
:  concurring  with  Michaux  on  the  beauty  of  the
j  black  walnut  as  ornamental  for  parlor  furniture ;
j  now  with  his  conchological  friend.  Samuel  Akerly,
|  in  the  investigation  of  bivalves ;  and  now  with  the
learned  Jewish  rabbi,  Gershom  Seixas,  in  exegeti-
cal  disquisitions  on  Kennicott's  Hebrew  Bible.
Xow  he  might  be  waited  upon  by  the  indigent
philosopher,  Christopher  Colles,  to  countenance
his  measures  for  the  introduction  of  the  Bronx
river  into  the  city ;  and  now  a  committee  of  soap
boilers  might  seek  after  him  to  defend  the  in
noxious  influence  of  their  vocation  in  a  crowded
population.  For  his  services  in  this  cause  of  the
chandlers,  Chancellor  Livingston  assured  him,
doubtless  facetiously,  by  letter,  that  he  deserved  a
monument  of  hard  soap  ;  while  Mitchill.  in  return,
complimented  Livingston  for  his  introduction  of
the  merino  sheep,  as  chief  of  the  Argonauts.  In
the  morning  he  might  be  found  composing  songs
for  the  nursery ;  at  noon  dietetically  experiment
ing  and  writing  on  fishes,  or  unfolding  to  admira
tion  a  new  theory  on  terrene  formations ;  and  at
evening  addressing  his  fair  readers  on  the  health
ful  influence  of  the  alkalies  and  the  depurative
virtues  of  whitewashing."  Drake  made  Mitchill
the  subject  of  a  poem.  "To  the  Surgeon-General
of  the  State  of  Xew  York,"  while  Halleck  intro
duced  him  in  another  of  "  The  Croakers,"  also  in
"  Fanny  "  :  and  elsewhere  referred  to  him  in  prose
"  as  not  only  distinguished  in  his  profession,  but
as  an  author  of  popular  works  connected  with
medicine  and  science,  and  also  as  an  active  and  use
ful  leader  in  the  social,  literary,  and  scientific  insti
tutions  of  the  city.  Dr.  Mitchill.  moreover,  had
won  the  name  of  a  philosopher  by  his  frequent
discoveries,  more  or  less  important,  in  geology  and
other  conjectural  sciences."  Mitchill  was  called  the
"  Xestor  of  American  science."  See  "  Some  of  the
Memorable  Events  and  Occurrences  in  the  Life  of
Samuel  L.  Mitchill,  of  Xew  York,  from  the  Year
1786  to  1827,"  by  himself  and  Dr.  Francis,  contained
in  Gross's  "  American  Medical  Biography."

MITRE,  Bartoloni6  (mee'-tray),  Argentine
statesman,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayres,  26  June,  1821.
About  1836  he  was  persecuted  by  the  dictator.
Juan  Manuel  de  Rosas,  on  account  of  some  patri
otic  poems,  and  emigrated  to  Montevideo,  where  as
captain  he  participated  in  the  defence  of  the  city
during  the  first  siege  of  1838.  He  took  part  in
conducting  the  journals  "  El  Comercio."  "  El  Ini-
ciador."  and  "  El  Xacional,"  was  chief  editor  of
'•  La  Xueva  Era,"  and  published  in  those  papers
his  first  poetical  compositions.  During  the  second
siege  he  served  again  as  lieutenant-colonel ;  but
after  the  revolution  of  1846  he  emigrated  to  Bo
livia,  where  he  was  made  chief  of  staff  of  Gen.
Adolfo  Ballivian,  and  served  in  the  battles  of  La-
lava  and  Behistre  as  commander  of  the  artillery.
He  defended  Ballivian's  government  in  '•  La
Epoca."  and  was  director  of  the  military  college  ;
but  after  Ballivian's  downfall  in  1847,  as  Mitre
had  refused  to  join  the  revolution,  he  was  sent
over  the  frontier  to  Peru,  whence  he  went  to  Chili.
Then  he  became  editor  of  "  El  Mercuric,"  of  Val
paraiso,  in  1849.  and  was  also  assistant  editor  of
"  El  Progreso  "  in  Santiago,  but,  on  account  of  his
opposition  to  the  government,  he  was  banished  and
went  to  Peru  in  1851.  He  soon  returned  to  Chili,
and.  when  he  heard  of  the  rising  in  the  Argentine
Republic  against  Rosas,  he  joined  the  revolution
ary  forces  of  the  interior  provinces  under  Urquiza,
and  commanded  the  artillery  in  the  decisive  battle
!  of  Monte  Caseros,  2  Feb.,  1852.  After  the  flight


350


MOAK


MODJESKA


of  Rosas,  Mitre  was  elected  deputy  to  the  legisla
tive  assembly  of  Buenos  Ayres,  where  he  attacked
energetically  the  vote  of  the  governor,  Dr.  Lopez,
in  favor  of  the  presidency  of  Urquiza,  and,  not
withstanding  the  persecution  of  the  authorities,
continued  his  violent  opposition  in  the  columns  of
"  Los  Debates  "  till  Dr.  Lopez  resigned,  on  23  June,
1852.  Urquiza  now  declared  himself  dictator  ;  but
Buenos  Ayres.  instigated  by  Mitre,  who  had  been
elected  general  in  command  of  the  militia,  refused
to  sanction  his  government,  and  on  11  Sept.  de
clared  its  independence  of  the  other  provinces.
Valentin  Alsina  was  elected  governor,  and  ap
pointed  Mitre  minister  of  the  interior  and  foreign
relations.  He  then  founded  the  journal  "  La  Na-
cion,"  of  which  he  is  still  (1888)  the  editor,  and  as
commander  of  the  militia  continued  to  prepare  for
a  possible  conflict  with  the  rest  of  the  confedera
tion.  When  this  took  place,  in  1850,  he  was  ap
pointed  commander-in-chief  of  the  forces  of  Bue
nos  Ayres,  but  was  defeated  by  Urquiza  at  Cepeda
on  23'  Oct.  In  consequence  "Alsina  resigned  and
Buenos  Ayres  was  forced  to  re-enter  the  confeder
acy.  Mitre  was  elected  governor,  and  when  in
1861  Urquiza  marched  against  Buenos  Ayres,  Mi
tre  met  and  totally  defeated  him  at  Pa  von  on  17
Sept.  President  Derqui  fled,  and  Mitre  was  chosen
provisional  president  of  the  confederation.  In  the
elections  of  18(52  he  was  proclaimed  constitutional
president  for  the  term  of  six  years,  and  during  his
administration  the  public  welfare  made  rapid
progress  and  railroads,  telegraphic  lines,  and  pub
lic  schools  were  established.  The  Argentine  Re
public  joined  the  triple  alliance  in  18G5,  and  Mitre
marched  against  Paraguay  at  the  head  of  the  Ar
gentine  contingent,  leaving  Vice-President  Marcos
Paz  in  charge  of  the  executive.  He  was  com
mander-in-chief  of  the  allied  forces,  and  served  in
the  Paraguayan  war  till  1870.  On  12  Oct.,  1868,
he  delivered  the  executive  to  the  new  president,
Sarmiento,  and  after  the  war  he  resumed  the  di
rection  of  "  La  Xacion.''  In  1873  he  was  appointed
minister  to  Brazil  and  Paraguay.  In  1874  he  was
again  a  candidate  for  the  presidency,  and,  being
unsuccessful  in  the  election,  headed  a  revolution,
but  was  defeated  at  La  Verde  and  Santa  Rosa  and
left  the  country.  In  1875  he  was  included  in  an
amnesty  and  returned  to  Buenos  Ayres,  where  he
continues  as  editor  of  "  La  Nacion."  A  collection
of  his  poems  appeared  under  the  title  "  Rimas  y
Poesias "  (Buenos  Ayres,  1879),  and  he  has  also
written  "La  vida  de  Belgrano"  (1880);  "  Compro-
bacion  historica  acerca  de  algunos  puntos  de  His-
toria  Argentina  segun  nuevos  documentos  "  (1882) ;
and  "  La  vida  de  San  Martin  "  (1884).

MOAK,  Nathaniel  Cleveland,  author,  b.  in
Sharon,  N.  Y.,  3  Oct.,  1833.  He  was  educated  in
the  public  schools  and  academies  of  Cherry  Valley
and  Cooperstown,  N.  Y.,  studied  law,  and  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar,  and  in  1872-'4  was  district  at
torney  for  Albany  county,  N.  Y.  lie  has  published
"  Clarke's  Chancery  Reports,"  with  notes  (Alba
ny,  1869) ;  "  Moak's  English  Reports  "  (35  vols.,
1872-'84);  "Moak's  English  Digest"  (2  vols.,
1872) ;  "  Moak's  edition  of  Van  Santvoord's  Plead
ings"  (18J3);  and  legal  articles  in  periodicals.

MOClS'O,  Jose  (mo-theen'-yo),  Mexican  natural
ist,  b.  in  Temascaltepec  about  1760 ;  d.  in  Barce
lona,  Spain,  12  June,  1819.  He  studied  in  the
Seminary  Tridentino  of  Mexico,  devoting  himself
especially  to  physics,  mathematics,  botany,  and
chemistry.  In  1791  he  accompanied  Sesse  on  a
scientific  expedition  to  California  and  Xootka,  and
from  1795  till  1804,  by  order  of  Charles  IV..  they
raade  several  journeys  to  examine  the  natural  pro


ductions  of  Mexico.  They  travelled  more  than
3,000  leagues  and  formed  a  valuable  collection,  in
cluding  a  considerable  herbarium  and  a  great  num
ber  of  sketches,  which  they  carried  to  Spain.  Af
ter  the  death  of  Sesse,  on  'account  of  the  political
disturbances,  Mocino  was  obliged  to  take  refuge
in  Montpellier.  There  he  met  Decandolle,  direc
tor  of  the  botanical  garden,  showed  him  his  collec
tion  of  manuscripts  for  a  "  Flora  Mexicana,"  and
intrusted  them  to  him,  fearing  that  he  himself
would  never  return  to  his  own  country.  After
ward  he  returned  to  Spain,  and  in  April,  1817,
asked  Decandolle,  then  in  Geneva,  to  return  his
collection,  which  was  copied  by  the  latter.  Mo-
cino's  manuscript  is  in  the  botanical  garden  of
Madrid,  as  well  as  a  "  Flora  de  Guatemala."  He
also  wrote  "  Descripcion  del  Volcan  Jorullo  en  ver
sos  latinos"  (Mexico,  1801),  and  "  Observaciones
sobre  la  resina  del  hule,"  published  in  the  "  Anales
de  Ciencias  Naturales  "  (Madrid,  1804).

MODJESKA,  Helena  (mod-yes'-ka),  actress,  b.
in  Cracow,  Poland,  12  Oct.,  1844.*  She  is  the  daugh
ter  of  Michael  Opido,  a  man  of  fine  musical  culture,
who  gave  instruction  in  that  branch  in  Cracow,
where  his  home  was
the  meeting-place
of  all  musicians  and
artists  that  came  to
the  old  capital.  Her
early  aspirations
were  toward  the
stage,  but  that  ca
reer  seemed  impos
sible  on  account  of
family  opposition.
Finally,  after  her
marriage  with  Mod-
rzejewski  (abbre
viated  in  English
to  Modjeska),  she
made  her  first  ap
pearance  in  Sep
tember,  1861,  in  an
amateur  perform
ance  in  the  little
town  of  Bochnia,  Austrian  Poland.  Her  success
was  such  that  her  husband  organized  a  small  com
pany  with  which  she  travelled  through  all  the
towns  of  Galicia,  and  during  the  latter  part  of
1862  she  was  engaged  at  the  government  theatre
in  Lemberg  for  three  months.  She  then  managed
a  theatre  of  her  own  in  Czernowice,  playing  promi
nent  parts  herself  and  assisted  by  her  two  half-
brothers  and  her  younger  sister.  In  1865  she  re
turned  to  Cracow  and  there  became  the  leading
lady  in  the  local  theatre.  Her  fame  soon  extended
throughout  Poland  and  into  France  and  Germany.
She  received  proposals  to  act  from  European  man
agers,  and  the  younger  Dumas  invited  her  to  come
to  Paris  and  play  Marguerite  Gautier  in  his  "  Dame
aux  Camelias."  These  offers  she  steadily  refused,
determining  to  remain  true  to  the  Polish  stage.
After  her  first  husband's  death  she  married,  in  Sep
tember,  1868,  Charles  Bozenta  Chlapowski.  now
(1888)  a  naturalized  citizen  of  the  United  States,
and  a  year  later  settled  in  Warsaw,  where  she  played
the  principal  female  parts  in  the  standard  pieces  of
Shakespeare,  Goethe,  Schiller,  and  Moliere,  and  also
new  plays  of  Polish  origin.  For  seven  years  she
continued  in  Warsaw,  and  her  repertory  in  her
native  language  includes  284  parts.  Failing  health,
worry  over  the  Russian  censorship,  and  other
difficulties  induced  her  to  leave  the  stage  in
1876  and  come  to  the  United  States,  where  she
settled  on  a  ranch  near  Los  Angeles,  Cal.,  hoping  to


MOELLER


MOGUER


351


found  a  Polish  colony  there.  In  the  spring  of  1877
she  went  to  San  Francisco,  and,  after  studying
English  for  a  little  more  than  four  months,  made
her  first  appearance  in  the  California  theatre  as
Adrienne  Lecouvreur.  Her  success  was  imme
diate,  and  thenceforth  her  record  as  an  American
actress  has  been  one  of  continual  triumph.  She
has  made  six  tours  through  the  country,  and  has
acted  for  several  seasons  in  London  and  the  Eng
lish  provinces,  with  three  short  tours  in  Poland.
Madame  Modjeska  has  acted  in  twenty-five  parts
since  she  first  appeared  on  the  American  stage,
principally  in  the  Shakesperian  roles  of  Beatrice,
Imogen,  Juliet,  and  Rosalind,  also  Mary  Stuart
and  C'amille.  She  has  also  made  adaptations  for
the  Polish  stage  of  Shakespeare's  "  As  You  Like
It  "  and  "  Twelfth  Xight."

MOELLER,  Louis  Charles,  artist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  5  Aug.,  1856.  lie  is  the  son  of  a  decora
tive  painter.  After  serving  a  three  years'  apprentice
ship  with  his  father,  he  began  to  study  painting,  and
subsequently  visited  Munich  for  that  purpose.  To
the  influence  of  Feodor  Dietz,  who  was  one  of  his
masters  there,  Moeller  attributes  his  best  work.
Slender  resources  compelled  his  return  to  his  home,
where  he  again  devoted  himself  to  decorative  paint
ing  until  he  was  enabled  to  send  his  first  picture,
'•  A  Girl  in  a  Snow-Storm,"  to  the  National  acade
my  of  design.  His  second  work,  "  Puzzled,''  gained
hiin  the  Hallgarten  prize,  and  an  election  as  asso
ciate  of  that  institution  in  1884.  Moeller  is  a
pleasing  genre  painter.  Among  his  other  pictures
are  "  Morning  News,"  "  Stubborn,"  "  Bluffing,"  "  A
Doubtful  Investment,"  and  "  A  Siesta."

MOFFAT,  James  Clement,  educator,  b.  in
Glencree,  Gallowayshire,  Scotland.  30  May,  1811.
He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1832  with  the
intention  of  following  his  trade  as  a  printer,  but,
being  prepared  to  enter  the  junior  class  at  Prince
ton,  he  was  persuaded  to  do  so  by  Prof.  Maclean,  of
that  institution,  and  was  graduated  in  1835.  After
attending  lectures  for  two  years  at  Yale  he  re
turned  to  Princeton  as  tutor  in  Greek.  Receiving
the  appointment  to  the  chair  of  Greek  and  Latin  in
Lafayette  college  in  1839,  he  remained  there  until
the  spring  of  1841,  when  he  went  to  Miami  univer
sity,  Ohio,  as  professor  of  Latin,  subsequently
teaching  modern  history.  In  1851  he  was  licensed
to  preach,  and  for  a  time  taught  Greek  and  Hebrew
at  a  theological  seminary  in  Cincinnati.  In  1853
he  went  back  to  Princeton  as  professor  of  Latin
and  history,  Greek  being  afterward  substituted  for
Latin.  Since  1861  he  has  occupied  the  chair  of
church  history  in  Princeton  seminary.  He  re
ceived  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Miami  university
in  1853.  Besides  contributing  to  periodicals.  Dr.
Moffat  has  published  "  A  Rhyme  of  the  Xorth
Countrie"  (Cincinnati,  1847);  "  Life  of  Dr.  Thomas
Chalmers  "  (1853) ;  "  Introduction  to  the  Study  of
^•Esthetics  "  (1856  ;  new  ed.,  1860) ;  "  Comparative
History  of  Religions  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1871-'3) ;
••  Song  and  Scenery,  or  a  Summer  Ramble  in  Scot
land  "  (1874) :  "  Alwyn,  a  Romance  of  Study."  a
poem  (1875);  "The  Church  in  Scotland  "  (Phila
delphia.  1882):  "Church  History  in  Brief"  (1885):
and  "  The  Story  of  a  Dedicated'  Life  "  (Princeton,
1887). — His  son,  Edward  Stewart,  mining  engi
neer,  b.  in  Oxford,  Ohio,  5  Jan.,  1844,  was  gradu
ated  at  Princeton  in  1863.  and  at  Columbia  school
of  mines  in  1868,  as  a  mining  engineer,  serving  also
during  the  civil  war  as  a  lieutenant  in  the  U.  S.
signal  corps,  in  which  he  was  brevetted  captain.  In
1868  he  became  adjunct  professor  of  mining  and
metallurgy  in  Lafayette,  where  he  remained  until
1870,  and  he  afterward  held,  the  superintendency


i:;


of  various  iron-works  till  1882,  when  he  became

superintendent  of  the  Lackawanna  iron  and  coal

company,  of  which  corporation  he  was  made  general

manager  in  1886. Prof.  Moffat  has  attained  a  high

'  reputation  in  his  profession,  and  has  held  office  in

1  the American institute  of mining engineers,  to-

whose  transactions  he  has  contributed  papers.

MOFFAT,  James  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
Lisbon,  Columbiana  co.,  Ohio,  15  March,  1846.  He
was  graduated  at  Washington  and  Jefferson  college-
in  1869,  and,  after  studying  two  years  at  Princeton
theological  seminary,  was  licensed  to  preach  in
April,  1871.  He  was  ordained  co-pastor  with  his
father,  Rev.  John  Moffat,  of  the  2d  Presbyterian
church  at  Wheeling,  W.  Va.,  8  May,  1872,  and  on
his  father's  death  in  December.  1875,  became  his
successor.  He  labored  there  until  chosen  president
of  Washington  and  Jefferson  college  in  1881.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Hanover  college
in  1882.  and  from  Princeton  in  1883.

MOFF1TT,  John  M.,  sculptor,  b.  in  England
in  1837;  d.  in  London.  England,  15  Sept.,  1887.
He  was  apprenticed  when  fifteen  years  of  age  to-
a  London  sculptor,  and  after  serving  out  his  time-
came  to  the  United  States.  One  of  the  first  or
ders  he  received  after  his  arrival  was  for  the  exe
cution  of  the  figures  that  adorn  the  eastern  en
trance  to  Greenwood  cemetery,  and  represent  the
four  ages  of  man.  He  subsequently  executed  the
memorial  reredos  in  Packer  memorial  church,
Mauch  Chunk.  Pa.  Many  of  the  altars  in  the
rincipal  churches  in  New  York  city  were  designed
y  him.  Among  his  latest  works  are  the  plan  for
the  soldiers'  monument  in  East  Rock  park.  Xew
Haven,  Conn.,  and  the  drum  of  the  Yorktown
Revolutionary  monument,  erected  in  1881.

MOFRAS,~Eugene  Diiflot  de  (mo-frah),  French
explorer,  b.  in  Toulouse,  5  July.  1810 ;  d.  in  Paris
in  1851.  He  entered  the  diplomatic  service  in
1828  as  attache  to  the  French  mission  at  Madrid,
and  while  in  that  city  made  the  acquaintance  of
Martin  de  Xavarrete,  who  enraptured  him  by  his
descriptions  of  South  America.  Mofras  solicited
a  mission  to  that  country,  and  in  1839  was  sent  ta
Mexico  to  study  the  political  situation,  with  order*
to  go  afterward  to  California,  Oregon,  and  Russian
America.  For  four  years  he  explored  those  coun
tries,  and  also  visited  the  principal  cities  of  the
United  States.  On  his  return  to  France  he  pub
lished  "  Fragments  d'un  voyage  en  Californie  "
(Paris,  1843) ;  "  Exploration  de  1'Oregon  et  des  Cali-
fornies  "  (2  vols.,  1844) ;  "  Mendoza,  vice-roi  de  la
Xouvelle  Espagne,  et  Xavarrete.  notices  biogra-
phiques  "  (2  vols.,  1845)  ;  and  "  L'Oregon,  le
Mexiqtie  et  les  Etats-Unis,"  in  which  the  author
compares  these  countries,  and  predicts  a  great
future  for  the  United  States  (2  vols.,  1846).

MOGUER,  Andres  de  (mo-gair).  Mexican  cler
gyman,  b.  in  Moguer.  Spain,  in  1505 :  d.  in  Mexi
co,  14  Oct.,  1577. He  was  educated  in  the  convent
of San  Esteban  in  Salamanca,  where  he  entered
the  Dominican  order,  and  continued  to  study  the-
j  ology,  being  graduated  in  1530. When  Friar  Ber-
j  nardo  Alburquerque  returned  from  Rome  to  Mexi-
I  co  in  1533,  he  carried  with  him  Moguer,  who  soon
i  became  known  for  his  great  learning. He  rapidly
acquired  the  Mexican  language,  and.  that  he  might
utilize  it  in  the  conversion  of  the  Indians,  he  was
transferred  to  the  missions  of Oajaca,  where  he
was  successful,  and  became  superior  of  his  con
vent. In  1550  he  returned  to  Mexico  and  became
confessor  of  the  viceroy,  Antonio  de  Mendoza,  and
judge  of  the  Inquisition. When  an  epidemic  ap
peared  in  Tlaxcala  in  1576,  Moguer  asked  to  be
transferred  to  that  place,  and  with  great  devotion


352


MOISE


MOLINA


cared  for  the  sick,  selling  his  library  to  obtain  the
means  for  their  relief.  After  the  plague  was
checked  in  Tlaxcala  he  went  to  Atzcapotzalco,
where  he  fell  a  victim  to  the  disease,  and  returned
to  his  convent  in  Mexico,  where  he  died.  lie
wrote  "  Ilistoria  de  la  fundacion  de  la  provincia  de
Santiago  de  Mejico  "  (Seville,  1569) ;  "Sermonario
de  todo  el  afio  en  lengua  Mejicana" :  "  Libro  de
•cjeniplos";  and  "  Cartas  a  los  prelados  en  reco-
mendacion  de  los  Indios."  The  last  three  in
manuscript,  together  with  others,  were  in  the
library  of  the  Dominican  convent  at  Oajaca,  but
were  taken  away  and  lost.

MOISE,  Penina,  poet.  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,
23  April.  1797;  d.  there,  13  Sept..  1880.  She  was
the  child  of  French  parents  of  the  Jewish  faith,
who  came  to  Charleston  from  the  island  of  St.
Eustatius  in  1791.  She  was  the  author  of  hymns
used  in  the  Hebrew  worship,  contributed  verses  to
the  "Home  Journal,"  the  Washington  "Union."
and  other  publications,  and  published  "  Fancy's
Sketch-Book,"  poems  (Charleston.  1833).

MOLDENKE,  Edward  Frederick,  theolo
gian,  b.  in  Insterburg,  Prussia,  10  Aug.,  1836.  He
was  educated  in  the  universities  of  Konigsberg
and  Halle,  studying  specially  theology  and  philoso
phy,  and  was  successively  principal  of  a  parish
school  at  Eckersberg,  Prussia,  and  professor  in  the
gymnasium  of  Lyck,  which  post  he  held  until
July,  1861.  At  this  date  he  came  as  a  travelling
Lutheran  missionary  to  Wisconsin  and  Minnesota,
and  in  1863  he  was  elected  first  professor  of  theol
ogy  in  the  seminary  of  the  synod  of  Wisconsin.  He
returned  to  Germany  in  1866,  and  was  pastor  at
Johannisburg  until  1869.  preaching  in  German  and
Polish.  He  returned  to  America  in  that  year  and
became  pastor  of  Zion's  Lutheran  church  in  New
York  city.  At  present  (1888)  he  is  pastor  of  St.
Peter's  German  Lutheran  church  in  that  city.  In
1S65  he  was  editor  of  the  "  Gemeindeblatt "  at
Watertown,  Wis.  He  wrote  the  doctrinal  articles  for
the  "  Lutherische  Herold."  New  York,  in  1869-'70,
and  was  editor  of  the  same  paper  in  1877-'9.  With
others  he  began  the  "  Lutherisches  Kirchenblatt ''
in  Philadelphia  in  1884,  and  has  been  editor  of
•"  Siloah.''  a  monthly  paper  of  the  general  council
in  the  interest  of  German  home  missions,  since
1882.  He  received  the  degrees  of  M.  A.  and  Ph.  D.
from  the  University  of  Rostock,  Germany,  in  1865,
and  that  of  D.  D.  from  Muhlenberg  college,  Pa.,  in
1887.  He  has  published  series  of  articles  in  the
Berlin  "  Evang.  Kirchenzeitung  "  on  "  Flinf  Jahre
in  Amerika  "  (1868-'70)  and  "  New  Yorker  Kirchen-
spiegel "  (1870-'3),  and,  in  book-form,  "  Luther-
Biichlein,"  a  poem  (Allentown,  Pa.,  1879).  He  has
edited  "  Darstellung  der  modernen  deutschen  Theo-
logie  "  (Watertown.  Wis.,  1865). — His  son,  Charles
Edward,  b.  in  Lyck,  Prussia,  10  Oct.,  1860.  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1879,  spent  a  year  at  the
Lutheran  theological  seminary  in  Philadelphia,
and  studied  in  Halle  and  Strasburg,  Germany,  un
til  1884.  In  that  year  he  received  the  degree  of
Ph.  D.  from  Strasburg  university.  He  published
his  inaugural  dissertation,  "  Die  altegyptischen
Texten  envaehnten  Baeume  und  deren  Verwer-
thung"  (Leipsic,  1886;  American  ed.,  1887);  the
text  of  the  New  York  obelisk,  with  explanations,
the  first  print  in  hieroglyphic  type  ever  issued  in
America  (1887);  and  "The  World's  most  Ancient
Fairy-Tale,  the  Two  Brothers,"  in  hieratic  (1887).

MOLINA,  Alonso  de  (mo-lee'-nah),  Spanish  mis
sionary,  b.  in  Escalona  about  1510 ;  d.  in  Mexico  in
1584.  He  was  taken  by  his  parents  to  Santo  Do
mingo,  and  went  in  1523  to  Mexico,  where  he
learned  in  his  childhood  the  Aztec  language,  and


afterward  served  as  interpreter  to  the  first  Fran
ciscan  friars.  On  reaching  the  proper  age  he  en
tered  their  order  and  became  a  successful  mis
sionary,  and  afterward  superior  of  the  province  of
Santo  Evangelio.  lie  published  several  works
which  are  among  the  first  that  were  printed  in  the
New  World.  A  copy  of  the  first  edition  of  his
"  Diccionario  de  la  lengua  Castellana  y  Mexicana"
(Mexico,  1555;  revised  ed.,  1571)  was  sold  at  auc
tion  in  Paris  twenty  years  ago  for  $6,000.  Among
liis  other  works  are  "  Confessionario  mayor  y  me-
nor  en  lengua  Mexicana"  (Mexico,  1565).  which
brought  at  auction  recently  in  London  $1.250:
"  Arte  de  la  lengua  Mexicana  "  (1571) ;  "  Doctrina
Cristiana  en  lengua  Mexicana "  (1578 ;  Seville,
1584) ;  and  several  religious  works  in  the  Aztec
language,  including  "  Sermones,"  "  Vida  dc  S.
Francisco,"  "  Oraciones  para  los  Indios,"  and  "  Tra-
tado  de  los  Sacramentos."

MOLINA,  Juan  Isruacio,  Chilian  author,  b.
near  Talca,  Chili,  24  June,  1740;  d.  in  Bologna,
Italy,  12  Sept.,  1829.  He  became  a  member  of  the
Society  of  Jesus  at  an  early  age,  and  at  twenty  was
made  librarian  of  his  order  in  Santiago.  After  the
suppression  of  the  Jesuits  in  the  Spanish  posses
sions  he  went  to  Imola,  where  he  was  ordained
priest,  and  in  1774  to  Bologna,  Italy,  where  he  de
voted  himself  to  the  education  of  youth.  He  in
herited  a  large  fortune  in  1815,  by  the  death  of  a
nephew,  most  of  which  he  employed  in  founding  a
college  and  library  in  his  native  city.  He  wrote
"Saggio  sulla  storia  naturale  del  Chile"  (Bologna,
1782:  German  translation,  Leipsic,  1786;  French
translation,  with  the  title  "  Essai  sur  1'histoire  na-
turelle  du  Chili,"  with  notes,  Paris,  1788).  In  this
work  he  made  observations  on  natural  history  that
were  the  cause  of  much  discussion.  His  "Saggiodella
storia  del  Chile"  (Bologna,  1787;  2d  ed.,  enlarged,
1810;  translated  into  Spanish  by  Domingo  Jose  de
Argiiello  de  Mendoza,  2  vols.,  Madrid,  1788;  into
German.  1791 ;  into  English.  2  vols.,  London,  1809)
relates  the  invasion  of  that  country  by  the  Span
iards,  the  wars  of  the  latter  against  the  Araucani-
ans,  and  its  general  condition  until  1787.  His
pictures  of  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  Arau-
canians  are  of  great  interest.  The  narrative  is
based  on  documents,  printed  and  in  manuscript,
and  on  an  unpublished  "History  of  Chili,"  by  the
Abbe  Olivares,  the  first  part  of  which  Molina  took
with  him  to  Italy.  The  second  part  he  left  in
Peru,  and  for  a  time  despaired  of  bringing  the
work  to  a  conclusion.  But,  having  met  several  of
his  countrymen,  who  were  also  living  in  exile  in
Italy,  he  was  enabled,  with  their  help,  to  accom
plish  his  undertaking.  In  a  supplement  he  gives
a  sketch  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  Chilian  lan
guage,  followed  by  a  bibliography  of  the  works  of
which  he  had  made  use,  which  is  curious,  as  it
gives  the  names  of  works  little  known  outside  of
South  America.  Bologna  has  erected  a  statue  and
Santiago  de  Chile  a  monument  in  his  honor.

MOLINA,  Pedro,  Central  American  statesman,
b.  in  Guatemala  in  1777;  d.  about  1850.  He  advo
cated  in  his  writings  constitutional  principles  in
Central  America  before  the  assertion  of  the  inde
pendence  of  his  country,  was  a  leader  of  the  Lib
eral  party,  and  a  strenuous  supporter  of  reforms
and  free  institutions.  He  was  one  of  the  first
members  of  the  national  executive  in  1823,  minis
ter  from  the  Central  American  republics  to  Co
lombia  in  1825,  where  he  signed  a  treaty  of  alliance
between  these  two  countries,  and  represented  Cen
tral  America  in  the  congress  of  Panama  in  1826.
He  was  governor  of  Guatemala  in  1829,  secretary
of  state  for  foreign  affairs  in  1832-'3,  was  exiled


MOLINEUX


MOLSON


353


by  Carrcra,  and  resided  several  years  in  Costa
Rica.  In  1848  he  was  a  deputy  to  the  constitu
tional  assembly.  For  many  years  he  was  president
of  the  medical  faculty  and  chief  director  of  the
University  of  Guatemala.  lie  was  eminent  as  a
physician,  politician,  and  poet. — His  son,  Felipe,
statesman,  b.  in  Guatemala  in  1812 ;  d.  in  Wash
ington,  D.  C.,  1  Feb.,  1855,  was  a  member  of  the
Liberal  party,  and  held  several  political  offices.
After  the  downfall  of  the  Federal  government  he
was  exiled  and  went  to  Costa  Rica  with  his  father.
In  1848  he  was  appointed  envoy  of  that  republic
to  Nicaragua,  and  was  subsequently  minister
from  Costa  Rica  to  England,  France,  Spain,  Rome,
the  Hanseatic  towns,  and  to  the  United  States,
negotiating  a  commercial  treaty  with  the  last-
named  government.  He  published  in  various
languages  sketches  of  Costa  Rica  and  reports  on
the  boundary  and  navigation  questions  between
that  republic,  Nicaragua,  and  Colombia.

MOLINEUX,  Edward  Leslie  (mol-i-no),  sol
dier,  b.  in  London,  England,  12  Oct.,  1833.  He
early  came  to  the  United  States,  and  was  educated
at  the  Mechanics'  society  school  in  New  York.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  23d  regiment  of  the  New  York  na
tional  guard,  and  went  to  the  front  in  1862  as
colonel  of  the  159th  New  York  volunteers.  Subse
quently  he  had  command  of  a  brigade  in  the  19th
army  corps,  participating  in  the  campaigns  against
Port  Hudson,  Red  River,  and  Petersburg,  and  in
the  Shenandoah  valley.  He  received  the  thanks  of
the  city  council  and  merchants  of  Augusta,  Ga.,  for
his  honesty  and  fair  dealing  with  the  citizens  of
that  town  at  the  close  of  the  war.  The  brevet  of
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  was  conferred  on
him,  19  Oct.,  1864,  and  that  of  major-general  on
13  March,  1865.  In  1880  he  was  appointed  briga
dier-general  of  the  llth  brigade  of  the  New  York
state  national  guard,  and  in  1885  was  elected  major-
general  of  the  2d  division.  Gen.  Molineux  has  long
been  connected  with  the  firm  of  C.  T.  Raynolds
and  Company,  of  New  York,  whose  standing  as  the
largest  paint-house  in  the  United  States  is  due,  in
great  measure,  to  his  energy  and  ability.  He  was
elected  commander  of  the  military  order  of  the
Loyal  legion  in  1886,  and  has  been  nominated  on
several  occasions  for  civil  office,  but  invariably  de
clined.  He  has  contributed  to  current  literature
various  papers  on  military  subjects,  such  as  physi
cal  culture  in  public  schools  and  the  suppression
of  riots  in  cities  and  on  railroads.

MOLLER,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hamburg,
Germany,  in  1749;  d.  in  Sharon,  N.  Y.,  16  Sept.,
1829.  lie  came  to  this  country  when  fourteen
years  of  age,  and  while  wandering  about  the  streets
of  Philadelphia  was  accosted  by  Rev.  Dr.  Henry  M.
Muhlenberg,  the  "  patriarch  "  "of  the  Evangelical
Lutheran  church  in  America,  who  recognized  him
from  a  family  likeness.  He  was  at  once  taken  into
the  clergyman's  house,  and  made  assistant  in  a
school  in  which  the  latter  was  teaching.  His  lei
sure  hours  having  been  devoted  to  the  study  of
theology,  he  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  synod
of  Pennsylvania.  He  engaged  in  work  among  the
poor,  in  collecting  congregations  and  erecting
churches,  and  in  extending  the  principles  of  the
Lutheran  faith.  During  the  Revolutionary  war  he
was  chaplain  of  a  German  regiment  in  the  Ameri
can  army.  Moller's  first  regular  pastoral  charge
was  at  Reading,  Pa.  Thence  he  removed  to  Phila
delphia,  and  later  settled  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  where
he  built  the  first  Lutheran  church,  "in  1788  he  was
called  to  New  Holland.  Pa.,  and  labored  there  until
1795,  when  he  took  charge  of  the  Lutherans  at
VOL.  iv. — 23


Harrisburg,  where  he  remained  seven  years.  After
preaching  again  six  years  at  Albany,  he  had  the
care  of  the  united  churches  at  Sharon  and  New
Rhinebeck,  Schoharie  co.,  N.  Y.

MOLLHAUSEN,  Balduin,  German  traveller,
b.  in  Bonn,  27  Jan.,  1825.  He  came  to  the  United
States  in  1851,  visited  the  Rocky  mountains  with
Duke  Paul  William,  of  Wlirtemberg,  returned  to
Europe  in  1852,  and  in  1853  was  photographer  and
draughtsman  to  Lieut.  Amiel  W.  Whipple's  expe
dition  to  the  Pacific.  In  1857-'8  he  was  with  Lieut.
Joseph  C.  Ives  in  his  exploration  of  Colorado  river.
Besides  several  novels,  he  has  published  "  Tage-
buch  einer  Reise  vom  Mississippi  nach  der  Siidsee  "
(Leipsic,  1858;  English  translation  by  Mrs.  Sinnett,
2  vols..  London,  1858 ;  2d  ed.,  entitled  "  Wander-
ungen  durch  die  Prairien  und  Wilsten  des  west-
lichen  Nordamerika,"  1860) ;  "  Reisen  in  die  Fel-
sengebirge  Nordamerika's  bis  zum  Hochplateau
von  Neu-Mexiko"  (2  vols.,  1861);  "Der  Flucht-
ling :  Erzahlung  aus  Neu-Mexiko  "  (4  vols.,  1862) ;
"  Palmblatter  und  Schneeflocken :  Erzahlung  aus
dem  fernen  Westen  "  (2  vols.,  1863) ;  "  Der  Mayor-
domo:  Erzahlung  aus  dem  siidl.  Californien  und
Neu-Mexiko  "  (4  vols.,  1863) ;  "  Das  Mormonen-
madchen"(6  vols.,  1864-'71);  "Reliquien:  Erzah
lung  aus  dem  westlichen  Nordamerika"  (3  vols.,
Berlin,  1865) ;  "  Die  Mandanenwaise :  Erzahlung
aus  den  Rheinlanden  und  dem  Stromgebiet  des
Missouri"  (4  vols.,  1865);  and  "Nord  und  Slid:
Erzahlungen  und  Schilderungen  aus  dem  west-
lichen  Nordamerika  "  (2  vols.,  Jena,  1867).

MOLSON,  John,  Canadian  capitalist,  b.  in  Lin
colnshire,  England,  in  1764;  d.  in  Montreal  in
1836.  He  was  proprietor  of  the  estate  of  Snake
Hall  and  Moulton,  Lincolnshire,  but  came  to  Cana
da  in  1782,  established  a  brewery  in  Montreal,  and
in  1809  was  the  pioneer  of  steam  navigation  of  the
St.  Lawrence,  placing  the  steamer  "  Accommoda
tion  "  on  its  waters.  Other  vessels  were  afterward
added  by  him,  and  in  1812  he  did  the  state  service
in  the  transport  of  troops  and  supplies  during  the
war  with  the  United  States.  He  subsequently  be
came  presideiit  of  the  Bank  of  Montreal,  and  was
a  member  of  the  executive  council  of  Lower  Canada.
—His  son,  John,  b.  in  Montreal,  14  Oct.,  1787;  d.
there,  12  July,  1860,  after  completing  his  school
education,  entered  his  father's  service,  and  after
ward  became  associated  with  him  in  business.  He
took  an  active  part  in  the  introduction  of  railroads
into  Canada,  was  president  of  the  first  railroad  in
that  country,  the  St.  Lawrence  and  Champlain,
and  continued  a  director  of  it  during  his  lifetime.
He  was  also  a  director  of  the  Bank  of  Montreal,
and  in  1853,  with  his  brother  William,  established
the  Molson  bank,  which  became  one  of  the  most
important  in  the  country.  When  the  special  coun
cil  replaced  the  parliament  in  1837,  he  was  called
to  a  seat  in  it.  He  served  on  behalf  of  the  crown
during  the  rebellion  of  1837,  but  his  irritation  at
the  passage  of  the  rebellion  losses  bill  in  1849  led
!  him  and  others  to  sign  the  annexation  manifesto  at
I  that  time,  for  which  he  was  deprived  of  his  com-
!  missions  as  a  colonel  of  militia  and  justice  of  the
i  peace.  He  was  noted  for  his  benevolence,  was  gov
ernor  for  many  years  of  the  Montreal  general  hos
pital,  and  retired  from  its  presidency  only  the  year
i  preceding  his  death. — Another  son,  William,  b.  in
'  Montreal,  5  Nov.,  1793;  d.  there,  18  Feb.,  1875,
was  for  many  years  a  brewer  and  distiller  in  Mon
treal,  and  was  a  director  of  the  Bank  of  Montreal,
but  retired  to  found,  with  his  brother,  Molson's
bank,  of  which  he  was  president  till  his  death.  He
was  at  one  time  president  of  the  Champlain  rail
road,  and  later  a  local  director  of  the  Grand  Trunk


354


MOLYXEUX


MOXAGAS


railway.  He  was  held  in  esteem  for  his  integrity
and  liberality,  was  a  governor  of  McGill  university,
and  one  of  its  principal  benefactors.  He  built  the
library,  convocation  hall,  and  other  buildings  for
this  institution,  and,  with  his  brothers  John  and
Thomas,  endowed  the  chair  of  English  literature.

MOLYXEUX,  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lon
don,  England,  26  March,  1690;  d.  in  Bonham,  Eng
land,  18  May,  1706.  He  was  sent  to  Maryland  as
superior  of  the  Jesuits  in  17:50,  and  was  reappointed
in  1743.  The  Pennsylvania  authorities  availed
themselves  of  his  influence  with  the  Indians  on
their  western  frontier,  when  the  savages,  under
French  influence,  threatened  the  exposed  settle
ments.  He  was  with  the  Indians  at  Lancaster  just
before  the  treaty  that  was  made  there  in  June  and
July,  1744.  As"  the  purpose  of  his  visit  was  kept
secret  by  the  Pennsylvania!!  government,  it  was
suspected  in  Maryland  "  that  his  business  was  no
other  than  to  dissuade  ye  Indians  from  making
peace."  He  returned  to  England  in  1749.

MOMBERUEK,  William,  artist,  b.  in  Frank-
fort-on-Main,  Germany,  7  June,  1829.  He  was  the
son  of  a  merchant  and  received  a  liberal  education,
being  graduated  at  the  Frankfort  gymnasium  in
1845.  He  was  subsequently  apprenticed  to  learn
chromo-lithography,  and  in  1847  received  the  first
prize  from  the  senate  of  Frankfort  for  an  original
composition  on  stone.  He  also  studied  drawing
and  painting  under  Prof.  Jacob  Becker,  of  the
Diisseldorf  school,  and  was  taught  modelling  and
anatomy  by  Van  Der  Launitz  and  Prof.  Zwerger.
of  Frankfort.  In  1848  Momberger  was  compelled
to  leave  Germany  on  account  of  his  participation
in  the  revolutionary  movements  of  that  year,  and
came  to  the  United  States.  Here  he  again  turned
his  attention  to  chromo-lithography.  Later  he
devoted  much  time  to  the  illustration  of  newspa
pers  and  books,  and  also  to  making  sketches  and
drawing  vignettes  for  bank-notes.  He  assisted  in
illustrating  works  on  the  civil  war,  made  all  the
drawings  for  Duyckinck's  '•  Cyclopaedia  of  Ameri
can  Literature,"  and  the  majority  of  those  con
tained  in  the  "Gallery  of  American  Landscape
Artists."  He  built  a  studio  at  Morrisania,  N.  Y.,
where  he  has  painted  several  landscapes,  among
them  "  Sugar-Loaf  Mountain,  near  Winona,  Wis.,
"  A  Recitation  on  Indian  Rock,  in  the  Catskills,"
"  Through  the  Woods,"  "  Harvest  Moon,"  and  "  Isl
and  on  the  Susquehanna  River."  He  was  a  found
er  of  the  Gotham  art  students'  club.

MOMBERT,  Jacob  Isidor,  author,  b.  in  Cas-
sel,  Germany,  6  Nov.,  1829.  He  went  to  England
while  still  young,  engaged  in  business,  and  pur
sued  his  studies  there  and  afterward  at  Leipsic  and
Heidelberg.  lie  took  orders  in  the  Church  of  Eng
land  in  1857,  acting  as  curate  in  Quebec,  Canada,
for  two  years.  He  became  assistant  in  1859,  and
soon  afterward  rector  of  St.  James's  church,  Lan
caster,  Pa.  After  ten  years'  service  he  accepted  the
American  chaplaincy  at  Dresden,  Saxony,  which
he  held  till  1875.  He  was  rector  of  St.  John's,
Passaic,  N.  J.,  from  1880  till  1882.  Since  that  time
he  has  devoted  himself  chiefly  to  literary  work.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  Univer
sity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1866.  He  has  translated
Tholuck's  "  Commentary  on  the  Psalms  "  (Philadel
phia,  1856);  "Commentary  on  the  Catholic  Epis
tles,"  in  the  Lange  series  (1867) ;  edited,  with  pro
legomena,  Tyndale's  "  Five  Books  of  Moses,"  from
the  edition  of  1530,  in  the  Lenox  library,  New  York
city,  together  with  the  Pentateuch  in  the  Vulgate,
Luther's,  and  Matthew's  Bible  (New  York,  1884).
He  is  author  of  "  Faith  Victorious,  an  Account  of
the  Venerable  Dr.  Johann  Ebel,  late  Archdeacon


of  the  Old  Town-Church  of  Konigsberg,  Prussia  "
(1882) :  "  Handbook  of  the  English  Versions  of  the
Bible,"  with  comparative  tables,  etc.  (1883) ;  and
"  Great  Lives,  a  Course  of  History  in  Biographies  "
(New  York  and  Boston,  1886).  He  has  also  complet
ed  in  manuscript  an  extended  life  of  Charlemagne.

MOMPESSOX,  Roger,  jurist,  b.  in  England;
d.  in  New  York  or  New  Jersey  in  March,  1715.
He  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  son  of  Rev.  Will
iam  Mompesson,  who  was  rector  of  Eyam,  Derby
shire,  England,  during  the  plague  of  1666.  Roger
became  a  barrister-at-law,  and  served  as  recorder
of  Southampton  and  as  a  member  of  two  parlia
ments.  Becoming  involved,  it  is  said,  by  engage
ments  to  pay  some  of  his  father's  debts,  he  found
it  convenient,  in  April,  1703,  to  accept  from  the
king  the  appointment  of  judge  of  the  vice-admi
ralty  for  Massachusetts,  Rhode  Island,  Connecti
cut,  New  York,  New  Jersey,  and  Pennsylvania,  and
thus  commissioned,  early  in  1704,  came  to  Pennsyl
vania  in  company  with  the  younger  William  Penn
and  Gov.  Evans.  He  was  almost  immediately
thereafter  appointed  one  of  the  councillors  of
Pennsylvania,  and  later  in  the  same  year  became
the  seventh  chief  justice  of  New  York  and  shortly
afterward  chief  justice  of  New  Jersey.  In  1705  he
entered  the  provincial  councils  of  both  New  York
and  New  Jersey,  retaining  office  in  the  former
colony  until  his  death.  In  1706  he  was  appointed
chief  justice  of  Pennsylvania,  but  it  is  doubtful
whether  he  ever  presided  there.  He  was  a  warm
partisan  of  Lord  Cornbury,  as  such  made  himself
obnoxious  to  the  people  of  New  Jersey,  and  in
1709  resigned  the  office  of  chief  justice  rather
than  be  removed,  but  later  in  the  same  year  he
was  restored  to  the  office  by  his  old  friend,  Gov.
Ingolsby.  In  1710  he  surrendered  his  commission
to  Gov.  Hunter,  but  retained  the  chief  justiceship
of  New  York  until  his  death.  Mompesson  was  a
lawyer  of  ability,  and  as  a  jurist  was  no  doubt  one
of  the  ablest  of  his  time.  Gov.  Hunter  wrote  of
him  as  being  "a  person  of  ability  and  great  knowl
edge  of  the  laws,"  while  at  a  later  period  he  charged
him  with  ingratitude.  In  1709,  in  a  petition  to
the  lords  of  trade,  he  claimed  that  he  had  "  brought
the  courts  of  said  province  [New  York]  more  form-
able  to  the  practice  of  Westminster  hall  than  any
other  of  her  majesty's  plantations  in  America."
Mompesson  married  a  daughter  of  William  Pin-
horne,  his  colleague  on  the  bench  in  New  York.

MOXAGAS,  Jacinto,  South  American  soldier,
b.  in  Venezuela  in  1785  ;  d.  in  Boyaca,  New  Grenada,
8  Aug.,  1819.  When  Francisco  Miranda  and  Si
mon  Bolivar  raised  the  standard  of  independence,
he  was  one  of  the  first  to  join  their  cause.  After
their  capitulation  in  July,  1812,  he  assisted  in  or
ganizing  in  the  provinces  north  of  New  Grenada
bodies  of  mounted  guerillas,  which  were  known  as
the  "  Tartars  of  America."  The  rapidity  and  force
of  their  movements  dismayed  the  royal  army,  of
which  they  captured  entire  detachments.  In  1815
Monagas  surrounded  Angostura  and  drove  the
royalists  from  Guiana  and  Cumana,  but  was  after
ward  defeated  by  Cevallos,  governor  of  Coro,
Venezuela.  He  escaped  by  leaving  his  horse  and
jumping  from  the  rocks.  After  receiving  re-en
forcements  he  participated  in  the  bloody  cam
paigns  of  1817-'18,  contributing  to  the  defeat  of  the
Spaniards,  but  was  mortally  wounded  in  the  battle
of  Boyaca,  which  secured  liberty  to  Colombia.

MOXAdrAS,  Jose  Tadeo  (mo-nah'-gas),  Vene
zuelan  soldier,  b.  in  Maturin,  28  Oct.,  1784;  d.
in  El  Valle,  near  Caracas,  18  Nov.,  1868.  When
Gen.  Marino  (q.  v.)  invaded  the  coast  of  Guiria,
Monagas  joined  his  forces.  During  1814  he  took


MOXAGAS


MOXCKTOX


355


part  in  the  campaign  of  the  east,  and  made  a  re
markable  retreat  from  Valencia  to  the  llanos  of
Barcelona. lie  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel,
and  when  Bolivar  and  Marino  left  Venezuela  he
kept  up  a  guerilla  warfare  in  the  plains  of  Barce
lona  and  Maturin. After  the  arrival  of  the  expe
dition  of  Morillo  (q.  v.)  he  passed  the  Orinoco  to
the  province  of  Guayana,  but  was  defeated  at  La
Mesa,  and,  recrossing  the  river  to  the  province  of
Barcelona,  was  appointed  by  the  junta  of  San  Die
go,  26  May.  1816,  to  the  supreme  command  of  the
Orient, and recognized by all the independent
chiefs. On  the  arrival  of  Bolivar  at  Carupano  he
promoted  Monagas  brigadier. He  fought  in  Sep
tember  the  battles  of  Alacran.  Piritu,  and  Juncal,
and  in  1817  marched  with  Bolivar  to  Guayana.
and  was  appointed  governor  of  Barcelona ;  but  on
31  Jan.,  1818,  he  joined  the  army  at  San  Juan  de
Payara  and  participated  in  the  subsequent  battles.
After  the  march  of  Bolivar  to  Colombia  in  1819,
Monagas  returned  to  Pao  and  co-operated  in  the
eastern  campaign. In  1823  he  marched  with  the
auxiliary  forces  to  Peru,  and  in  1826  checked  a
revolutionary  movement  in  Cumana. On  6  May,
1830,  he  occupied  a  seat  in  congress,  but  after  Boli
var's  death  he  returned  to  his  estates,  and  was  ap
pointed,  on  22  May,  1831,  commander-in-chief  of  the
Orient. In  1835  he  entered  the  revolutionary  move
ment  of  "  La  Reforma,"  but  on  3  Xov.  made  his  sub
mission  to  the  government. In  1847  he  was  elected
president,  and,  although  he  commuted  the  sen
tences  of  twenty-nine  persons  that  had  been  con
demned  to death by  the preceding  government
and  practically  abolished  that  penalty  for  political
offences,  he  soon  began  arbitrary  measures,  and.
after  impeachment  by  congress,  dissolved  that  body
on  24  Jan.,  1848,  by  military  force,  eleven  persons,
of  whom  four  were  deputies,  being  killed. Gen.
Paez  (q.  v.)  now  took  arms  against  the  govern
ment, and,  after  being  several times defeated,
signed  a  capitulation  at  Macapo  Abajo,  15  Aug.,
1849.  the  terms  of  which  were  violated  by  Mona
gas,  and  Paez  was  sent  as  a  prisoner  to  Cumana,
where  he  remained  till  May, 1850. This  unjust
treatment  will  always  remain  as  a  stain  on  Mona-
gas's  name. In  1855  he  succeeded  his  brother  Gre-
gorio  in  the  executive  power :  but  his  arbitrary  rule
provoked  a  general  revolution,  and  in  January,
1858,  seeing  the  hopelessness  of  resistance,  he  took
refuge  in  the  British  legation,  and,  after  signing
his  abdication,  left  the  country. In  1864  he  re
turned  from  banishment  and  took  part  in  some  of
the  battles  in  the  Orient,  but  after  peace  had  been
made  went  to  his  estates. In  1868  Monagas  col
lected  a  force  to  uphold  the  constitution  of  1864,
according to his proclamation, and, marching
against  Caracas,  occupied  it  on  25  June  after  fight
ing  three  days,  established  a  provisional  govern
ment,  and  laid  siege  to  Puerto  Cabello.  which  he
occupied  on  15  Oct. There  he  fell  ill,  and  was  I
transported  to  La  Guayra  and  thence  to  El  Valle.
On  4  Oct.  he  was  elected  president,  but  he  died  be
fore  assuming  the  executive. — His  brother,  Jose"
drregorio,  Venezuelan  soldier,  b.  in  Maturin  in
1 795 ;  d.  in  Maraeaibo  in  1858,  also  joined  the  re
publican  forces  at  an  early  age,  defended  Maturin
in  March  and  May.  1813,  and  fought  against  Boves  I
in  Cachipo  on  11  Sept.  of  the  same  year. During  |
the  years  1814-'18  he  fought  in  fourteen  battles,  i
several  times  under  the  immediate  orders  of  Boli
var,  who  called  him  the  first  lancer  of  the  Orient.
He  followed  that  general  in  his  campaign  of  Co
lombia,  and.  after  that  republic  had  been  firmly
established,  marched  in  1824  to  Peru  with  the  rank
of  colonel. After  the  termination  of  that  cam-  |


paign,  Monagas,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier,  re
turned  to  private  life  and  did  not  enter  the  service
again  till  the  political  disturbances  of  1831  and
1835.  In  1846  he  was  a  candidate  for  the  presi
dency  of  the  republic  of  Venezuela,  and  in  1851
was  elected.  At  his  recommendation,  congress
granted  freedom  to  the  slaves  on  23  March,  1854.
In  1855,  after  the  termination  of  his  presidential
j  term,  he  retired  again  to  his  property,  and  in
March,  1858,  when  the  government  of  his  brother,
Jose  Tadeo,  was  overthrown  by  a  revolution,  he
collected  a  force  in  Barcelona  to  sustain  the  legiti
mate  authorities;  but  after  his  brother's  surrender
and  by  his  command  he  disbanded  his  forces.  He
was  then  arrested  and  sent  as  a  prisoner  to  Puerto
( 'abello  and  later  to  Maraeaibo,  where  he  died  in
!  the  same  year.  In  1872  his  remains  were  placed  in
the  national  pantheon  of  Caracas.

MOXCABRIE  DE  PEYTES,  Joseph  Satur-
nin,  Comte  de  (mong-kab-re-ay),  French  naval
officer,  b.  in  Toulouse,  9  Aug.,  1741 ;  d.  there,  20
Sept.,  1819.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midship
man  in  1756,  served  in  Canada  till  the  peace  of
1763.  being  made  lieutenant  in  1764,  and  captain
in  1777.  During  the  war  with  England  from  1778
till  1783  he  participated  in  the  capture  of  Tobago,
defeated  an  English  division  off  Jamaica  in  1780,
and,  joining  De  Grasse  in  Chesapeake  bay,  took
part  in  the  engagement  of  5  Sept.,  1781.  He  was  also
at  the  capture  of  St.  Christopher  and  the  battles
off  Dominique  on  9  and  12  April,  1782,  and  was
made  a  commodore.  He  took  part  in  the  expedi
tion  to  Santo  Domingo  in  1788,  cruised  during  the
following  year  on  the  banks  of  Xewfoundland,  and
forced  the  English  fishers  to  abandon  their  preten
sions,  which  had  threatened  to  end  in  war.  He
returned  to  command  the  station  of  Santo  Domingo
in  1790,  where  he  remained  for  eighteen  months
amid  great  difficulties,  in  consequence  of  negro
insurrections.  In  1792  he  was  imprisoned,  but  was
allowed  in  1794  to  go  to  the  United  States,  where
he  remained  several  years.  In  1814,  after  the
restoration,  he  was  promoted  rear-admiral.

MOXCK,  Charles  Stanley,  Viscount,  governor-
general  of  Canada,  b.  in  Templemore,  County
Tipperary,  Ireland,  10  Oct.,  1819.  He  is  a  son  of
the  third  viscount.  He  was  educated  at  Trinity
college,  Dublin,  and  admitted  to  the  Irish  bar  in
1841.  In  May,  1848.  he  was  an  unsuccessful  can
didate  for  parliament  for  Wicklow,  but  was  elected
for  Portsmouth,  in  the  Liberal  interest,  in  July,
1852.  He  was  re-elected  in  March,  1855,  but  de
feated  in  1857  and  1861.  In  February,  1851,  he
was  appointed  a  commissioner  of  charitable  dona
tions  and  bequests  in  Ireland,  and  he  was  a  lord  of
the  treasury  from  1855  till  1858.  He  was  appointed
governor-general  of  British  Xorth  America,  28
Oct.,  1861,  and  was  formally  reappointed,  under
a  new  act  of  parliament,  governor  of  the  united
provinces  of  Canada,  Xova  Scotia,  and  Xew  Bruns
wick  in  June,  1867.  He  resigned  this  office  in
Xovember,  1868.  In  1871  he  was  appointed  a
commissioner  of  national  education  for  Ireland,
and,  on  the  disestablishment  of  the  Irish  church  in
that  year,  was  made  a  commissioner  to  carry  into
effect  the  provisions  of  the  act.  He  succeeded  his
father  as  fourth  viscount  in  the  peerage  of  Ireland,
20  April,  1849,  and  became  a  peer  of  the  United
Kingdom,  12  July,  1866.  The  principal  event  that
distinguished  his  governorship  in  British  Xorth
America  was  the  confederation  of  the  various
provinces  into  the  Dominion  of  Canada.

MOXCKTON,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  England;
d.  there,  3  May,  1782.  He  was  the  son  of  John,
first  Viscount  of  Galway.  He  began  his  military


356


MONCRIEFFE


MONELL


career  in  Flanders  in  1742,  fought  at  Dettingon
and  in  other  engagements,  and  was  promoted  lieu
tenant-colonel  of  the  47th  regiment.  28  Feb.,
1750.  In  1753  he  was  stationed  at  Halifax,  N.  S.,
and  succeeded  in  suppressing  the  riots  among  the
Germans  at  Lunenburg,  about  fifty  miles  from  the
latter  city.  He  was
governor  of  Port  Roy
al  (now  Annapolis),
Nova  Scotia,  in  1754,
and  in  June,  1755,
was  in  command  at
the  capture  of  Beause-
jourand  other  French
posts.  lie  was  lieu
tenant  -  governor  of
Nova  Scotia  in  1750.
The  following  year
he  was  transferred  to
the  60th,  or  Royal
American,  regiment,
and  attached  to  Lou-
don's  army.  He  led  a
battalion  at  the  siege
of  Louisburg  under
Amherst  in  1758,

and,  as  brigadier-general  and  second  in  com
mand,  was  severely  wounded  at  the  capture  of
Quebec.  For  his  gallantry  in  this  action  he  was
promoted  colonel  of  the  17th  foot,  and  subse
quently  made  major-general  and  lieutenant-gen
eral.  He  accompanied  the  expedition  that  took
Martinique  in  1702,  and  was  made  governor  of
Berwick,  Scotland,  in  1700,  and  of  Portsmouth  in
1788,  which  borough  he  represented  in  parliament.
He  was  offered  a  commission  to  fight  in  the  Ameri
can  war,  but  refused  to  draw  his  sword  against
the  colonies. — His  brother.  Henry,  b.  13  July,  1740.
was  a  lieutenant-colonel  of  engineers.  He  was
shot  through  the  body  at  the  battle  of  Long  Island,
1  Aug.,  1770,  and  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Mon-
mouth,  N.  J.,  28  June,  1778.

MONCRIEFFE,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  the
county  of  Fife,  Scotland ;  d.  in  Dunkirk,  France,
7  Sept.,  1793.  He  was  educated  for  the  army  at
Woolwich  as  a  military  engineer.  After  passing
through  several  grades  he  was  promoted  captain,
and  ordered  to  New  York.  As  he  was  related  by
marriage  to  Gov.  William  Livingston  and  other
Americans  of  high  station,  the  Whig  leaders  enter
tained  the  hope  that  he  would  espouse  their  cause,
but  he  adhered  to  the  crown,  and  in  1776  was  with
Lord  Percy  on  Staten  island.  In  1778  he  was
taken  prisoner  at  Flatbush,  Long  Island,  by  a  party
that  went  from  the  New  Jersey  shore  in  boats  ex
pressly  to  seize  him  and  other  persons  of  note.
During  the  campaign  in  the  south  he  performed
valuable  service  in  his  department,  notably  in  the
defence  of  Savannah,  Ga.,  Gen.  Prevost  commend
ing  him  to  the  official  notice  of  his  superiors  in  the
most  laudatory  terms.  He  was  in  consequence
commissioned  lieutenant-colonel,  27  Sept.,  1780,
and  received  "a  very  generous  donation  from  his
royal  master."  Col.  Moncrieffe  also  planned  the
defensive  works  at  Charleston,  S.  C.,  and  was
warmly  complimented  therefor  by  Sir  Henry  Clin
ton.  At  the  evacuation  he  appears  to  have  been
guilty  of  an  act  that  greatly  tarnished  his  repu
tation.  Eight  hundred  slaves,  employed  by  him
in  engineering  work,  were  shipped  to  the  "West
Indies  by  his  direction  and,  as  it  is  also  asserted,
for  his  benefit.  At  the  end  of  the  war  he  returned
to  England,  and  was  killed  in  a  sally  that  was
made  by  the  French  from  Dunkirk  during  the
siege  of  that  city  by  the  Duke  of  York.


MONDELET,  Charles  Joseph  Elz&ir,  Cana
dian  jurist,  b.  in  St.  Charles,  Lower  Canada,  27
Dec.,  1801  ;  d.  in  January,  1877.  He  is  the  grand
son  of  Dominique  Mondelet,  a  French  army  sur
geon  who  came  to  Canada  before  the  conquest.
He  was  educated  at  the  colleges  of  Nicolet  and
Montreal,  completing  his  course  at  the  latter,  and
was  afterward  employed  as  an  assistant  by  the
astronomical  commission  that  was  appointed  to
ascertain  the  position  of  the  boundary-line  between
the  United  States  and  Canada  under  the  treaty  of
Ghent.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1822,  and  practised  at  Three  Rivers,  and  after
1830  in  Montreal.  He  was  appointed  district  judge
for  Terrebonne,  L'Assomption.  and  Herthier  in
1842,  circuit  judge  at  Montreal  in  1844,  judge  of
the  superior  court  in  1849.  of  the  seigniorial  court
in  1855,  and  assistant  judge  in  appeals,  court  of
Queen's  bench,  in  1858.  lie  took  an  active  part  in
political  controversies,  and  was  arrested  for  politi
cal  offences  in  1828  and  1838,  but  was  never  tried.
He  published  "  Lett  res  sur  ('education  "  (1840).

MONDESIR,  Charles  Stanislas  (mong-day-
zeer),  French  naturalist,  b.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,
in  1750;  d.  in  Aix,  Provence,  in  1817.  He  entered
the  church,  was  provided  with  an  abbey  in  1770
through  the  influence  of  the  Duke  de  Choiseul,
employed  in  several  missions,  and  in  1781  sent  to
Cayenne,  where  he  tried  to  naturalize  the  cochineal
insect  and  the  nopal-tree  on  which  it  feeds.  He
went  afterward  to  Peru  to  study  the  effects  of  the
cholera,  which  had  broken  out  in  Callao,  and  with
other  scientists  advised  the  tearing  down  of  many
buildings.  He  afterward  made,  at  the  instance  of
the  Spanish  authorities,  an  examination  of  the
mines  of  Xepero  and  Barillo,  discovered  a  sulphur-
mine  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  latter  place,  and
was  still  in  Peru  when  the  expedition  round  the
world  under  command  of  Capt.  Malaspina  arrived
in  Concepcion  in  1790.  He  immediately  joined  the
explorers,  guided  them  through  the  Andes  range,
and  accompanied  Malaspina  along  the  California!!
coast  to  the  Straits  of  Nootku.  He  then  went  to
New  Spain  and  lived  there  several  months,  occu
pied  in  forming  an  herbarium  of  the  plants  of  the
country.  The  revolution  in  France  had  mean
while  deprived  him  of  the  income  from  his  abbey,
and  for  several  years  after  1793  he  assisted  Louis
Nee  in  preparing  a  "  Flora  Peruana."  Returning
to  France  in  1802,  he  recovered  a  part  of  his
estate,  and.  settling  in  Aix,  devoted  the  remain
der  of  his  life  to  the  arrangement  of  the  mate
rials  he  had  collected  during  his  twenty  years  in
America.  Mondcsir's  works  are  few  but  valuable.
They  are  "  Memoire  sur  la  cochenille  et  le  nopal,
et  de  leur  acclimatation  a  Saint  Domingue  et  a  la
Guiane  "  (Paris,  1783) ;  "Histoire  et  effets  de  1'epi-
demie  de  cholera  asiatique  a  Callao  dans  le  Perou,
pendant  1'ete  de  1783  "  (1785) ;  "  Histoire,  descrip
tion  et  proprietcs  des  plantes  medicinales  du
royaume  de  la  Nouvelle  Espagne  "  (2  vols.,  Aix,
1807) ;  "  Description  des  mines  d'argent  du  Perou  "
(1811);  and  '•  Memoire  sur  les  mines  de  souf're  du
Perou,  suivi  d'une  description  de  celle  de  Xepero,
et  d'une  etude  sur  les  procedes  d'exploitation  "  (2
vols.,  Aix,  1813).

MONELL,  Claudius  L.,  jurist,  b.  in  Hudson,
N.  Y.,  20  March,  1815;  d.  in  Narragansett  Pier,
R.  I.,  1  Aug.,  1876.  He  was  the  son  of  Joseph  D.
Monell,  a  prominent  jurist.  Educated  chiefly  in
his  native  town,  he  removed  to  New  York  in
1830,  studied  law  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1837.  In  1841  he  re
turned  to  Hudson  and  formed  a  partnership  with
Judge  Henry  Hogeboom.  His  professional  career


MOXFORT


MONROE


357


was  henceforward  active  and  successful.  He  was
retained  as  counsel  by  the  Shakers  in  many  im
portant  cases,  and  by  the  Hudson  river  railroad
company  when  the  question  of  the  acquisition  of
the  right  of  way  from  Poughkeepsie  to  Albany.
X.  Y.,  was  raised.  He  again  removed  to  Xew
York  city  in  1851.  and  was  elected  to  the  bench  of
the  superior  court  in  1861,  1867,  and  1873.  becom
ing  chief  justice.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Con
stitutional  convention  of  1876.  He  was  the  author
of  "  Practice  of  the  Courts  of  the  State  of  Xew
York"  (Xew  York,  1849  ;  2d  ed.,  2  vols.,  1853-'4).

MONFORT,  Joseph  Glass,  clergyman,  b.  in
Warren  county,  Ohio,  9  Dec..  1810.  His  father
for  many  years  was  pastor  of  Presbyterian  churches
at  Hamilton.  Ohio,  and  Mount  Carmel,  Ind.  The
son  was  graduated  at  Miami  university  in  1834,
studied  theology  in  1835-'6  at  Indiana  seminary,
and  was  a  founder  and  editor  of  the  Louisville,
Ky.,  "  Presbyterian  Herald ''in  1836-7.  He  was
licensed  to  preach  in  September,  1837,  and  occu
pied  pulpits  in  Hamilton,  Ohio,  and  Greensburg
and  Sandy  Creek,  Ind.,  from  1837  till  1855,  with
the  exception  of  two  years,  when  he  acted  as  agent
of  the  theological  seminary  at  Xew  Albany,  Ind.
In  the  last-named  year  he  was  invited  to  assume
the  editorship  of  the  "  Presbyterian  of  the  West."
the  name  of  which  journal  he  changed  to  "  The
Presbyter."  In  1869  it  was  united  with  the  Xew
school  organ  under  the  title  of  '•  The  Herald  and
Presbyter."  For  ten  years  preceding  that  event
Dr.  Monfort  was  an  earnest  advocate  of  the  re
union  of  the  two  branches  of  his  church.  He  was
the  author  of  the  Xewark,  Ohio,  memorial  which
was  signed  by  seventy  clergymen  and  forty  ruling
elders,  and  which  proposed  negotiations  with  a
view  to  such  action.  He  was  appointed  by  the
general  assembly  of  1866  a  member  of  the  joint
committee  on  reunion.  For  many  years  he  was  a
member  of  the  church  extension  committee,  and  of
the  boards  of  domestic  and  foreign  missions,  a
trustee  of  Hanover  college.  Ind.,  a  director  of  the
Theological  seminary  of  the  northwest,  and  a
trustee  of  Lane  theological  seminary,  for  which
institution  he  also  acted  as  treasurer,  and  by  the
skilful  management  of  its  finances  considerably
increased  its  income.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Hanover  college,  and  that  of  LL.  D.
from  Centre  college,  Ky.,  in  1853. — His  son,  Fran
cis  Cassatte,  b.  in  Greensburg,  Decatur  co.,  Ind.,
1  Sept.,  1844,  was  graduated  at  Wabash  college  in
1864,  and  studied  theology  for  three  years  in  this
country  and  for  three  years  in  the  universities  of
Edinburgh  and  Berlin.  In  1869  he  was  called  to  a
church  in  Cincinnati,  where  he  remained  four
years,  when  he  resigned  to  become  an  editor  of  his
father's  journal,  "  The  Herald  and  Presbyter,"
with  which  he  is  still  connected.  In  1879  he
accepted  a  call  from  the  First  church.  Cincinnati,
and  now  discharges  the  duties  of  both  pastor  and
editor.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the
University  of  Wooster,  Ohio.  He  is  the  author  of
"  Sermons  for  Silent  Sabbaths  "  (Cincinnati,  1884)
and  '•  Socialism  and  City  Evangelization  "  (1887).

MONIS.  Judah,  educator,  b.  in  Italy,  4  Feb..
1683 ;  d.  in  Xorthborough,  Mass.,  25  April.  1764.
He  came  to  this  country,  embraced  Christianity,
and  was  baptized  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  in  1722.
From  the  latter  year  till  1761  he  taught  Hebrew  in
Harvard  university.  He  published  "  Truth,  Whole
Truth,  Xothing  but  the  Truth "(1722)  and  "A
Hebrew  Grammar"  (1735).

MONK,  Maria,  impostor,  b.  about  1817;  d.  in
Xew  York  city  about  1850.  In  1835  she  asserted
in  Montreal  that  she  had  escaped  from  the  Hotel


Dieu  nunnery  in  that  city,  of  which  she  claimed  to
have  been  an  inmate  for  years,  and  told  a  shocking
story  of  crimes  that  had  been  committed  there.
Her  stories  met  with  no  credence  in  Montreal,  and
she  was  shown  to  be  a  woman  of  bad  character,
whereupon  she  came  to  Xew  York  and  repeated
her  story,  which  many  believed.  She  gained  an
entrance  into  good  society,  and  received  many
attentions  from  those  who  gave  credit  to  her  tale ;
but  it  was  conclusively  proved  to  be  a  falsehood.
She  had  even  gone  so  far  as  to  publish  a  plan  of
the  interior  of  the  nunnery,  which  was  shown  by
careful  examination  to  be  incorrect  in  every  par-
|  ticular,  and  in  her  second  publication  she  described
I  an  island  in  St.  Lawrence  river  that  had  no  exist
ence.  In  the  midst  of  the  excitement  that  her
story  caused,  Col.  William  L.  Stone,  then  editor  of
the  "  Commercial  Advertiser,"  made  a  special  jour
ney  to  Montreal  to  investigate  matters,  with  the
result  that  he  refuted  Maria's  story  in  "  Maria
Monk  and  the  Xunnery  of  the  Hotel  Dieu  "  (Xew
York,  1836).  This  raised  against  him  a  storm  of
abuse  from  her  adherents,  and  Laughton  Osborne
made  a  bitter  assault  on  him  in  "  The  Vision  of
Rubeta "  (Boston,  1838),  a  clever  but  scurrilous
poem.  Maria's  adherents  believed  in  her  after  she
had  been  repeatedly  exposed  by  men  of  high  repu
tation,  and  the  Protestant  residents  of  Montreal
finally  thought  it  necessary  to  deny  her  allegations
in  a  public  meeting  held  for  the  purpose.  Her
imposture,  considering  the  internal  improbabili
ties  of  her  story,  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable
on  record.  The  "Know  Xothing"  party  used  it
to  make  political  capital,  and  the  burning  of  Ro
man  Catholic  churches  in  various  cities  were  indi
rectly  the  result  of  it.  Her  "  disclosures  "  were
published  in  "  Awful  Disclosures  by  Maria  Monk  "
(Xew  York,  1836),  and  "  Further  Disclosures,"  with
an  introduction  by  Rev.  J.  J.  Slocum  (1836).  Of
the  various  editions  of  this  book  it  was  estimated
by  Cardinal  Manning,  in  1851,  that  from  200,000
to  250,000  copies  had  appeared  in  England  and
this  country.  Maria  left  a  daughter,  who  pub
lished  an  autobiography  entitled  "  Maria  Monk's
Daughter  "  (Xew  York,  1870).

MONOD,  Theodore,  French  clergyman,  b.  in
Paris,  France,  6  Xov.,  1836. He  is  the  son  of  Rev.
Frederic  Monod,  a  French  Protestant  clergyman.
He  studied  law  in 1855-'8,  came to  the  United
!  States,  and,  deciding  to  prepare  for  the  ministry,
spent  the  two  succeeding  years  in  Western  theo
logical  seminary,  Alleghany,  Pa. From  1860 till
|  1863  he  labored  among  the  French  Canadians  in
!  Illinois. Returning  to  Paris,  he  succeeded  to  his
:  father's pastorate, preaching there until 1875.
During  the  next  three  years  he  travelled  as  agent
;  of  the  "  Mission interieure,"  but in  1878  he  ac-
:  cepted  a  call  from  a  congregation  in  Paris. From
1875  till  1879  he  edited  "  Le  Liberateur,"  which  is
!  now  absorbed  in  the  "  Bulletin  de  la  mission  inte
rieure."  His  writings  embrace  '•  Regardant  a  Jesus  "
(1862  ;  English  translation,  "  Looking  unto  Jesus,"
Xew  York,  1864);  ''The  Gift of  God"  (London,
1876; French  ed., Paris,  1877) ;  and  ';Life  More
Abundant  "  (1881).

MONROE,  Andrew,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hamp
shire  county,  Va.,  29  Oct..  1792;  d.  in  Mexico,
Audrain  co.,  Mo.,  18  Xov.,  1871.  He  was  the
youngest  of  a  family  of  eleven  children,  four  of
whom  became  ministers  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  in  March,
1815,  by  the  Ohio  conference,  and  sent  to  labor  on
the  Fairfield  circuit.  He  was  a  pioneer  worker
in  Kentucky.  Tennessee,  and  Missouri,  a  member
during  his  life  of  eleven  general  conferences,  and


358


MONROE


MONROE


is  known  as  the  patriarch  of  Missouri  Methodism.
His  name  has  become  historic  in  the  annals  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church,  south.

MONROE,  James,  legislator,  b.  in  Plainfleld,  ,
Conn.,  18  July,  1821.  He  was  graduated  at
Oberlin  in  1846.  studied  theology  there,  and  from  j
184!)  till  1852  taught  in  that  institution.  He  was
a  member  of  the  lower  branch  of  the  Ohio  legisla
ture  in  1856-'9,  and  of  the  senate  in  1800-'2,  and
was  twice  president  of  the  latter  body.  lie  re
signed  his  seat  in  October,  1802,  to  accept  the  U.
S.  consulship  at  Rio  Janeiro,  which  he  held  from
1863  till  1869,  serving  for  several  months  during
the  latter  year  as  charge  d'affaires  ad  interim.  On
his  return  to  Oberlin  he  was  elected  and  re-elected
to  congress  as  a  Republican  for  five  successive
terms,  serving  from  4  March,  1871,  till  4  March,
1881.  He  has  since  filled  the  chair  of  political
science  and  modern  history  in  Oberlin.

MONROE,  James,  fifth  president  of  the  United
States,  b.  in  Westmoreland  county,  Va.,  28  April,
1758 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  4  July,  1831.  Although
the  attempts  to  trace  his  pedigree  have  not  been
successful,  it  appears  certain  that  the  Monroe
family  came  to  Virginia  as  early  as  1650,  and  that
they  were  of  Scottish  origin.  James  Monroe's
father  was  Spence  Monroe,  and  his  mother  was
Eliza,  sister  of  Judge  Joseph  Jones,  twice  a  dele
gate  from  Virginia  to  the  Continental  congress.
The  boyhood  of  the  future  president  was  passed  in
his  native  county,  a  neighborhood  famous  for  early
manifestations  of  patriotic  fervor.  His  earliest
recollections  must  have  been  associated  with  pub
lic  remonstrances  against  the  stamp-act  (in  1766),
and  with  the  reception  (in  176!))  of  a  portrait  of
Lord  Chatham,  which  was  sent  to  the  gentlemen
of  Westmoreland,  from  London,  by  one  of  their
correspondents,  Edmund  Jennings,  of  Lincoln's
Inn.  To  the  College  of  William  and  Mary,  then
rich  and  prosperous,  James  Monroe  was  sent ;  but
soon  after  his  student  life  began  it  was  interrupted
by  the  Revolutionary  war.  Three  members  of  the
faculty  and  twenty-five  or  thirty  students,  Monroe
among  them,  entered  the  military  service.  He
joined  the  army  in  1776  at  the  headquarters  of
Washington  in  New  York,  as  a  lieutenant  in  the  3d
Virginia  regiment  under  Col.  Hugh  Mercer.  He
was  with  the  troops  at  Harlem,  at  WThite  Plains,
and  at  Trenton,  where,  in  leading  the  advance
guard,  he  was  wounded  in  the  shoulder.  During
1777-'8  he  served  as  a  volunteer  aide,  with  the  rank
of  major,  on  the  staff  of  the  Earl  of  Stirling,  and
took  part  in  the  battles  of  the  Brandy  wine,  Ger-
mantown,  and  Monmouth.  After  these  services
he  was  commended  by  Washington  for  a  commis
sion  in  the  state  troops  of  Virginia,  but  without
success.  He  formed  the  acquaintance  of  Gov.  Jef
ferson,  and  was  sent  by  him  as  a  military  commis
sioner  to  collect  information  in  regard  to  the  con
dition  and  prospects  of  the  southern  army,  lie
thus  attained  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel ;  but
his  services  in  the  field  were  completely  interrupted,
to  his  disappointment  and  chagrin.  His  uncle,
Judge  Jones,  at  all  times  a  trusted  and  intimate
counsellor,  then  wrote  to  him :  '•  You  do  well  to
cultivate  the  friendship  of  Mr.  Jefferson  .  .  .  and
while  you  continue  to  deserve  his  esteem,  he  will
not  withdraw  his  countenance."  The  future  proved
the  sagacity  of  this  advice,  for  Monroe's  intimacy
with  Jefferson,  which  was  then  established,  con
tinued  through  life,  and  was  the  key  to  his  early
advancement,  and  perhaps  his  ultimate  success.
The  civil  life  of  Monroe  began  on  his  election  in
1782  to  a  seat  in  the  assembly  of  Virginia,  and  his
appointment  as  a  member  of  the  executive  coun


cil.  He  was  next  a  delegate  to  the  4th,  5th,  and
6th  congresses  of  the  confederation,  where,  not
withstanding  his  youth,  he  was  active  and  in
fluential.  Bancroft  says  of  him  that,  when  Jeffer
son  embarked  for  France,  Monroe  remained  "  not
the  ablest  but  the  most  conspicuous  representative
of  Virginia  on  the  floor  of  congress.  He  sought
the  friendship  of  nearly  every  leading  statesman
of  his  commonwealth,  and  every  one  seemed  glad
to  call  him  a  friend."  On  1  March.  1784,  the  Vir
ginia  delegates  presented  to  congress  a  deed  that
ceded  to  the  United  States  Virginia's  claim  to  the
northwest  territory,  and  soon  afterward  Jefferson
presented  his  memorable  plan  for  the  temporary
government  of  all  the  western  possessions  of  the
United  States  from  the  southern  boundary  (lat.
31°  N.)  to  the  Lake  of  the  Woods.  From  that
time  until  its  settlement  by  the  ordinance  of  13
July,  1787,  this  question  was  of  paramount  impor-
ance.  Twice  within  a  few  months  Monroe  crossed
the  Alleghanies  for  the  purpose  of  becoming  ac
quainted  with  the  actual  condition  of  the  country.
One  of  the  fruits  of  his  western  observations  was  a
memoir,  written  in  1786,  to  prove  the  rights  of  the
people  of  the  west  to  the  free  navigation  of  the  Mis
sissippi.  Toward  the  close  of  1784  Monroe  was
selected  as  one  of  nine  judges  to  decide  the  boun
dary  dispute  between  Massachusetts  and  New  York.
He  resigned  this  place  in  May,  1786,  in  consequence
of  an  acrimonious  controversy  in  which  he  became
involved.  Both  the  states  that  were  at  difference
with  each  other  were  at  variance  with  Monroe  in
respect  to  the  right  to  navigate  the  Mississippi,  and
he  thought  himself  thus  debarred  from  being  ac
ceptable  as  an  umpire  to  either  of  the  contending
parties,  to  whom  he  owed  his  appointment.

In  the  congress  of  1785  Monroe  was  interested  in
the  regulation  of  commerce  by  the  confederation,
and  he  certainly  desired  to  secure  that  result  :  but
he  was  also  jealous  of  the  rights  of  the  southern
states,  and  afraid  that  their  interests  would  be
overbalanced  by  those  of  the  north.  His  policy
was  therefore  timid  and  dilatory.  A  report,  upon
the  subject  by  the  committee,  of  which  he  was
chairman,  was  presented  to  congress,  28  March,

1785,  and  led  to  a  long  discussion,  but  nothing
came  of  it. The  weakness  of  the  confederacy  grew
more  and  more  obvious,  and  the  country  was  drift
ing  toward  a  stronger  government. But  the  meas
ures  proposed  by  Monroe  were  not  entirely  abor
tive. Says  John  Q.  Adams:  "They  led  first  to  the
partial  convention  of  delegates  from  five  states  at
Annapolis  in  September,  1786,  and  then  to  the  gen
eral  convention  at  Philadelphia  in  1787,  which  pre
pared  and  proposed  the  constitution  of  the  United
States. Whoever  contributed  to  that  event  is  justly
entitled  to  the  gratitude  of  the  present  age  as  a
public  benefactor,  and  among  them  the  name  of
Monroe  should  be  conspicuously  enrolled."

According  to  the  principle  of  rotation  then  in
force,  Monroe's  congressional  service  expired  in

1786,  at  the  end  of  a  three  years'  term. He  then
intended  to  make  his  home  in  Fredericksburg,  and
to  practise  law,  though  he  said  he  should  be  happy
to  keep  clear  of  the  bar  if  possible. But  it  was  not
long  before  he  was  again  called  into  public  life.
He  was  chosen  at  once  a  delegate  to  the  assembly,
and  soon  afterward  became  a  member  of  the  Vir
ginia  convention  to  consider  the  ratification  of  the
proposed  constitution  of  the  United  States,  which
assembled  at  Richmond  in  1788. In  this  conven
tion  the  friends  of  the  new  constitution  were  led  by
James  Madison,  John  Marshall,  and  Edmund  Ran
dolph. Patrick  Henry  was  their  chief  opponent,
and  James  Monroe  was  by  his  side,  in  company  with


MONROE


MONROE


359


William  Grayson  and  George  Mason.  In  one  of
his  speeches,  Monroe  made  an  elaborate  historical
argument,  based  on  the  experience  of  Greece,  Ger
many,  Switzerland,  and  New  England,  against  too
firm  consolidation,  and  he  predicted  conflict  be
tween  the  state  and  national  authorities,  and  the
possibility  that  a  president  once  elected  might  be
elected  for  life.  In  another  speech  he  endeavored
to  show  that  the  rights  of  the  western  territory
would  be  less  secure  under  the  new  constitution
than  they  were  under  the  confederation.  He  final
ly  assented  to  the  ratification  on  condition  that
certain  amendments  should  be  adopted.  As  late  as
1816  he  recurred  to  the  fears  of  a  monarchy,  which
he  had  entertained  in  1788,  and  endeavored  to  show
that  they  were  not  unreasonable.  Under  the  new
constitution  the  first  choice  of  Virginia  for  senators
fell  upon  Richard  Henry  Lee  and  William  Grayson.
The  latter  died  soon  afterward,  and  Monroe  was
selected  by  the  legislature  to  fill  the  vacant  place.
He  took  his  seat  in  the  senate.  6  Dec.,  1790,  and
held  the  office  until  May,  1794,  when  he  was  sent  as
euvov  to  France.  Among  the  Anti-Federalists  he


took  a  prominent  stand,  and  was  one  of  the  most
determined  opponents  of  the  administration  of
Washington.  To  Hamilton  he  was  especially  hos
tile.  The  appointment  of  Gouverneur  Morris  to  be
minister  to  France,  and  of  John  Jay  to  be  minister
to  England,  seemed  to  him  most  objectionable.  In
deed,  he  met  all  the  Federalist  attempts  to  organize
a  strong  and  efficient  government  with  incredulity
or  with  adverse  criticism.  It  was  therefore  a  great
surprise  to  him,  as  well  as  to  the  public,  that,  while
still  a  senator,  he  was  designated  the  successor  of
Morris  as  minister  to  France.  For  this  difficult
place  he  was  not  the  first  choice  of  the  president,
nor  the  second ;  but  he  was  known  to  be  favorably
disposed  toward  the  French  government,  and  it  was
thought  that  he  might  lead  to  the  establishment
of  friendly  relations  with  that  power,  and,  besides,
there  is  no  room  to  doubt  that  Washington  desired,
as  John  Quincy  Adams  has  said,  to  hold  the  bal
ance  between  the  parties  at  home  by  appointing
Jay,  the  Federalist,  to  the  English  mission,  and
Monroe,  the  Republican,  to  the  French  mission.  It
was  the  intent  of  the  United  States  to  avoid  a  col
lision  with  any  foreign  power,  but  neutrality  was
in  danger  of  being  considered  an  offence  by  either
France  or  England  at  any  moment.  Monroe  ar
rived  in  Paris  just  after  the  fall  of  Robespierre,
and  in  the  excitement  of  the  day  he  did  not  at
once  receive  recognition  from  the  committee  of
public  safety.  He  therefore  sent  a  letter  to  the
president  of  the  convention,  and  arrangements
were  made  for  his  official  reception,  15  Aug.,  1794.
At  that  time  he  addressed  the  convention  in  terms
of  great  cordiality,  but  his  enthusiasm  led  him
beyond  his  discretion.  He  transcended  the  au
thority  that  had  been  given  to  him,  and  when
his  report  reached  the  government  at  home  Ran


dolph  sent  him  a  despatch,  "  in  the  frankness  of
friendship,"  criticising  severely  the  course  that
the  plenipotentiary  had  pursued.  A  little  later
the  secretary  took  a  more  conciliatory  tone,  and
Monroe  believed  he  never  would  have  spoken  so
severely  if  all  the  despatches  from  Paris  had
reached  the  United  States  in  due  order.  The
residence  of  Monroe  in  France  was  a  period  of
anxious  responsibility,  during  which  he  did  not
succeed  in  recovering  the  confidence  of  the  authori
ties  at  home.  When  Pickering  succeeded  Ran
dolph  in  the  department  of  state.  Monroe  was  in
formed  that  he  was  superseded  by  the  appointment
of  Charles  C.  Pinckney.  The  letter  of  recall  was
dated  22  Aug..  1796.  On  his  return  he  published
a  pamphlet  of  500  pages,  entitled  "A  View  of  the
Conduct  of  the  Executive  "  (Philadelphia,  1797),
in  which  he  printed  his  instructions,  correspond
ence  with  the  French  and  United  States  govern
ments,  speeches,  and  letters  received  from  American
residents  in  Paris.  This  publication  made  a  great
stir.  Washington,  who  had  then  retired  from  pub
lic  life,  appears  to  have  remained  quiet  under  the
provocation,  but  he  wrote  upon  his  copy  of  the
"  View  "  animadversions  that  have  since  been  pub
lished.  Party  feeling,  already  excited,  became
fiercer  when  Monroe's  book  appeared,  and  person
alities  that  have  now  lost  their  force  were  freely
uttered  on  both  sides.  Under  these  circumstances
Monroe  became  the  hero  of  the  Anti-Federalists,
and  was  at  once  elected  governor  of  Virginia.  He
held  the  office  from  1799  till  1802.  The  most  note
worthy  occurrence  during  his  administration  was
the  suppression  of  a  servile  insurrection  by  which
the  city  of  Richmond  was  threatened.  Monroe's
star  continued  in  the  ascendant.  After  Thomas
Jefferson's  election  to  the  presidency  in  1801,  an
opportunity  occurred  for  returning  Mr.  Monroe  to
the  French  mission,  from  which  he  had  been  re
called  a  few  years  previously.  There  were  many
reasons  for  believing  that  the  United  States  could
secure  possession  of  the  territory  beyond  the  Mis
sissippi  belonging  to  France.  The  American  min
ister  in  Paris,  Robert  R  Livingston,  had  already
opened  the  negotiations,  and  Monroe  was  sent  as
an  additional  plenipotentiary  to  second,  with  his
enthusiasm  and  energy,  the 'effort  that  had  been
begun.  By  their  joint  efforts  it  came  to  pass  that
in  the  spring  of  1803  a  treaty  was  signed  by  which
France  gave  up  to  the  United  States  for  a  pecu
niary  consideration  the  vast  region  then  known  as
Louisiana.  Livingston  remarked  to  the  plenipo
tentiaries  after  the  treaty  was  signed :  "  We  have
lived  long,  but  this  is  the  noblest  work  of  our
lives."  The  story  of  the  negotiations  that  termi
nated  in  this  sale  is  full  of  romance.  Bonaparte,
Talleyrand,  and  Marbois  were  the  representatives
of  France :  Jefferson,  Livingston,  and  Monroe
guided  the  interests  of  the  united  States.  The
French  were  in  need  of  money  and  the  Americans
could  afford  to  pay  well  for  the  control  of  the  en
trance  to  the  Mississippi.  England  stood  ready  to
seize  the  coveted  prize.  The  moment  was  oppor
tune  ;  the  negotiators  on  both  sides  were  eager  for
the  transfer.  It  did  not  take  long  to  agree  upon
the  consideration  of  80.000,000  francs  as  the  pur
chase-money,  and  the  assent  of  Bonaparte  was  se
cured.  "  I  have  given  to  England."  he  said,  ex-
ultingly,  "  a  maritime  rival  that  will  sooner  or
later  humble  her  pride."  It  is  evident  that  the
history  of  the  United  States  has  been  largely  in
fluenced  by  this  transaction,  which  virtually  ex
tended  the  national  domain  from  the  mouth  of
the  Mississippi  river  to  the  mouth  of  the  Colum
bia.  Monroe  went  from  Paris  to  London,  where  he


360


MONROE


MONROE


was  accredited  to  the  court  of  St.  James,  and  sub
sequently  went  to  Spain  in  order  to  negotiate  for
the  cession  of  Florida  to  the  United  States.  But
he  was  not  successful  in  this  and  returned  to  Lon
don,  where,  with  the  aid  of  William  Pinckney,  who
was  sent  to  re-enforce  his  efforts,  he  concluded  a
treaty  with  Great  Britain  after  long  negotiations
frequently  interrupted.  This  treaty  failed  to  meet
the  expectations  of  the  United  States  in  two  im
portant  particulars — it  made  no  provisions  against
the  impressment  of  seamen,  and  it  secured  no  in
demnity  for  loss  that  Americans  had  incurred  in
the  seizure  of  their  goods  and  vessels.  Jefferson
was  so  dissatisfied  that  he  would  not  send  the
treaty  to  the  senate.  Monroe  returned  home  in
1807  and  at  once  drew  up  an  elaborate  defence  of
his  political  conduct.  Matters  were  evidently
drifting  toward  war  between  Great  Britain  and  the
United  States.  Again  the  disappointed  and  dis
credited  diplomatist  received  a  token  of  popular
approbation.  He  was  for  the  third  time  elected  to
the  assembly,  and  in  1811  was  chosen  for  the  second
time  governor  of  Virginia.  He  remained  in  this
office  but  a  short  time,  for  he  was  soon  called  by
Madison  to  the  office  of  secretary  of  state.  He
held  the  portfolio  during  the  next  six  years,  from
1811  to  1817.  In  1814-'15  he  also  acted  as  secre
tary  of  war.  While  he  Avas  a  member  of  the  cabi
net  of  Madison,  hostilities  were  begun  between  the
United  States  and  England.  The  public  build
ings  in  Washington  were  burned,  and  it  was  only
by  the  most  strenuous  measures  that  the  progress
of  the  British  was  interrupted.  Monroe  gained
much  popularity  by  the  measures  that  he  took
for  the  protection  of  the  capital  and  for  the  enthu
siasm  with  which  he  prosecuted  the  war  measures
of  the  government.

Monroe  had  now  held  almost  every  important
station  except  that  of  president,  to  which  a  poli
tician  could  aspire.  He  had  served  in  the  legisla
ture  of  Virginia,  in  the  Continental  congress,  and
in  the  senate  of  the  United  States.  He  had  been
a  member  of  the  convention  that  considered  the
ratification  of  the  constitution,  twice  he  had  served
as  governor,  twice  he  had  been  sent  abroad  as  a
minister,  and  he  had  been  accredited  to  three  great
powers.  He  had  held  two  places  in  the  cabinet  of
Madison.  With  the  traditions  of  those  days,  which
regarded  experience  in  political  affairs  a  qualifi
cation  for  an  exalted  station,  it  was  most  natural
that  Monroe,  should  become  a  candidate  for  the
presidency.  Eight  years  previously  his  fitness  for
the  office  had  been  often  discussed.  Now,  in  1816,
at  the  age  of  fifty-nine  years,  almost  exactly  the  age
at  which  Jefferson  and  Madison  attained  the  same
position,  he  was  elected  president  of  the  United
States,  receiving  183  votes  in  the  electoral  college
against  34  that  were  given  for  Rufus  King,  the
candidate  of  the  Federalists.  He  continued  in
this  office  until  1825.  His  second  election  in  1821
was  made  with  almost  complete  unanimity,  but
one  electoral  vote  being  given  against  him.  "  Dan
iel  D.  Tompkins  was  vice-president  during  both
presidential  terms.  John  Quincy  Adams,  John  C.
Calhoun,  William  H.  Crawford,  and  William  Wirt.
were  members  of  the  cabinet  during  his  entire  ad
ministration.  The  principal  subjects  that  engaged
the  attention  of  the  president  were  the  defences  of
the  Atlantic  seaboard,  the  promotion  of  internal
improvements,  the  conduct  of  the  Seminole  war,
the  acquisition  of  Florida,  the  Missouri  compro
mise,  and  the  resistance  to  foreign  interference  in
American  affairs,  formulated  in  a  declaration  that
is  called  the  "  Monroe  doctrine."  Two  social
events  marked  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  his


administration :  first,  his  ceremonious  visit  to  the
principal  cities  of  the  north  and  south  ;  and  second,
the  national  reception  of  the  Marquis  de  Lafayette
who  came  to  this  country  as  the  nation's  guest.
The  purchase  of  the  Floridas  was  brought  to  a
successful  issue,  22  Feb.,  1819,  by  a  treaty  with
Spain,  concluded  at  Washington,  and  thus  the  con
trol  of  the  entire  Atlantic  and  Gulf  seaboard,  from
the  St.  Croix  to  the  Sabine,  was  secured  to  the
United  States.  Monroe's  influence  in  the  contro
versies  that  pi'eceded  the  Missouri  compromise
does  not  appear  to  have  been  very  strong.  He
showed  none  of  the  boldness  which  Jefferson  would
have  exhibited  under  similar  circumstances.  He
took  more  interest  in  guiding  the  national  policy
with  respect  to  internal  improvements  and  the  de
fence  of  the  seaboard.  He  vetoed  the  Cumberland
road  bill,  4  May,  1822,  on  the  ground  that  congress
had  no  right  to  execute  a  system  of  internal  im
provement  :  but  he  held  that  if  such  powers  could
be  secured  by  constitutional  amendment  good  re
sults  would  follow.  Even  then  he  held  that  the
general  government  should  undertake  only  works
of  national  significance,  and  should  leave  all  mi
nor  improvements  to  the  separate  states.  There  is
no  measure  with  which  the  name  of  Monroe  is
connected  so  important  as  his  enunciation  of  "the
Monroe  doctrine."  The  words  of  this  famous  ut
terance  constitute  two  paragraphs  in  the  presi
dent's  message  of  2  Dec.,  1823.  In  the  first  of
these  paragraphs  he  declares  that  the  governments
of  Russia  and  Great  Britain  have  been  informed
that  the  American  continents  henceforth  are  not
to  be  considered  subjects  for  future  colonization
by  any  European  powers.  In  the  second  paragraph
he  says  that  the  I  nited  States  would  consider  any
attempt  on  the  part  of  the  European  powers  to  ex
tend  their  system  to  any  portion  of  this  hemi
sphere  as  dangerous  to  our  peace  and  safely.  He
goes  further,  and  says  that  if  the  governments  es
tablished  in  North  and  South  America  who  have
declared  their  independence  of  European  control
should  be  interfered  with  by  any  European  power,
this  interference  would  be  regarded  as  the  mani
festation  of  unfriendly  disposition  to  the  United
States.  These  utterances  were  addressed  especial
ly  to  Spain  and  Portugal.  They  undoubtedly  ex
pressed  the  dominant  sentiments  of  the  people  of
the  United  States  at  the  time  they  were  uttered,
and,  moreover,  they  embodied  a  doctrine  which
had  been  vaguely  held  in  the  days  of  Washington,
and  from  that  time  to  the  administration  of  Mon
roe  had  been  more  and  more  clearly  avowed.  It
has  received  the  approval  of  successive  administra
tions  and  of  the  foremost  publicists  and  statesmen.
The  peace  and  prosperity  of  America  have  been
greatly  promoted  by  the  declaration,  almost  uni
versally  assented  to,  that  European  states  are  not
to  gain  new  dominion  in  America.  For  conve
nience  of  reference  the  two  passages  of  the  mes
sage  are  here  quoted :

"  At  the  proposal  of  the  Russian  imperial  gov
ernment,  made  through  the  minister  of  the  em
peror  residing  here,  full  power  and  instructions
have  been  transmitted  to  the  minister  of  the  Unit
ed  States  at  St.  Petersburg,  to  arrange,  by  amica
ble  negotiation,  the  respective  rights  and  interests
of  the  two  nations  on  the  northwest  coast  of  this
continent.  A  similar  proposal  had  been  made  by
his  imperial  majesty  to  the  government  of  Great
Britain,  which  has  likewise  been  acceded  to.  The
government  of  the  United  States  has  been  desir
ous,  by  this  friendly  proceeding,  of  manifesting  the
great  value  which  they  have  invariably  attached  to
the  friendship  of  the  emperor,  and  their  solicitude


MONROE


MONROE


361


to  cultivate  the  best  understanding  with  his  gov
ernment.  In  the  discussions  to  which  this  interest
has  given  rise,  and  in  the  arrangements  by  which
they  may  terminate,  the  occasion  has  been  judged
proper  for  asserting,  as  a  principle  in  which  the
rights  and  interests  of  the  United  States  are  in
volved,  that  the  American  continents,  by  the  free
and  independent  condition  which  they  have  as
sumed  and  maintain,  are  henceforth  not  to  be  con
sidered  as  subjects  for  future  colonization  by  any
European  power.  .  .  .  We  owe  it,  therefore,  to
candor,  and  to  the  amicable  relations  existing  be
tween  the  United  States  and  those  powers,  to  de
clare  that  we  should  consider  any  attempt  on  their
Eart  to  extend  their  system  to  any  portion  of  this
emisphere  as  dangerous  to  our  peace  and  safety.
With  the  existing  colonies  or  dependencies  of  any
European  power  we  have  not  interfered,  and  shall
not  interfere.  But  with  the  governments  who  have
declared  their  independence  and  maintained  it,
and  whose  independence  we  have,  on  great  consid
eration  and  on  just  principles,  acknowledged,  we
could  not  view  any  interposition  for  the  purpose  of
oppressing  them,  or  controlling  in  any  other  man
ner  their  destiny,  by  any  European  power,  in  any
other  light  than  as  the  manifestation  of  an  un
friendly  disposition  toward  the  United  States."

At  the  close  of  Monroe's  second  term  as  presi
dent  he  retired  to  private  life,  and  during  the
seven  years  that  remained  to  him  resided  part
of  the  time  at  Oak  Hill.  Loudon  co.,  Va.,  and
part  of  the  time  in  the  city  of  New  York.  The
illustration  on  page  359  represents  both  the  old
and  the  new  Oak  Hill  mansions.  He  accepted
the  office  of  regent  in  the  University  of  Virginia
in  1826  with  Jefferson  and  Madison.  He  was
asked  to  serve  on  the  electoral  ticket  of  Virginia
in  1828,  but  declined  on  the  ground  that  an  ex-
president  should  not  be  a  party-leader.  He  con
sented  to  act  as  a  local  magistrate,  however,  and
to  become  a  member  of  the  Virginia  constitutional
convention.  The  administration  of  Monroe  has
often  been  designated  as  the  "  era  of  good  feel
ing."  Schouler,  the  historian,  has  found  this
heading  on  an  article  that  appeared  in  the  Bos
ton  "Centinel"  of  12  July,  1817.  It  is.  on  the
whole,  a  suitable  phrase  to  indicate  the  state  of
political  affairs  that  succeeded  to  the  troublesome
period  of  organization  and  preceded  the  fearful
strains  of  threatened  disruption  and  of  civil  war.
One  idea  is  consistently  represented  by  Monroe
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  his  public  life —
the  idea  that  America  is  for  Americans,  that  the
territory  of  the  United  States  is  to  be  protected
and  enlarged,  and  that  foreign  intervention  will
never  be  permitted.  In  his  early  youth  Monroe-
enlisted  for  the  defence  of  American  independence.
He  was  one  of  the  first  to  perceive  the  importance
of  free  navigation  upon  the  Mississippi :  he  nego
tiated  with  France  and  Spain  for  the  acquisition
of  Louisiana  and  Florida :  he  gave  a  vigorous  im
pulse  to  the  second  war  with  Great  Britain  in  de
fence  of  our  maritime  rights  when  the  rights  of  a
neutral  power  were  endangered  :  and  he  enunciat
ed  a  dictum  against  foreign  interference  which
has  now  the  force  of  international  law.  Judged
by  the  high  stations  he  was  called  upon  to  fill,  his
career  was  brilliant ;  but  the  writings  he  has  left
in  state  papers  and  correspondence  are  inferior  to
those  of  Jefferson,  Madison.  Hamilton,  and  others
of  his  contemporaries.  He  is  rather  to  be  honored
as  an  upright  and  patriotic  citizen  who  served  his
party  with  fidelity  and  never  condescended  to  low
and  unworthy  measures.  He  deserved  well  of
the  country,  which  he  served  faithfully  during


I  his  career.  After  his  retirement  from  the  office
of  president  he  urged  upon  the  government  the
judgment  of  unsettled  claims  which  he  presented

j  for  outlays  made during  his  prolonged  political

I  services  abroad  and  for  which  he  had  never  re
ceived  adequate  remuneration.  During  the  ad
vance  of  old  age  his  time  was  largely  occupied  in
correspondence,  and  he  undertook  to"  write  a  phi
losophical  history  of  the  origin  of  free  govern
ments,  which  was  published  long  after  his  decease.
While  attending  congress,  Monroe  married,  in
1786,  a  daughter  of  Lawrence  Kortright,  of  New
York.  One  of  his  two  daughters,  Eliza,  married

!  George  Hay,  of  Virginia,  and  the  other,  Maria,
married  Samuel  L.  Gouvernetir.  of  New  York.

A  large  number  of  manuscripts,  including  drafts
of  state  papers,  letters  addressed  to  Monroe,  and
letters  from  him,  have  been  preserved.  Most  of
these  have  been  purchased  by  congress  and  are
preserved  in  the  archives  of  the  state  department ;
others  are  still  held  by  his  descendants.  Schouler.
in  his  "  History  of  the  United  States,"  has  made
use  of  this  material  to  advantage,  particularly  in
his  account  of  the  administrations  of  Madison  and
Monroe,  which  he  has  treated  in  detail.  Bancroft,
in  his  "History  of  the  Constitution,"  draws  large
ly  upon  the  Mon
roe  papers,  many
of  which  he  prints
for  the  first  time.
The  eulogy  of  John
Quincy  Adams

|  (Boston,  1831)  and

1  his diary afford

j  the  best  contempo-

i  rary  view  of  Mon
roe's  characteris-

I  tics  as  a  statesman.

j  Jefferson,  Madison.

i  Webster,  Calhoun.
and  Benton  have
left  their  apprecia
tive  estimates  of
his  character.

The  remains  of
James  Mon  roe  were
buried  in  Marble
cemetery,  Second

street,  between  First  and  Second  avenues,  New
York,  but  in  1858  were  taken  to  Richmond,  Va..
and  there  reinterred  on  the  28th  of  April,  in
Hollywood.  (See  illustration  above.)  See  Samuel
P.  Waldo's  "Tour  of  James  Monroe  through  the
Northern  and  Eastern  States,  with  a  Sketch  of
his  Life  "  (Hartford,  1819) ;  "  Life  of  James  Mon
roe,  with  a  Notice  of  his  Administration,"  by
John  Quincy  Adams  (Buffalo,  1850):  "Concise
History  of  the  Monroe  Doctrine,"  by  George  F.
Tucker  (Boston,  1885) :  and  Daniel  C.  Gilman's  life
of  Monroe,  in  the  "American  Statesmen"  series
(Boston.  1883).  In  the  volume  last  named  is  an
appendix  by  J.  F.  Jameson,  which  gives  a  list
of  writings  pertaining  to  Monroe's  career  and  to
the  Monroe  doctrine.  Monroe's  portrait  by  Stuart
is  in  the  possession  of  Thomas  J.  Coolidge.  and  that
by  Vanderlyn  is  in  the  city-hall,  New  York,  both
of  which  have  been  engraved. — His  wife,  Eliza
beth  Kortriyrht,  b.  in  New  York  city  in  1768 ;
d.  in  Loudon  county,  Va..  in  1830.  was  the  daugh
ter  of  Lawrence  Kortright.  a  captain  in  the  Brit
ish  army.  She  married  James  Monroe  in  1786,
accompanied  him  in  his  missions  abroad  in  1794
and  1803,  and  while  he  was  U.  S.  minister  to
France  she  effected  the  release  of  Madame  de  La
fayette,  who  was  confined  in  the  prison  of  La


362


MONROE


MONTAGU


Force,  hourly  expecting  to  be  executed. On  the  j
accession  of  her  husband  to  the  presidency,  Mrs.
Monroe  became  the  mistress  of  the  White  House ;  |

but  she  mingled  j
little  in  society  on  j
account  of  her  del-  j
icate  health.  She  is
described  by  a  con
temporary  writ
er  as  "an  elegant
and  accomplished
woman,  with  a
dignity  of  manner
that  peculiarly  fit
ted  her  for  the  sta
tion,"  The  accom
panying  vignette  is
copied  from  the
only  portrait  that
was  ever  made
of  Mrs.  Monroe,
which  was  exe
cuted  in  Paris  in
1796.— His  neph
ew.  James,  soldier,
b.  in  Albemarle
county,  Va.,  10

Sept.,  1799;  d.  in  Orange,  X.  J.,  7 "Sept.,  1870,
was  a  son  of  the  president's  elder  brother,  An
drew.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1815,  assigned  to  the  artillery  corps,
and  served  in  the  war  with  Algiers,  in  which
he  was  wounded  while  directing  part  of  the  quar
ter-deck  guns  of  the  "  Guerriere "  in  an  action
with  the  "  Mashouda "  off  Cape  de  Gata,  Spain.
He  was  aide  to  Gen,  Winfield  Scott  in  1817-'22,
became  1st  lieutenant  of  the  4th  artillery  on  the
reorganization  of  the  army  in  1821,  and  served  on
garrison  and  commissary  duty  till  1832,  when  he
was  again  appointed  Gen.  Scott's  aide  on  the  Black
Hawk  expedition,  but  did  not  reach  the  seat  of
war,  owing  to  illness.  He  resigned  his  commission
on  80  Sept.,  1832,  and  entered  politics,  becoming
an  alderman  of  New  York  city  in  1833,  and  presi
dent  of  the  board  in  1834.  In  1836  he  declined  the
appointment  of  aide  to  Gov.  William  L.  Marcy.  He
was  in  congress  in  1839-'41,  and  was  chosen  again
in  1846,  but  his  seat  was  contested,  and  congress
ordered  a  new  election,  at  which  he  refused  to  be  a
candidate.  During  the  Mexican  war  he  was  active
in  urging  the  retention  in  command  of  Gen.  Scott.
In  1850-'2  he  was  in  the  New  York  legislature,
and  in  1852  was  an  earnest  supporter  of  his  old
chief  for  the  presidency.  After  the  death  of  his
wife  in  that  year  he  retired  from  politics,  and
spent  much  of  his  time  at  the  Union  club,  of  which
he  was  one  of  the  earliest  members.  Just  before
the  civil  war  he  visited  Richmond,  and,  by  public
speeches  and  private  effort,  tried  to  prevent  the  se
cession  of  Virginia,  and  in  the  struggle  that  fol
lowed  he  remained  a  firm  supporter  of  the  National
government.  He  much  resembled  his  uncle  in  per
sonal  appearance.

MONROE,  Samuel Yorke,  clergyman,  b. in  I
Mount  Holly,  N.  J.,  1  July,  1816;  d.'near  Jersey
City,  N.  J.,  9  Feb.,  1867. After  receiving  an  Eng-  i
lish  education,  he  united  with  the  Methodist  church,  j
became  a  local  preacher,  and  in  1843  entered  the  I
itinerancy. During  the  next  twenty  years  he  was  j
stationed  at  various  points  in  New  Jersey,  serving
as  presiding  elder  of  Bridgeton  district  in  1850,
and  of  Camden  district  in  1864. From  1865  till  |
his  death  he  was  corresponding  secretary  of  the  I
newly  organized  Church  extension  society,  which  :
he  raised  to  a  high  standard  of  efficiency,  "  He  was  j


an  active  member  of  the  general  conferences  of
1856,  1860,  and  1864,  and  at  the  last  received  a
large  vote  for  bishop.  He  was  killed  by  falling
from  a  rail  way- train.

MONROY,  Antonio  (mon-roy'),  Mexican  cler
gyman,  b.  in  Queretaro  in  1634;  d.  in  Santiago  de
.Galicia,  Spain,  in  1715.  He  studied  at  the  Colegio
de  Cristo,  was  graduated  in  philosophy  in  1652,
and  entered  the  Dominican  order  in  1654.  He  re
ceived  the  degree  of  doctor  of  theology  from  the
Mexican  academy,  where*  he  became  professor  of
philosophy  and  theology.  He  went  to  Rome  on
business  of  his  province  after  serving  the  rectory
of  the  College  of  Portaceli  and  the  priory  of  the
principal  convent  of  his  order  in  Mexico.  While
he  was  at  the  court  of  Innocence  XI.,  Rocaberti,  ,'
the  general  of  the  Dominican  order,  was  appointed
archbishop  of  Valencia  in  1677,  and  Monroy,  by
recommendation  of  the  pope,  was  elected  his  suc
cessor,  which  place  he  held  for  nine  years.  In
1681  he  was  presented  with  the  bishopric  of  Mi-
choacan.  which  he  declined,  but  in  1(585  the  king
made  him  archbishop  of  Santiago  de  Galicia.  He
held  this  place  for  thirty  years  and  founded  many
charitable  institutions.  King  Charles  II.  made
him  his  chaplain,  a  grandee  of  Spain,  and  a  mem
ber  of  the  privy  council.  Monroy  was  the  only
Mexican  that  has  been  general  of  the  Dominican
order.  He  wrote  "  Laudatio  funebris  ad  regias
Philipi  IV.  Magni  Ilispan.  Regis  et  Indian  Impe-
ratoris  Exequias  "  (Mexico,  1667)  and  many  other
works  on  European  ecclesiastical  affairs.

MONSERRAT,  Joaqnin  de  (mon-scr-raf),
Marquis  of  Cruillas,  Viceroy  of  Mexico,  b.  about
1710  ;  d.  about  1770.  He  entered  the  city  of  Mexi
co,  6  Oct.,  1760,  and  his  administration  is  note
worthy  principally  for  the  creation  of  the  army
of  New  Spain  and  the  visit  of  Jose  de  Galvez  (q.  v.).
In  consequence  of  the  war  between  France  and
England,  Spain  sent  forces  to  America  as  a  [ire-
cautionary  measure,  but,  when  the  Spanish  au
thorities  on  this  continent  received  orders  to  pro
vide  the  French  colonies  with  provisions,  war  was
declared  by  England  in  January,  1762,  and  Sir
George  Keppel  (q.  v.)  took  possession  of  Havana.
When  the  viceroy  learned  that  the  English  had  at
tacked  Cuba,  he  fortified  Vera  Cruz  and  other
Gulf  ports,  and,  as  he  had  only  one  Spanish  regi
ment  of  infantry  and  one  troop  of  cavalry,  he  at
once  began  to  organize  the  militia,  forming  and
drilling  six  regiments  of  infantry  and  three  of
cavalry.  On  25  Aug..  1765,  Jose  de  Galvez  arrived
in  Mexico  as  an  inspector  with  independent  power,
and  began  to  arrange  affairs  without  consulting
the  viceroy.  The  Indians  revolted  in  different
parts  of  the  country,  and  the  disagreement  between
the  viceroy,  the  visitor  Galvez,  the  audiencia,  and
the  inspector  of  militia,  Juan  de  Villalba,  con
tributed  to  diminish  respect  for  the  Spanish  au
thorities.  There  is  no  doubt  that  Monserrat.  by
showing  the  people  by  the  organization  of  militia
what  power  they  possessed,  and  by  the  disorgan
ization  of  the  viceregal  authority  through  his  dis
putes,  was  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  independence.
At  last  the  court  resolved  to  supersede  him,  and  he
returned  to  Spain  in  1766  to  justify  himself;  but
he  did  not  figure  again  in  politics,  and  soon  died.

MONTAGU,  George,  British  naval  officer,  b.
12  Dec.,  1750 ;  d.  23  Dec.,  1829.  His  father.  John,
was  an  admiral  in  the  British  navy.  The  son  was
educated  at  the  Royal  naval  academy,  and  attained
the  rank  of  post-captain  in  1773.  At  the  begin
ning  of  the  war  of  American  independence  he  was
employed  in  blockading  the  ports  of  Marblehead
and  Salem,  Mass.  He  covered  the  embarkation  of  •


MONTAGUE


MONTCALM


363


the  array  at  the  evacuation  of  Boston,  assisted
Lord  Duninore  and  his  family  to  escape  from  the
Virginian  patriots,  and  took  part  in  the  capture  of
New  York  city,  where  his  vessel,  the  "  Fowey,"  was
stationed  by  Lord  Howe  as  the  advanced  ship.  He
was  promoted  to  a  flag  in  1794,  and  became  full
admiral  in  1801.

MONTAGUE.  Robert  L.,  statesman,  b.  in  Mid
dlesex  county,  Va.,  23  May,  1819 ;  d.  4  March,
1880.  He  received  his  education  at  William  and
Mary,  where  in  1842  he  took  the  degree  of  LL.  B.
He  began  the  practice  of  law  in  Middlesex  county
in  1844,  was  repeatedly  a  member  of  the  Virginia
legislature,  thrice  a  presidential  elector,  lieutenant-
governor  of  the  state  for  four  years,  and  a  mem
ber  of  the  Virginia  secession  convention,  and
president  at  its  last  session.  He  served  in  the  Con
federate  congress  from  1863  until  it  ceased  to  exist.
In  1873  he  was  elected  judge  of  the  eighth  judicial
circuit,  and  for  several  years  he  was  president  of
the  General  Baptist  association  of  Virginia.

MONTAGUE,  William  Lewis,  educator,  b.  in
Belchertown,  Mass.,  6  April,  1831.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Amherst  in  1855,  studied  theology,  and  j
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1860.  He  travelled  in
Europe  for  two  years,  and  since  1862  has  been
professor  of  modern  languages  in  Amherst.  His
publications  include  •'  Comparative  Grammar  of
the  Spanish  Language  "  (Boston,  1873) ;  "  Manual
of  Italian  Grammar"  (1874);  "Introduction  to
Italian  Literature"  (1875;  2d  ed.,  1879);  and  sev
eral  historical  and  biographical  papers.

MONTAIGNE  I)E  NOGARET,  Charles
Stanislas  (mon-tang),  West  Indian  naturalist,  b.
in  St.  Croix,  W.  I.,  in  1667;  d.  in  Paris  in  1742.
His  mother  took  him  in  1672  to  Paris,  where  he
received  his  education  in  the  College  Louis  le  Grand.
In  1689,  having  obtained  a  pension  in  considera
tion  of  the  services  of  his  ancestors,  he  resolved
to  devote  his  life  to  science.  He  was  assistant
demonstrator  in  the  laboratory  of  the  Academy
of  sciences  when  he  was  sent  in  1701  to  explore  the
West  Indies  and  Guiana,  and  to  study  the  miner
alogy  and  botany  of  those  countries.  Sailing  from
Brest  in  May,  1703,  he  visited  successively  the
greater  part  of  the  \Vest  Indian  islands,  and,  pass
ing  to  the  continent,  explored  the  Guianas  till  1717,
remaining  altogether  fourteen  years  in  America.
He  formed  a  collection  of  minerals  and  plants,  the
greater  part  of  which  he  lost  in  a  shipwreck  on  his
return  to  France,  but  he  saved  his  papers  and
drawings.  He  published  •' Etudes  sur  la  mineralo-
gie  des  Antilles"  (Paris,  1720);  "  Geodesie  de  1'ile
de  Saint  Croix"  (1721);  "Plan  de  mineralogie  de
la  Guiane "  (1724);  "Etudes  sur  les  gisements
mineralogiques  des  Antilles  "  (1730) ;  "  Herbier  de
la  flore  des  Antilles  explique  "  (1733) ;  and  "  De
scription  des  couches  mineralogiques  de  l'ile  de
Saint  Domingue  "  (1735).

MONTALVO  ¥  AMBULODI,  Francisco  (mon-
tal'-vo),  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  in
1754;  d.  in  Madrid  in  1832.  He  entered  the  army
in  Spain  in  his  youth,  served  in  South  America
and  Santo  Domingo,  and  was  promoted  rapidly.
In  1795  he  was  made  brigadier,  and  in  May.  1813,
appointed  captain-general  of  New  Granada,  then  in
open  revolt  against  the  Spanish  rule.  During  Mon-
talvo's  short  administration  the  condition  of  the
natives  began  to  improve.  In  1815  he  was  made
lieutenant-general,  but  in  1816,  after  Morillo's
arrival  in  Bogota,  he  was  superseded  and  returned
to  Spain,  where  he  was  a  member  of  the  council
of  state  to  the  end  of  his  life.

MONTAUUAND  (mon-to-bong).  buccaneer,  b.
about  1650;  d.  in  Bordeaux  in  1700.  The. place


of  his  birth  is  unknown.  He  appeared  as  a  pirate
in  the  West  Indies  about  1675,  and  for  twenty
years  was  the  terror  of  the  Spaniards  in  Africa
and  America.  He  established  his  headquarters  in
the  island  of  Tortuga,  which  at  that  time  was  the
rendezvous  of  all  the  buccaneers.  Montauband
frequently  ravaged  the  coasts  of  New  Spain,  Car-
thagena,  Florida,  and  North  America,  as  far  as
Newfoundland.  In  1694  he  escorted  to  France  a
great  number  of  prizes  that  he  had  taken  in  the
West  Indies,  but  the  excesses  that  were  committed
by  his  crew  at  Bordeaux  forced  him  to  abandon
that  port  in  January,  1695,  and  he  cruised  for
some  time  on  the  coast  of  Guinea,  capturing  many
ships  from  the  Dutch  and  English.  After  nearly
losing  his  life  by  the  explosion  of  a  powder-maga-.
zine  he  returned  to  Tortuga,  but  resolved  to  aban
don  his  mode  of  life,  and  returned  to  Bordeaux,
where  he  died.  He  wrote  "  Relation  du  voyage  du
sieur  de  Montauband,  capitaine  de  flibustiers  sur
les  cotes  de  1'Amerique  du  Sud  et  de  Guinee  dans
les  annees  de  1694  et  1695."  which  is  printed  in  the
collection  of  Las  Casas  (Amsterdam,  1698).  This
is  considered  unauthentic  by  some  authorities.

MONTBARS  (mom-barr),  surnamed  the  "Ex
terminator,"  buccaneer,  b.  in  Languedoc,  France,
about  1645.  Nothing  is  known  of  his  death.  He
belonged  to  a  wealthy  family,  and  in  his  youth  re
ceived  a  good  education,  but  embarked  with  his
uncle,  a  captain  in  the  royal  navy  of  France,  when
the  war  against  Spain  began  in  1667,  and  sailed  to
the  West  Indies.  Near  Santo  Domingo  their  ship
went  down,  together  with  two  Spanish  vessels
which  they  were  fighting,  and  the  death  of  his
uncle  augmented  his  hatred  of  the  Spaniards.  He
joined  the  buccaneers  of  Tortugas,  and  soon  was
one  of  their  chiefs.  With  his  companions  he  at
tacked  the  coasts  of  Mexico,  Honduras,  the  Span
ish  main,  Cuba,  and  Porto  Rico,  taking  forts  and
destroying  cities,  and  never  giving  quarter,  although
he  did  not  murder  defenceless  persons  in  cold  blood
like  other  buccaneers.  He  set  fire  to  Porto  Ca-
bello,  San  Pedro,  Gibraltar,  Maracaibo,  and  other
important  cities,  whose  commerce  he  wholly  de
stroyed.  He  was  probably  lost  at  sea  during  one  of
his  expeditions.  He  is  the  hero  of  several  dramas
and  of  a  romance  entitled  "  Montbars,  1'Extermina-
teur;  ou  le  dernier  des  flibustiers"  (Paris,  1807).
See  also  Alexander  O.  (Emelin's  "  Histoire  des
aventuriers  ou  flibustiers"  (Lyons,  1775).  _,

MONTCALM  GOZON  DE  SAINT  YERAN,
Louis  Joseph,  Marquis  de,  b.  in  the  chateau  of
Candiac.  near  Nimes,  France,  29  Feb.,  1712 ;  d.
in  Quebec,  Canada,  14
Sept.,  1759.  He  was
educated  by  one  Du
mas,  a  natural  son  of
his  grandfather,  who
taught  him  Greek.
Latin,  and  mathemat
ics,  till  at  fifteen  he
entered  the  army  as
ensign  in  the  regiment
of  Hainaut.  In  1743
he  was  made  colonel  of
the  regiment  of  Aux-
errois.  Three  years
later,  while  rallying
his  soldiers  in  the  bat
tle  under  the  walls  of
Piacenza,  he  received
five  sabre -cuts,  and
was  made  prisoner.

He  was  soon  afterward  exchanged,  promoted  to
the  rank  of  brigadier,  and  again  severely  wound-


.3(54


MONTCALM


MONTCALM


ed.  The  peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle  gave  him  an
interval  of  rest,  till,  in  1755,  war  began  in  Amer
ica,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  year  he
was  appointed  to  succeed  Baron  Dieskau,  who
had  been  defeated  and  captured  by  the  New
England  militia  at  the  battle  of  Lake  George.
In  the  spring  of  175(5  he  sailed  from  Brest  to  take
command  of  the  French  regular  forces  in  Can
ada,  and  after  a  rough  voyage  landed  at  Que
bec.  He  soon  had  an  interview  with  the  governor-
general,  Vaudreuil,  who  regarded  him  with  a
jealousy  that  time  only  deepened  and  strengthened.
Vaudreuil,  the  official  commander-in-chief,  was  in
censed  at  finding  himself  practically  supplanted,
and  he  never  could  forgive  his  rival.  Montcalm's
first  movement  was  to  Ticonderoga,  which  was
then  threatened  by  the  English,  but  the  danger  at
that  point  proving  less  imminent  than  was  sup
posed,  the  governor  and  the  general  resolved  to
attack  the  English  post  of  Oswego.  By  a  rapid
and  well-conducted  movement,  Montcalrn  invested
and  captured  it,  thus  uncovering  the  western
frontier  of  New  York  and  spreading  consternation
through  all  the  British  colonies.  The  next  sum
mer  he  struck  a  yet  more  noteworthy  blow,  crossed
Lake  George  with  about  8,000  French  and  Indians,
and  took  Fort  William  Henry,  which  guarded  the
head  of  the  lake.  The  capture  was  followed  by  a
deplorable  event.  The  Indian  allies  broke  the
capitulation,  fell  upon  the  defenceless  garrison,
murdered  a  considerable  number  of  men,  women,
and  children,  and  carried  off  many  more  as  prison
ers.  Montcalm  vainly  risked  his  life  to  protect  his
conquered  enemies.  The  catastrophe  has  been  re
garded  as  a  blot  upon  his  name,  but  the  only  blame
that  can  be  imputed  to  him  is  his  failure  to  foresee
the  extent  of  the  danger  and  take  effectual  meas
ures  to  avert  it.

In  the  next  year,  1758,  he  achieved  the  crowning
exploit  of  his  life.  Gen.  Abercrombie  advanced  on
Ticonderoga  with  about  15,000  men,  and  Montcalm
awaited  his  attack  with  fewer  than  a  fourth  of
that  number,  but  formed  almost  entirely  of  regular
troops,  who  were  posted  at  the  neck  of  the  penin
sula  on  high  ground  behind  a  breastwork  of  trunks
of  trees  and  protected  in  front  by  a  vast  and
tangled  abatis.  Abercrombie  had  a  powerful  artil
lery  train,  but,  hearing  that  his  enemy  would  soon
be  re-enforced,  he  would  not  wait  to  bring  it  into
action,  and  ordered  an  attack  with  musketry  alone.
The  battle  raged  from  one  o'clock  till  evening.  The
English  troops  displayed  a  desperate  courage,  but
could  not  force  the  breastwork  and  the  abatis,
which,  in  themselves  almost  impregnable  to  a  direct
attack,  were  defended  with  the  utmost  gallantry.
At  night  the  assailants  withdrew  in  disorder,  with
the  loss  of  nearly  2,000  men.  This  French  suc
cess  was  balanced  by  great  reverses.  Gen.  Sir
Jeffrey  Amherst  laid  siege  to  Louisburg,  and  that
important  fortress  fell  into  British  hands.  Gen.
John  Forbes  advanced  upon  Fort  Duquesne,  and
the  small  French  garrison  abandoned  it  at  his  ap
proach.  The  English  were  putting  forth  an  ac
tivity  and  vigor  that  they  had  miserably  lacked  in
the  earlier  years  of  the  war,  for  Pitt  was  now  in
power,  and  the  nation  was  roused  from  apathy  to'
enthusiasm.  On  the  other  hand,  France,  engrossed
by  European  wars,  left  her  American  colonies  al
most  without  succor,  and  Montcalm,  with  scanty
resources,  disordered  finances,  and  a  discouraged
people,  was  left  to  the  well-nigh  hopeless  task  of
defending  Canada.  Pitt  resolved  on  a  strong  effort
to  master  it,  and  in  1759  Gen.  Wolfe  ascended  the
St.  Lawrence  with  between  8,000  and  9,000  troops
and  a  considerable  naval  force  under  Admiral


Saunders.  The  object  of  the  expedition  was  the
reduction  of  Quebec,  the  citadel  of  Canada.  Here
the  whole  available  force  of  the  colony  was  mus
tered  to  oppose  the  invaders,  and  Quebec,  with  the
adjacent  shores  of  Beauport,  was  occupied  by  regu
lars,  militia,  and  Indians,  to  the  number  in  all  of
more  than  16,000,  of  whom  only  a  small  part  were
disciplined  troops.  Montcalm  shared  the  command
with  Vaudreuil,  who,  with  all  his  jealousy,  was
always  ready  in  time  of  danger  to  throw  responsi
bility  on  his  rival.  Having  no  confidence  in  the
Canadian  militia,  Montcalm  persisted  in  an  atti
tude  of  defence.  Every  plan  of  Wolfe  was  met
and  thwarted,  and  when,  at  the  end  of  July,  the
English  commander  made  a  desperate  attempt  to
scale  the  heights  of  Montmorency,  he  met  with  a
disastrous  repulse.  The  uncommon  strength  of
the  country,  joined  with  the  sagacious  tactics  of
Montcalm,  held  Wolfe  everywhere  at  bay.  At  the
beginning  of  September  the  success  of  the  defence
seemed  assured.  The  British  admiral  was  anxious
to  be  gone,  and  the  French  fully  believed  that
their  deliverance  was  at  hand.  But  before  dawn
on  the  morning  of  the  13th  Wolfe  surprised  a
French  outpost,  scaled,  with  about  5,000  men,  the
lofty  heights  that  here  bordered  the  St.  Lawrence,
gained  the  plateau  of  Quebec,  and  formed  in  line
of  battle  on  the  plains  of  Abraham.  Montcalm
left  his  camp  on  the  Beauport  shore,  hastily  crossed
the  little  river  St.  Charles,  and  at  about  ten
o'clock  advanced  to  the  attack.  His  force  was  by
this  time  much  reduced  by  desertion  and  other
causes,  and  a  large  part  had  been  detached  to
watch  the  river  above.  Thus  the  opposing  forces
were  about  equal  in  number.  Montcalm  led  the
charge  in  person.  The  French  came  on  shouting
and  firing.  The  British  waited  in  silence  till  they
were  within  forty  yards,  then  gave  them  a  general
volley  and  charged  with  bayonet  and  broadsword.

j  The  French  broke  in  disorder. Wolfe,  leading  the

i  pursuit,  was  mortally  wounded,  and  died  on  the
field.  Montcalm,  who  was  on  horseback,  tried  in

j  vain  to  rally  his  troops,  and  was  borne  back  with
the  tide  of  fugitives  toward  the  St.  Louis  gate.
Here  a  bullet  passed  through  his  body,  and  two

1  soldiers led him into the town. A group of

i  terrified  women stood near the entrance  of St.

'  Louis  street,  and  one  of  them  shrieked  out,  "  Oh,.

j  mon  Dieu  !  mon
Dieu  !  the  marquis
is  killed.''  "  It's
nothing,  it's  noth
ing,"  he  returned ;
"  don't  be  troubled
for  me,  my  good
friends."  lie  died
the  next  morning.

Montcalm  was
small  of  stature,
with  a  vivacious
countenance  and
rapid,  impetuous
speech.  He  had  a
high  sense  of  hon
or,  strong  family
attachments,  and
an  ardent  patriot
ism,  together  with
the  tastes  of  a  schol
ar  and  a  great  love
of  rural  pursuits.
As  a  commander
he  stands  high,  though  not  in  the  foremost
rank.  His  last  years  were  embittered  by  his  mis
understanding  with  Vaudreuil,  who,  during  the


MONTEAGUDO


MONTEJO


365


life  of  his  rival  and  still  more  after  his  death,
lost  no  opportunity  of  traducing  him.  With
him  perished  the  last  hope  of  the  colony  of  New
France.  The  engraving  represents  the  monument
erected  to  Montcalru  and  Wolfe  in  1827.  Mont-
calm's  journal  of  his  Canadian  campaign  was  dis
covered  among  other  valuable  papers  in  the  Cha
teau  de  Troisiel,  France,  in  1888,  by  Abbe  Henry
R.  Casgrain.  of  Canada.  See  Francis  Parkman's
'•  Montcalm  and  Wolfe  "  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1885). —
His  son,  Paul  Francois  Joseph,  French  naval
officer,  b.  in  Rouergue  in  1750 ;  d.  in  Turin  in  Octo
ber,  1812,  served  during  the  whole  of  the  war  of
1778-'83  in  the  West  Indies.  He  took  part  in  five
naval  battles,  and  was  at  the  capture  of  Granada  and
Tabago,  being  severely  wounded  during  the  latter
engagement.  He  served  also  under  De  Grasse  in
Chesapeake  bay,  was  again  wounded  at  Yorktown
in  October,  1781.  and  after  the  conclusion  of  peace
married  in  Quebec  a  daughter  of  the  Marquis  de
Jonquieres,  a  former  governor  of  Canada.  In  1789
he  was  elected  to  the  states  general  by  the  nobility
of  Rouergue,  and,  when  the  annuities  to  noblemen
were  suppressed  in  1790,  his  was  continued,  the  ex
ception  being  made  out  of  respect  for  the  memory
of  his  father.  He  emigrated  to  Italy  a  few  months
later,  and  died  in  Turin  from  the  effects  of  a  fall
from  his  horse.  Two  of  his  sons  met  their  death  in
the  West  Indies  while  fighting  against  the  English.

MONTE  AtrU  1)0,  Bernardo  (mon-tay-ah-goo'-
do),  Argentine  statesman,  b.  in  Tucuman  in  1787:
d.  in  Lima,  Peru,  in  1825.  He  studied  in  the  Uni
versity  of  Cordova,  and  after  being  graduated  as
doctor  in  law  came  to  Chuquisaca,  Peru,  where  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1808.  He  was  one  of
the  principal  promoters  of  the  first  declaration  of
independence  in  South  America,  25  May,  1809.  and
was  arrested  by  the  Spanish  authorities  and  sent  to
Buenos  Ayres.  There  he  published  the  "  Martir  6
Libre,"  a  newspaper,  and  prepared  the  way  for
the  revolution  of  May,  1810.  He  also  proclaimed
his  ideas  in  the  Chilian  journal  '•  El  Censor."
In  1811  he  was  one  of  the  editors  of  the
'•  Gaceta  "  and  of  '•  El  Independiente  "  and  "  El
Grito  del  Sur,"  and  he  was  one  of  the  principal
instigators  of  the  movement  that  overthrew  the
governing  junta  of  Buenos  Ayres  in  1812.  In
1813  he  was  a  member  of  the  constituent  assem
bly,  where  he  recommended  many  useful  reforms.
From  1815  till  1817  he  travelled  in  Europe,  but  in
the  latter  year  he  accompanied  San  Martin  as
secretary  in  the  campaign  of  Chili.  After  the
disaster  of  Cancha  Rayada  he  came  to  Mendoza.
and  was  one  of  the  tribunal  that  sentenced  the
brothers  Can-era  to  death.  He  afterward  accom
panied  San  Martin  in  his  campaign  of  Peru  as
military  judge  and  secretary,  and  when  the  latter
was  declared  protector  of  Peru  in  1821  he  appoint
ed  Monteagudo  secretary  of  war  and  the  navy.  On
1  Jan.,  1822,  Monteagudo  became  secretary  of"  state
and  foreign  relations.  He  introduced  many  im
provements,  and  inspired  the  decree  of  10  Jan..
which  established  the  "  Sociedad  Patriotica  de
Lima."  He  was  murdered  in  one  of  the  principal
streets  of  Lima  by  a  negro,  probably  the  tool  of  a
political  enemy.

MONTEFIORE,  Joshna,  author,  b.  in  London.
England,  10  Aug.,  1762;  d.  in  St.  Albans,  Vt.,  26
June,  1843.  His  father,  Moses  Vita,  of  an  Italian
Jewish  family,  came  from  Leghorn  to  England  in
1758.  Of  the  latters  nine  sons,  Joseph  Elias,  the
fourth,  was  the  father  of  Sir  Moses  Montefiore.  the
philanthropist.  Joshua,  who  was  the  sixth,  was
graduated  at  Oxford,  studied  law.  and  in  1784  was
admitted  to  practice.  After  following  his  profes


sion  in  London,  he  joined,  in  1791,  a  band  of  275
adventurers  who  proposed to  establish  a  colony
on  the coast of  Africa,  and  took  charge  of the
military arrangements of the expedition. The
I  party  occupied  the  island  of Bulama  and  raised
J  the  British  flag,  but  after  several  conflicts  with  the
natives,  and  the  refusal  of  Montefiore's  associates
!  to  acquire  the  island  by  purchase,  as  he  advised
them  to  do,  they  were  obliged  to  withdraw. On
I  his return to England,  Montefiore  declined the
honor  of  knighthood,  and  entered  the  army  as  a
captain,  being  the  first  Jew  to  hold  a  military  com-
!  mission  in  England. After  service  in  various  parts
of  the  world  he  resigned,  came  to  the  United  States,
and  for  some  time  published  and  edited  in  New
York  "  Men  and  Measures,"  a  weekly  political  jour
nal  which  was  subventioned  by  the  British  govern
ment. He  afterward  resided  at  St.  Albans,  Vt.,
until  his  death. Mr.  Montefiore  took  a  second  wife
in  his  seventy-third  year,  and  had  seven  children
by  this marriage. He published "  Commercial
and  Notarial  Precedents  "  (London :  Philadelphia,
1804) :  "  Commercial  Dictionary,"  which  was  long
a  standard  work  (London,  1803,  2  eds.  in  the  Unit-
I  ed  States) ; "  Trader's  Compendium  "  ; •'  United
!  States Trader's Compendium  " ;  "  Law  of Copy-
1  right "  :  "  Synopsis  of  Mercantile  Laws  "  (2d  ed.  by
\  Clement  C."  Biddle,  1830) ;  "  Law  and  Treatise  on
!  Book-keeping  "  (1831) ;  and  "  Laws  of  Land  and
|  Sea  "(New  York,  1831).

MONTEIL,  Nicolas  Antoine  (mon-tay),  West
I  Indian  botanist,  b.  in  Fort  Dauphin,  Santo  Do
mingo,  in  1771 :  d.  in  Versailles  in  1833.  He
served  in  the  regiment  of  Port  au  Prince  from  1791
till  1793,  and  became  captain,  but  left  his  native
country  in  1800  and  went  to  New  Orleans,  where
he  resided  several  years,  studying  the  flora  of
Louisiana.  He  participated  also  in  the  foundation
of  the  Champ  d'Asile  in  Texas  in  1817,  and.  after
ward  joining  Jean  Lafitte,  became  his  principal
agent.  He  returned  to  France  in  1824,  and  settled
in  Versailles,  devoting  the  remainder  of  his  life  to
science.  He  published  "  Flore  de  la  Louisiane  "
(3  vols.,  Paris,  1828):  "Etudes  sur  les  legumi-
neuses  arborescentes  de  FAmerique  du  Sud  "  (1830) ;
"  Traite  de  la  culture  de  la  canne  a  sucre  en  Lou
isiane"  (1831),  and  several  other  works.

MONTEIRO,  Candido Borges  (mon-tay  -ro),
Brazilian physician, b. in Rio  Janeiro,  12  Oct.,
|  1812; d.  there,  25 Aug., 1872. He  entered  the
!  Medico-chirurgical  academy,  and  was  graduated  in
]  surgery  in  1833,  and  in  medicine  a  year  later. In
!  1837 he obtained  the professorship  of  operative
j  surgery  and  topographical  anatomy,  which  he  held
I  for  twenty-five  years,  and  he  also  figured  in  parlia-
I  ment  as  an  eloquent  orator. He  was  a  notable
1  operator,  the  first  in  Brazil  to  tie  the  aorta  above
the  iliacal  bifurcation,  and  wrote  a  valuable  treatise
|  on  the  operation,  which  was  printed  in  the  "  Annals
of  the  Imperial  Academy  of  Medicine  "  in  Rio  de
Janeiro. He  was  physician  to  the  imperial  family,
I  held  the  presidency  for  four  years  of  the  municipal
j  chamber  of  the  capital,  and  occupied  other  high
posts  as  councillor  and  minister  of  state,  agricul
ture,  commerce  and  public  works,  and  senator  of
the  empire  for  the  province  of  Rio  Janeiro.

MONTEJO.  Francisco  de  (mon-tay'-ho),  Span
ish  soldier,  b.  in  Salamanca  in  1479 ;  d.  in  Spain  in
1549.  Of  his  early  life  nothing  certain  is  known.
He  enlisted  in  1514,  in  search  of  fortune,  in  the
expedition  of  Pedrarias  Davila  for  the  Spanish
main,  but  shortly  after  his  arrival  in  Nombre  de
Dios,  not  liking  "the  prospect,  he  went  to  Cuba,
where  he  served  under  Diego  de  Velasquez,  who
intrusted  him  with  the  command  of  the  troops  in


366


MONTEMAYOR


MONTERO


the  expedition  to  Yticatan  of  May,  1518.  On  his
return  he  enlisted  with  Hernan  Cortes,  and  sailed
with  him  for  the  conquest  of  Mexico  on  18  Feb.,
1519.  He  was  the  first  Spaniard  to  touch  the  shore,
and  assisted  in  the  foundation  of  Vera  Cruz,  being
appointed  by  Cortes  a  member  of  the  first  common
council.  In  July  of  that  year  he  was  commissioned
by  Cortes  to  carry  to  Spain  the  news  of  the  con
quest  and  presents  for  the  emperor,  who  in  1522
appointed  him  governor  of  the  fortress  of  Vera
Cruz.  On  his  return  to-  Mexico  he  assisted  Cortes
in  the  conquest  till  the  beginning  of  1526,  when  he
returned  on  another  commission  to  Spain,  and  in
December  of  that  year  made  an  agreement  with
the  emperor  for  the  conquest  of  Yucatan,  receiving
the  title  of  adelantado  and  governor.  In  May.  1528,
he  left  Seville  with  three  vessels  and  500  men,  and
after  his  arrival  carried  on  a  constant  war  for
twelve  years,  passing  victoriously  through  the
country  from  Kimpech  to  Vera  Paz.  till  on  23  Jan.,
1541,  the  most  powerful  king  of  that  region,
Tutulxin,  surrendered.  lie  founded  the  cities  of
Campeche.  Valladolid,  and  Salamanca  in  Yucatan.
New  Sevilla  and  Olancho  in  Guatemala,  and  Port
Cabal los  and  Comayagua  in  Honduras.  In  1540  a
royal  commissioner  arrived  to  investigate  his  ad
ministration  ;  and,  to  complain  at  court  of  the  in
justice  that  was  thus  done  him,  he  sailed  in  1548
for  Spain,  where  he  died. — His  son,  Francisco,  b.
in  Salamanca  in  1502;  d.  in  Merida,  Yucatan,  in
1560,  accompanied  his  father  on  his  expedition
and  was  appointed  by  him  in  1545  assistant  gov
ernor  of  Yucatan  and  Cozumel.

MONTEMAYOR.  Alonso  de  (mon-tay-mah-
yor'),  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Seville  late  in  the  15th
century;  d.  in  Mexico  in  1552.  He  came  to  Peru
in  1532  with  his  friend  Almagro,  and  accompanied
him  in  1536  to  the  conquest  of  Chili.  In  the  battle
of  Salinas  he  was  made  a  prisoner  and  kept  long  in
confinement  by  Hernando  Pizarro.  After  recover
ing  his  liberty  he  came  to  Lima,  when  he  heard  of
the  assassination  of  Francisco  Pizarro  in  1541,  and
joined  the  party  of  the  younger  Almagro,  who  sent
him  to  Cuzco  to  gain  over  the  governor,  Alvarez
Holguin,  but  he  was  imprisoned  by  the  latter  and
sent  to  Vaca  de  Castro.  lie  was  pardoned  by  Cas
tro  and  fought  for  him  against  his  former  com
panions  in  the  battle  of  Chupas,  15  Sept.,  1542.  On
the  arrival  of  the  viceroy,  Nunez  vela,  in  1544,
Montemayor  was  appointed  captain,  but  fell  into
the  hands  of  the  forces  of  the  andiencia  opposed
tc  the  viceroy.  Being  discovered  in  the  act  of  con
spiring  against  the  life  of  the  oidores,  or  supreme
judges,  in  favor  of  the  viceroy,  he  was  put  to  the
torture,  but,  after  recovering,  fled  and  joined  Nunez
Vela  in  Tumbez.  He  accompanied  the  latter  in  his
unfortunate  campaign,  and  in  the  battle  of  Ana-
quito,  19  Jan.,  1546,  was  taken  prisoner  by  Gonzalo
Pizarro,  who  pardoned  him,  but  banished  him  to
Chili.  On  the  voyage  he  and  his  companions  over
powered  the  crew  of  the  vessel,  and  sailed  for  New
Spain,  landing  in  Soconusco.  He  wrote  a  narra
tive  of  the  events  in  Peru  in  which  he  participated,
published  by  Oviedo  in  his  "  Historia  general  y
natural  de  las  Indias."

MONTENEGRO,  Alfonso  de  (mon-tay-nay'-
gro),  clergyman,  b.  in  Spain ;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,  in
1553,  He  was  chaplain  to  the  army  of  Belalcazar,
lieutenant  of  Pizarro,  on  his  march  from  San  Miguel
de  Piura  to  Quito.  He  entered  the  city  with  the
conqueror,  and  was  the  first  apostle  of  this  country.
He  was  soon  followed  by  other  Dominicans,  and
laid  the  foundations  of  the  immense  Dominican
convent  and  church  of  Quito,  which,  although  their
walls  are  cracked  by  earthquakes,  are  still  among


the  most  imposing  buildings  of  South  America.
He  governed  his  order  in  Quito,  with  the  title  of
vicar,  up  to  1551,  when  he  was  recalled  to  Limn.
He  is  believed  to  have  founded  the  convents  of
Guayaquil  and  Loja.

MONTERDE,  Mariano  (mon-tair'-deh),  Mexi
can  soldier,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico.  9  Feb.,  1789;
d.  in  Chapultepec,  5  March,  1861.  He  studied  in
the  College  of  San  Juan  de  Letran,  but  left  it  to
enter  the  militia,  being  placed  in  1812  by  the  vice
roy,  Venegas,  in  his  company  of  halberdiers.  In
1821  he  joined  the  army  of  Iturbide  and  gained
the  rank  of  lieutenant.  After  the  war  of  inde
pendence  Monterde  applied  himself  again  to  his
studies,  was  appointed  assistant  on  the  general
staff,  and  built  the  fortifications  of  Vera  Cruz  and
those  of  the  Puente  Nacional.  He  projected  and
constructed  the  fortifications  of  Cerro  Gordo,  and
took  an  active  part  in  forcing  the  capitulation  of
the  Spanish  troops  that  occupied  the  Castle  of  San
Juan  de  Ulna.  In  1828,  under  Gen.  Bnstamante,
he  commanded  part  of  the  army  at  the  time  of  the
invasion  of  Tampico  by  Barradas.  Two  years  af
terward  he  was  appointed  civil  governor  of  the
territory  of  Baja  California,  and  in  1831  he  was
elected  deputy  to  the  general  congress.  In  1835
he  was  again  deputy,  and  when  the  sessions  of
congress  were  closed  he  returned  to  the  corps  of
engineers  as  lieutenant-colonel.  He  was  appointed
sub-director  of  the  military  college  in  1837,  bre
vet  ted  brigadier  in  1840,  and  in  the  following  year
attained  the  rank  of  colonel  of  engineers.  After
his  appointment  in  1842  as  general  commander  of
Chihuahua,  lie  was  elected  by  the  people  constitu
tional  governor  of  the  department.  In  1846  he
was  chosen  director  of  the  military  college  of  Cha-
pultepec,  and  built  the  fortifications  there  in  1847
at  the  time  of  the  American  invasion.  He  de
fended  the  fortress  with  his  scholars,  but  was  taken
prisoner  on  13  Sept.,  1847.  In  1848  Monterde
again  assumed  the  direction  of  the  military  col
lege,  but  during  the  revolution  of  the  following
year  he  was  relieved.  In  1859  he  was  appointed
general  commander  of  the  Federal  district  and
elected  temporary  president  by  the  junta  de  nota
bles.  During  the  administration  of  Gen.  Mira-
mon  he  again  took  charge  of  the  military  college,
and  he  died  while  holding  that  post.

MONTERO,  Lizardo  (mon-tay'-ro),  Peruvian
naval  officer,  b.  in  Ayabaca,  province  of  Piura,
27  May,  1832.  He  studied  in  his  native  place,  and
went  to  Quito  to  finish  his  scientific  education.  In
1851  he  returned  to  Lima,  entered  the  naval  acade
my,  and  was  assigned  to  the  frigate  "  Mercedes."
which  was  lost  in  1853  with  nearly  all  on  board,
but  Montero.  with  a  few  others,  escaped.  He  was
then  sent  to  the  steamer  "  Rimac,"  which  was  also
wrecked  in  1855,  and  Montero  went  on  foot  through
the  desert  of  Tarapaca  to  obtain  aid  for  the  few
survivors.  In  the  same  year  he  was  lieutenant  of
the  "  Apurimac,"  the  largest  vessel  of  the  Peruvian
navy,  and,  while  her  commander  was  ashore  in
Arica.  joined  in  a  mutiny  in  favor  of  Vivanco,  who
was  then  at  the  head  of  a  revolution  against  Presi
dent  Castilla,  and  steamed  away  from  port.  Early
in  1857,  while  Castilla  was  besieging  Vivanco  in
Arequipa,  Montero,  with  the  "Apurimac,"  cap
tured  Arica,  thus  cutting  off  Castilla's  supplies  by
sea.  After  the  suppression  of  the  rebellion,  Mon
tero  delivered  the  vessel  to  the  government  and
went  to  Europe,  but  he  returned  in  1862,  and,  when
war  was  declared  with  Spain,  was  commissioned  to
buy  war-vessels  in  the  United  States.  He  arrived
in  Callao  a  few  days  before  the  bombardment  of
2  May,  1866,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  defence


MONTES  DE OCA


MONTESQUIOU-FEZENSAC 357


as  commander  of  gun-boats,  fighting  under  shelter
of  the  forts,  for  which  he  was  promoted  post-
captain.  In  1874  he  was  sent  by  President  Pardo
against  Pierola,  who  had  risen  in  the  south,  and
defeated  that  leader  at  Los  Angeles  and  Arequipa,
for  which  he  was  promoted  rear-admiral.  He  was
an  unsuccessful  presidential  candidate  against  Gen.
Prado  in  1876.  and  was  senator  for  Piura  when  the
war  against  Chili  began  in  1879.  He  was  sent  by
Prado  to  fortify  Arica,  and  after  the  president  had
left  the  country  in  November  was  in  command  of
the  allied  army,  but  on  the  arrival  of  the  Bolivian
president,  Campero,  the  latter  took  the  supreme
command,  and  under  him  Montero  led  the  Peru
vian  contingent  in  the  unfortunate  battle  of  Tacua,
'2(5  May,  1880,  and  retired  with  his  force  to  Torata.
Under  Pierola  he  served  in  the  battles  of  C'horrillos
and  Miraflores,  13  and  14  Jan.,  1881.  and,  after  the
final  defeat,  was  appointed  to  superintend  the
operations  in  the  north,  where  he  continued  the
war  against  the  Chilians.  He  accepted  the  vice-
presidency  under  Garcia  Calderon  in  March,  1881,
without  abandoning  his  position  in  Cajamarca,  and,
after  the  imprisonment  of  Garcia,  claiming  the
presidency,  went  in  August,  1882.  to  Arequipa  and
formed  a  government.  After  the  evacuation  of
Arequipa,  29  Oct.,  1883,  he  went  to  Bolivia,  but  re
turned  to  Peru  on  its  abandonment  by  the  Chilians
and  submitted  to  Iglesias.  In  1885  he  was  elected
deputy  to  congress,  and  in  the  same  year  became
senator  for  the  province  of  Piura.

MONTES  DE  OCA,  Ignacio  (mon-tes-day-o'-
ka),  Mexican  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Guanajuato,  26
June.  1840.  He  was  sent  in  1852  to  England.
where  he  received  his  primary  education,  returned
in  1856  to  Mexico  to  study  in  the  university,  and
afterward  went  to  Rome,  where  he  was  graduated
in  theology  in  1862.  He  was  ordained  in  1863.
and,  after  serving  for  a  short  time  as  parish  priest
of  Ipswich,  England,  he  returned  again  to  Rome.
where  he  was  chaplain  of  the  papal  troops,  became
a  member  of  the  Academy  of  Arcadians  under  the
name  of  Ipandro  Acaico,  and  received  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1865.  He  returned  to  Mexico  in  the
same  year,  was  appointed  to  the  parish  of  Guana
juato.  and  in  1866  became  honorary  chaplain  to
the  Emperor  Maximilian.  After  his  fall  he  re
turned  to  Rome,  was  appointed  bishop  of  Ciudad
Victoria  de  Tamaulipas  and  consecrated  by  the
ope,  6  March,  1871,  and  went  immediately  to

exico  to  take  possession  of  his  see.  In  1878  he
was  transferred  to  the  bishopric  of  Linares,  and  in
November,  1884,  the  see  of  San  Luis  Potosi  was
also  given  him.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Royal
academy  of  Madrid  and  of  the  Mexican  geographi
cal  and  statistical  society,  and  has  published  "  Poe-
tas  Bucolicos  Griegos,"  a  version  of  the  Greek
original  in  Spanish  verse  (Monterey,  1877)  ;  ''  Ocios
Poeticos,"  a  collection  of  poems  (1878)  ;  and  a
Spanish  translation  of  Pindar's  odes  (1882).

MONTESINOS,  Antonio  de  (mon-te-see'-nos),
clergyman,  b.  in  Spain  in  the  15th  century.  While
sub-prior  of  the  convent  of  St.  Stephen'  of  Sala
manca,  he  determined  to  engage  in  missionary
work  in  America,  and  went  to  Rome,  in  1510,  to
ask  permission  and  the  necessary  powers  for  his
future  field  of  labor.  He  arrived  in  Santo  Domingo
the  following  year,  bringing  with  him  a  number  of
Dominicans,  with  whom  he  established  schools  for
the  colonists  and  the  natives.  But,  as  soon  as  he
attempted  to  free  the  Indians  from  the  slavery  to
which  the  Spaniards  had  reduced  them,  he  became
an  object  of  persecution.  At  first  he  tried  quietly
to  make  the  conquerors  understand  the  injury  they
were  doing  the  king  and  country  by  their  tyranny  :


p


but  when  this  failed  he  denounced  their  crime  in
a  sermon  before  the  governor  and  the  principal
authorities  of  the  colony.  This  discourse  excited
great  indignation,  and  he  was  accused  of  preaching
heresy.  As  his  superiors  refused  to  interfere,  and
as  he  was  more  vehement  in  his  denunciations  in
his  other  sermons,  the  proprietors  of  the  island  re
solved  to  denounce  the  Dominicans  to  King  Ferdi
nand,  and  sent  a  Franciscan  monk  with  a  letter  to
the  Spanish  court.  As  soon  as  Father  Montesi-
nos  was  informed  of  the  charges  against  him  and
his  order,  he  went  to  plead  his  own  cause,  and  to
enlighten  the  king  on  the  abuses  of  which  the  In
dians  were  the  victims.  On  his  arrival  at  Madrid
he  found  every  one  against  him.  and  had  the  great
est  difficulty  in  obtaining  an  audience  with  the
king.  When  he  finally  succeeded,  Ferdinand  re
fused  to  settle  the  question  himself,  and  referred  it
to  an  extraordinary  council.  This  body  decided
that,  while  in  principle  the  Indians  were  free,  the
interests  of  the  colony  required  that  matters  should
remain  as  they  were  for  a  time.  Although  all  his
hopes  were  destroyed  by  this  decision.  Montesinos
returned  to  Santo  Domingo,  whence  he  was  sent
to  the  continent  with  two  other  Dominicans.  Dur
ing  the  passage  he  became  very  ill,  and  was  landed
at  Porto  Rico.  As  he  showed  no  signs  of  recover
ing,  his  companions  continued  their  voyage.  He
finally  recovered,  and  resolved  to  remain  in  Porto
Rico.  He  became  the  first  apostle  of  this  island,
and  converted  the  greater  portion  of  the  inhabi
tants  to  Christianity.

MONTESINOS,"  Fernando,  Spanish  historian,
b.  in  Osuna  in  1593;  d.  in  Seville  in  1655.  He  emi
grated  to  Lima  in  1610,  received  an  appointment
under  the  government,  and  became  afterward  coun
cillor  of  the  viceroy  and  visitor  of  the  audiencia  of
Charcas.  During  the  whole  of  his  career  he  showed
himself  very  humane  to  the  Indians,  and  won  the
friendship  of  their  caciques,  who  furnished  him
with  valuable  historical  information.  He  obtained
also  the  manuscripts  of  the  learned  Luis  Lopez  de
Solis,  bishop  of  Quito,  who  died  in  1628,  and  utilized
them  in  his  works.  He  was  reputed  the  ablest  of
Peruvian  archaeologists,  and  made  also  a  particular
study  of  the  mines  of  Peru.  He  published  "  Ophyr
de  Espana.  6  anales  de  los  reynos  de  Quito  y  Lima  "
(2  vols.,  Lima,  1640):  "Memorias  historicas  del  an-
tiguo  reyno  de  Quito"  (1652);  and  works  on  Peru
vian  metallurgy,  since  reprinted  in  Henry  Ternaux-
Compans's  collection  (1850),  and  in  the  second  edi
tion  of  Leon  Pinelo's  "  Epitome  de  la  Biblioteca
Oriental  y  Occidental"  (Madrid,  1737).

MONTESqUIOU-FEZENSAC,  Philippe  An-
dr6  Francois,  Comte  de  (mon-tes-kew),  French
soldier,  b.  in  the  castle  of  Marsan,  near  Auch,  in
1753 ;  d.  in  Paris,  7  Feb..  1833.  He  became  a  colo
nel  in  1780,  served  in  Tobago  and  Martinique  in
1781,  and  was  appointed  in  1792  brigadier-general
and  governor  of  the  southern  provinces  of  Santo
Domingo,  which  he  administered  with  firmness  and
severity  for  eighteen  month?.  He  quelled  negro
insurrections,  though  he  had  to  contend  with  diffi
culties  of  all  kinds,  which  were  increased  by  the
commissioners  of  the  convention,  who  excited  the
negroes  to  rebellion,  and  pretended  to  organize  in
the  colony  an  impossible  state  of  social  equality.
Montesquieu  deserves  great  praise  for  his  able  con
duct  under  these  difficult  circumstances.  He  was
arrested  and  imprisoned  by  the  commissioners,  but
escaped  in  1794  to  the  United  States,  where  he  be
came  a  professor  of  French,  returning  to  Paris  in
1800.  At  the  accession  of  Louis  XVIII.  he  was
commissioned  lieutenant-general,  and  commanded
a  division  for  a  few  months,  but  retired  in  1817.


368


MONTEVERDE


MONTEZUMA I.


MONTEVERDE,  Juan  Domingo,  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  Spain  about  1772;  d.  there  in  1820.
He  served  in  the  Spanish  navy  and  had  become
captain  in  1811,  when  he  was  sent  by  the  junta  of
Cadiz  to  suppress  the  revolt  in  Venezuela.  Land
ing  at  Coro,  he  rapidly  took  several  large  towns,
compelled  Gen.  Francisco  Miranda  to  capitulate,
12  July,  1812,  and  sent  that  patriot  to  Spain,
as  a  prisoner,  in  violation  of  the  terms  of  agree
ment.  He  also  treated  the  native  chieftains  and
their  families  with  much  perfidy.  His  severities
were  a  principal  cause  of  the  second  insurrection,
headed  by  Simon  Bolivar  (q.  v.),  by  whom  Monte-
verde  was  subsequently  driven  from  Venezuela.

MONTE/,  Lola,  adventuress,  b.  probably  in
Limerick,  Ireland,  in  1824;  d.  in  Astoria,  L.  I.,  30
June.  1861.  Her  mother  was  a  Creole,  and  there
are  conflicting  statements  as  to  her  birth  and  par
entage.  Her  maiden  name  was  Maria  Dolores  Por-
ris  Gilbert.  She  was  brought  up  in  P^ngland,  edu
cated  in  Bath,  and  at  the  age  of  fifteen  married  a
Capt.  James,  of  the  British  army.  Later  she  went
with  her  husband  to  Ilindostan,  but  soon  parted
from  him  to  return  to  England.  In  1840  Lola
Montez  suddenly  appeared  as  a  Spanish  dancer  in
Paris,  and  attracted  attention  by  her  beauty  and
eccentricities.  After  numerous  adventures  in  the
French  capital,  she  found  her  way  to  Munich  as  a
Spanish  performer  in  ballet  and  pantomime.  King
Louis  soon  became  fascinated  by  her  person  and
manners,  and  bestowed  on  her  many  distinctions.
In  184(5  Lola  was  made  Countess  of  Landsfeldt.
Her  influence  with  the  monarch  at  last  became  so
aggravating  to  the  ministry  and  offensive  to  the
people  as  to  cause  several  popular  outbreaks,  which
in  1848  brought  on  a  governmental  crisis  that  re
sulted  in  the  king's  abdication  and  Lola's  expulsion
from  Bavaria.  The  countess  then  retired  to  Eng
land  and  married  a  British  officer  named  Heald,
whereupon  she  was  prosecuted  for  bigamy  by  her
first  husband,  and  fled  to  Spain.  In  1831  she  sailed
in  the  same  ship  with  Louis  Kossuth,  and  landed
in  New  York  city.  Here  she  performed  in  several
dramas  that  set  forth  her  European  experiences,
appearing  first  at  the  Broadway  theatre  on  29  Dec.,
1851.  She  repeated  these  entertainments  in  Bos
ton,  Philadelphia,  New  Orleans,  and  San  Francisco.
In  1855  she  sailed  for  Australia,  and  after  an  ab
sence  of  about  a  year  returned  to  the  United  States,
delivered  lectures  on  "  Woman,  Love,  and  Spirit
ualism,"  and  went  to  England  to  repeat  the  series.
But  her  literary  novelties  were  not  appreciated,
and  she  returned  to  this  country,  discouraged  and
without  occupation.  Not  long  afterward  she  suf
fered  from  partial  paralysis,  and  closed  her  event
ful  career  in  a  sanitary  asylum.  She  was  a  brunette
of  the  Spanish  type,  with  dark-blue  eyes  and  long
lashes.  To  her  personal  charms  she  added  an  arch
and  vivacious  manner,  and  fluent  conversation  in
four  languages.  Her  publications  include  "  Anec
dotes  of  Love  "  (New  York) ;  "  Lectures,"  autobio
graphical  (1858) ;  and  "  The  Arts  of  Beauty."  See
"  The  Story  of  a  Penitent "  (New  York,  1867).

MONTEZUMA  I.,  MOCTE/UMA,  or  MOTH-
EUZOMA  (mon-teh-su'-ma),  surnamed  ILHUICA-
MIXA,  or  the  "  archer  of  heaven,"  seventh  king  of
Mexico,  b.  in  Tenochtitlan,  Mexico,  in  1390;  d.
there  in  1464.  He  was  the  son  of  Huitzilihuitl
(q.  i:),  became  the  best  general  of  his  uncle  Chimal-
popoca,  and  annexed  to  the  empire  the  cities  of
Chalco  and  Tequizquiac.  At  the  death  of  Chimal-
pppoca,  Montezuma  became  a  stanch  supporter  of
his  successor  Izcohuatl  (q.  v.),  and  served  under  the
latter  in  the  army  of  the  allies  against  Moxtla
(q.  v.),  who  was  defeated  in  1430,  and  killed  by


Netzahualcoyotl.  On  the  death  of  Izcohnatl  in
1436,  Montezuma  was  elected  king  by  acclama
tion,  and,  after  a  successful  campaign  against  the
city  of  Chalco,  his  coronation  was  celebrated  with
great  festivities  and  the  accustomed  human  sacri
fices,  the  victims  for  which  had  been  secured  in  the
expeditions  against  the  Chalcos.  Immediately  af
terward  he  subdued  in  a  southward  expedition  the
valleys  of  Matlazingo  and  Tlahuican,  advancing
into  the  territory  of  Oaxaca  as  far  as  the  shore  of
the  Pacific  ocean.  In  a  second  expedition  eastward
he  conquered  the  Totopanecans  on  the  shore  of  the
Gulf  of  Mexico.  In  1446  the  lake  of  Tezcoco  over
flowed  and  inundated  the  city  of  Tenochtitlan,  de
stroying  many  buildings,  and,  on  account  of  the
ruin  of  the  corn  crop,  famine  and  plague  followed.
Montezuma  conferred  with  Netzahualcoyotl  as  to
the  best  means  of  preventing  the  return  of  such  a
calamity,  and  they  agreed  to  build  immense  dams,
the  construction  of  which  was  superintended  by
the  king  of  Tezcoco,  and  the  remains  of  which  in
the  San  Lorenzo  valley  are  still  a  wonder  to  engi
neers.  Montezuma  also  rebuilt  Tenochtitlan,  re
placing  its  frail  houses  by  solid  structures  of  stone
and  lime,  which  brought  about  an  enormous  in
crease  of  the  population.  Montezuma's  court  was
numerous  and  brilliant,  he  promoted  the  influence
of  the  priests,  and  instituted  new  ceremonies,  and
during  his  reign  the  great  temple  was  finished.
He  deprived  the  nobility  of  its  former  privileges,
and  issued  a  Draconian  code  of  laws,  in  which
death  was  the  common  penalty  for  robbery  and
drunkenness.  His  cousin,  Axayacatl,  became  his
successor  in  1464. — II.,  eleventh  king  of  Mexico,
b.  in  Mexico  in  1466;  d.  there  in  June,  1520.  He
was  a  son  of  Axayacatl,  eighth  king,  and  Xochicu-
eitl,  princess  of  Texcoeo,  and  was  surnamed  Xoco-
yotzin  to  distinguish  him  from  the  first  Monte
zuma.  At  the  death  of  his  uncle,  Ahuitzotl,  15
Sept.,  1502,  he  was  elected  king,  and,  after  the  reg
ular  sacrifices  at  the  obsequies  of  his  predecessor,
set  out  accord
ing  to  custom
on  an  expedi
tion  against  the

|  tribes  of  Atlix-

;  co, which had

|  rebelled.  On  his
return  to  Te-

i  nochtitlan,with
numerous  pris
oners  for  the
human  sacri
fices,  his  coro
nation  was  cele
brated  with
great  pomp.  In
1504,  to  aid  his
allies  of  Huexo-
tzingo,  he  be
gan  a  protract
ed  war  against
the  small  but
warlike  repub
lic  of  Tlaxcala.
He  embellished

his  capital,  and  in  1507  opened  war  against  Gua
temala  and  later  against  the  rebellious  province
of  Tehuantepec,  and,  conducting  expeditions  as
far  as  Honduras  and  Nicaragua,  enlarged  his  em
pire.  In  1518,  on  the  occasion  of  the  expedition
of  Juan  de  Grijalva  (q.  v.),  he  received  notice
that  unknown  men,  white,  and  with  long  beards,
had  landed  on  his  coast,  and  this  filled  his  mind
with  superstitious  terror,  as  he  remembered  the


MONTGOMERY


MONTGOMERY


369


ancient  tradition  that  shortly  before  the  destruction
of  the  Mexican  empire  the  first  chief  of  the  dynas
ty,  yuetzalcoatl,  would  return  from  the  Orient.
Notwithstanding,  he  ordered  the  coast  to  be
watched,  and  when  Cortes  arrived  in  1519  he  was
met  by  an  embassy  from  Montezuma  with  presents.
Making  use  of  their  superstition,  Cortes  asserted
that  he  was  an  envoy  from  Quetzalcoatl.  When  Cor
tes,  against  the  wishes  of  the  Mexican  monarch,  ad
vanced  toward  the  capital,  Montezuma  sallied  forth
to  receive  him,  and  lodged  him  in  one  of  his  pal
aces  on  8  Nov.,  1519.  Soon  he  was  practically  a
prisoner  of  the  Spaniards,  and  during  that  time
showed  a  great  want  of  character,  becoming  a  mere
tool  in  their  hands.  When  in  June,  1520,  the  popu
lation  of  Mexico  attacked  the  Spaniards,  Monte
zuma  appeared  on  the  roof  of  the  palace  to  order
his  subjects  to  desist :  but  they  had  already  so  far
lost  their  respect  for  him  that  they  attacked  him
also.  Dangerously  wounded  by  a  stone,  the  mon
arch  died  three  days  afterward,  and  the  people  de
nied  him  even  the  solemn  obsequies  that  had  been
given  to  all  his  predecessors.  He  left  two  legiti
mate  children,  a  son,  Axayacatl,  who  was  killed  by
Cuauhtemotzin,  and  a  daughter,  Tecuichpotzin,
who  married  the  emperors  Cuitlahuatzin  and  Cua
uhtemotzin,  and  after  the  latter's  death  was  bap
tized  under  the  name  of  Isabella.  She  then  mar
ried  first  Pedro  Gallego  and  afterward  Juan  Cano,
Spanish  officers,  by  whom  she  had  two  daughters
and  four  sons.  The  latter  were  afterward  created
by  the  Spanish  court  Counts  of  Montezuma,  and
were  the  progenitors  of  the  present  family  of  that
name.  One  of  the  Counts  of  Montezuma  was  vice
roy  of  Mexico  in  1697-1701.

MONTGOMERY, George Washington,  au
thor,  b.  in  Valencia,  Spain,  in  1804 :  d.  in  Wash
ington,  D.  C.,  5  June,  1841. He  was  the  son  of  an
American merchant  of  Alicante,  Spain,  and  re
ceived  a  good  education. On  his  return to  the
United  States  he  obtained  an  appointment  in  the
department  of  state,  and  served  as  U.  S.  consul  at
Tampico  and  Porto  Rico. He  contributed  to  the
"  Southern  Literary  Messenger "  and  other  peri
odicals,  and published in Spanish Washington
Irving's  "  Chronicle  of  the  Conquest  of  Grenada,"  I
"  Tareas  de  un  Solitario,"  a  collection  of  tales  in  j
imitation  of  "  The  Sketch-Book,"  "  El  Bastarde  de  ;
Castilla,"  founded  on  the  story  of  Bernardo  del  !
Carpio,  which was  translated into  English  and  |
published  in  the  United  States,  and  "  Narrative  of  |
a  Journey  to  Guatemala  in  Central  America  in  !
1838  "  (New  York,  1839).

MONTGOMERY,  George  Washington,  cler
gyman,  b.  in  Portland,  Me.,  6  April,  1810. He  re-  '
ceived  a  common-school  education,  became  a  Uni-  I
versalist  clergyman,  and  held  various  pastorates.
At  present  (1888)  he  lives  in  retirement  in  Roches-  •
ter,  N.  Y. Besides  being  a  large  contributor  to  [
current  Universalist  literature,  he  has  published
"Illustrations  of  the  Law  of Kindness"  (Utica,
1840),  of  which  upward  of  60.000  copies  were  sold
in  the  United  States,  and  which  was  republished  in
England  and  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  and  a
volume  of  "Sermons"  (Rochester,  1850).

MONTGOMERY,  Henry  Esrlinton.  clergy
man,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  9  Dec.,  1820 :  d.  in
New  York  city,  15  Oct..  1874.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1839,  and
then  studied  law  for  two  years,  but  abandoned  it
and  prepared  for  the  ministry  at  Nashotah  theologi
cal  seminary  and  the  General  theological  seminary.
New  York  city.  After  receiving  ordination  at  the
hands  of  Bishop  Alonzo  Potter  in  1846.  he  was
called  to  the  charge  of  All  Saints'  churcn  in  Phila-
TOL.  iv. — 24


delphia,  where  he  remained  nine  years.  In  1855
he  was  called  to  the  Church  of  the  Incarnation  in
New  York  city.  In  1864  a  new  church  building
was  erected  for  this  parish  on  the  corner  of  Madi
son  avenue  and  Thirty-fifth  street,  which  at  that
time  was  one  of  the  finest  church  edifices  in  the
city.  In  1863  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  Dr.  Montgomery
was  always  a  hard  worker ;  he  had  no  assistant  in
his  ministry,  and,  besides  the  constant  demands
upon  his  strength  made  by  a  growing  church,  he
had  for  years  been  a  prominent  member  of  nearly
all  the  missionary  and  home  societies  for  the  ad
vancement  of  the  gospel.  His  younger  brother.
JAMES  EGLIXTON,  is  the  author  of  "  The  Cruise  of
the  '  Franklin,' "  a  narrative  of  Admiral  Farragut's
visit  to  Europe  (New  York,  1869).

MONTGOMERY,  James,  pioneer,  b.  in  Ashta-
bula  county,  Ohio,  22  Dec.,  1814 ;  d.  in  Linn  county,
Kan.,  6  Dec.,  1871.  He  came  with  his  family  early
in  life  to  Kentucky,  and  taught,  ultimately  becom
ing  a  Campbellite  preacher.  Later  he  devoted
himself  to  farming,  but  in  1854  went  to  southern
Kansas,  where  he  was  one  of  the  earliest  settlers.
His  residence  in  Linn  county  was  burned  by  the
Missourians  in  1856,  and  this  resulted  in  his  tak
ing  an  active  part  in  the  disturbances  that  followed.
The  retaliatory  visits  into  Missouri  were  frequent
ly  led  by  him.  and  his  discretion,  courage,  and  ac
knowledged  ability  gained  for  him  the  confidence
and  support  of  the  southern  counties.  His  en
rolled  company  included  nearly  500  men,  all  of
whom  were  old  residents  of  the  territory,  and  con
sequently  familiar  with  the  peculiar  mode  of  fight
ing  that  was  followed  on  the  border.  Capt.  Mont
gomery  was  one  of  the  acknowledged  leaders  of
the  free-state  cause  during  1857-'61.  Next  to  John
Brown  he  was  more  feared  than  any  other,  and  a
contemporary  sketch  of  the  "  Kansas  Hero,"  as  he
was  then  called,  says :  "  Notwithstanding  every  in
centive  to  retaliate  actuates  them  to  demand  blood
for  blood,  yet  Montgomery  is  able  to  control  and
direct  them.  He  truly  tempers  justice  with  mercy,
and  he  has  always  protected  women  and  children
from  harm,  and  has  never  shed  blood  except  in  con
flict  or  in  self-defence."  In  1857  he  represented
his  county  in  the  Kansas  senate,  and  at  other  times
he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature.  At  the  be
ginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  made  colonel  of
the  10th  Kansas  volunteers,  but  soon  afterward
was  given  command  of  the  1st  North  Carolina
colored  volunteers.  These  troops  he  led  on  a  raid
from  Hilton  Head  into  Georgia  in  July,  1863,  and
at  the  battle  of  Olustee,  Fla.,  on  20  Feb.,  1864,  was
one  of  the  few  officers  that  escaped  with  his  life.
Horace  Greeley  savs  of  his  regiment  and  the  54th
Massachusetts :  "  It  was  admitted  that  these  two
regiments  had  saved  our  little  army  from  being
routed."  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  returned  to
Kansas  and  passed  the  last  years  of  his  life  at  his
home  in  Linn  county.

MONTGOMERY,'  John,  member  of  the  Conti
nental  congress,  b.  in  the  north  of  Ireland,  6  July,
1722;  d.  in  Carlisle.  Pa.,  3  Sept.,  1808.  He  re
ceived  a  good  education,  and,  having  inherited  a
small  fortune,  he  emigrated  to  Pennsylvania  in
1745  and  settled  in  Carlisle,  where  he  entered  mer
cantile  pursuits.  Subsequently  he  served  as  cap
tain  in  the  expedition  against  "the  Indians  under
Gen.  John  Forbes,  his  commission  bearing  the  date
7  May,  1758.  He  was  in  other  ways  prominent  in
local  affairs,  and  was  county  treasurer  in  1767-'76.
In  1774  he  was  chairman  of  the  committee  of  ob
servation  for  Cumberland  county,  and  in  July.
1776,  he  was  appointed  by  congress  one  of  the


370


MONTGOMERY


commissioners  to  conclude  a  treaty  with  the  west
ern  Indians  at  Fort  Pitt.  He  commanded  one  of
the  Pennsylvania  regiments  that  joined  Washing
ton  on  Long  Island  in  1776,  and  was  taken  pris
oner  at  Fort  Washington,  but  was  soon  exchanged,
and  then  served  as  colonel  of  a  battalion  of  asso-
ciators  during  the  campaign  of  New  Jersey  in  1777.
Col.  Montgomery  was  elected  by  the  general  assem
bly  to  the  Continental  congress  in  1782-'3,  was
one  of  the  burgesses  of  Carlisle  in  1787,  and  was
commissioned  an  associate  judge  of  Cumberland
county  in  1794.  He  was  a  public-spirited  citizen
and  active  in  the  founding  of  Dickinson  college,
being  a  trustee  from  its  foundation  until  his  death.
— His  son.  John,  was  mayor  of  Baltimore,  attor
ney-general  of  Maryland,  and  a  member  of  con
gress  in  1807-'!  1.

MONTGOMERY,  John  Ilerrien,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Allentown,  N.  J.,  17  Nov.,  1794 ;  d.  in  Carlisle,
Pa.,  25  March,  187-3.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a
midshipman  in  June,  1812,  and  participated  in  the
attack  on  Kingston,  Canada,  and  the  capture  of
Little  York,  Fort  George,  and  Newark.  In  August.
1813,  he  volunteered  for  service  on  Lake  Erie,
where  he  took  part  in  Com.  Oliver  H.  Perry's  cap
ture  of  the  British  fleet  on  10  Sept.,  1813.  Mont
gomery  received  a  sword  and  the  thanks  of  con
gress  for  his  services  in  that  action,  and  later  was
present  during  the  blockade  and  attack  on  Macki
naw  in  August,  1814.  He  then  was  transferred  to
the  "  Ontario,"  under  Com.  Stephen  Decatur,  with
whom  he  took  part  in  the  Algerine  war  of  1815.
In  February,  1818,  he  was  promoted  lieutenant.
In  1833-'5  he  was  on  recruiting  service  in  Phila
delphia  and  New  York,  after  which  he  was  execu
tive  officer  of  the  "  Constitution,"  when  that  vessel
was  sent  to  convey  Edward  Livingston  from
France  to  the  LTnited  States.  He  was  promoted
commander  in  1839,  and  during  the  war  with
Mexico  he  permanently  established  the  authority
of  the  United  States  at  various  places  along  the
coast  of  California,  and  also  participated  in  the
blockade  of  Mazatlan,  Mexico,  and  the  bombard
ment  and  capture  of  Guaymas  on  the  Gulf  of  Cali
fornia.  In  April,  1849,  "he  was  made  executive
officer  of  the  Washington  navy-yard,  where  he  re
mained  until  1851.  lie  was  commissioned  captain
in  January,  1853,  and  in  April,  1857,  placed  in
command  of  the  "  Roanoke,"  in  which  he  sailed  to
Aspinwall,  and  returned  to  New  York  in  August
with  250  of  William  Walker's  filibusters.  During
the  following  two  years  he  served  on  shore  duty,
and  in  1859-'62  had  command  of  the  Pacific  squad
ron,  with  the  "  Lancaster "  as  his  flag-ship.  On
his  return  to  New  York  he  was  placed  on  waiting
orders  until  May,  1802,  when  he  was  given  the
command  of  various  navy-yards.  He  was  made
commodore  on  the  retired  list  in  July,  1862,  and
rear-admiral,  25  July,  1866.  See  "A  Genealogical
History  of  the  Family  of  Montgomery,"  compiled
by  Thomas  Harrison  Montgomery  (printed  pri
vately,  Philadelphia,  1863).

MONTGOMERY,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pax-
tang  township,  Dauphin  co..  Pa.,  3  Oct.,  1733  ;  d.  in
Harrisburgh,  Pa.,  14  Oct.,  1794.  He  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1755,  and  then  became  master  of
the  grammar-school  connected  with  that  college.
Meanwhile  he  studied  theology,  and  was  licensed
to  preach  by  the  presbytery  of  Philadelphia  about
1760.  He  held  various  pastorates  in  Pennsylvania
until  1769,  and  was  then  installed  over  the  congre
gations  of  Christiana  Bridge  and  New  Castle,  Del.,
where  he  remained  until  1777.  Subsequently  he
held  a  commission  of  chaplain  in  Col.  William
Smallwood's  Maryland  regiment  of  the  Continental


line.  In  1780  he  was  chosen  by  the  general  assem
bly  of  Pennsylvania  as  one  of  its  delegates  to  con
gress,  and  served  during  two  terms.  He  was  elect
ed  to  the  state  assembly  in  1782,  and  chosen  by
that  body  in  1783  to  be  one  of  the  commission
ers  to  settle  the  difficulty  between  the  state  and
the  Connecticut  settlers  in  Wyoming.  In  1785,
when  the  county  of  Dauphin  was  founded,  Mr.
Montgomery  was  appointed  recorder  of  deeds  and
register  of  wills  for  the  county,  which  office  he
held  until  his  death.  In  1760  he  received  the  de
gree  of  A.  M.  from  Yale  and  the  College  of  Phila
delphia  (now  University  of  Pennsylvania).

MONTGOMERY,  Martin  Van  Buren,  lawyer,
b.  in  Eaton  Rapids,  Mich.,  20  Oct.,  1840.  He  re
ceived  a  common-school  education,  became  a  teacher
at  the  age  of  seventeen,  and  about  1861  began  the
study  of  law.  After  serving  for  some  time  during
the  civil  war  in  the  2d  Michigan  cavalry,  he  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1865,  and  practised  at  Eaton
Rapids,  Jackson,  and  Lansing.  During  1871-'2  he
was  a  member  of  the  Michigan  legislature,  and  was
candidate  for  the  office  of  attorney-general  of
Michigan  in  1874.  He  was  appointed  commis
sioner  of  patents  on  17  March,  1885,  and  on  1
April,  1887,  was  made  associate  justice  of  the  su
preme  court  of  the  District  of  Columbia.

MONTGOMER Y,  Richard,  soldier,  b.  in  Swords,
near  Feltrim,  Ireland,  2  Dec.,  1736;  d.  in  Quebec,
Canada,  31  Dec.,  1775.  He  was  the  son  of  Thomas
Montgomery,  a  member  of  the  British  parliament
for  LitFord,  and
was  educated  at
Trinity  college,
Dublin.  lie  en
tered  the  English
army  at  the  age
of  eighteen  as  an
ensign  in  the  17th
infantry,  and  in
1757  was  ordered
to  Halifax,  N.  S.
Soon  after  he  par
ticipated  in  the
siege  of  Louis-
burg  under  James
Wolfe,  where  he
was  promoted  lieu
tenant,  also  tak
ing  part  in  the  ex
pedition  that  was
sent  under  Sir  Jeffrey  Amherst  in  1759  to  reduce
the  French  forts  on  Lake  Champlain.  In  1760  he
became  adjutant  of  his  regiment  and  served  in  the
army  that  marched  on  Montreal  under  Col.  Will
iam  Haviland,  becoming  captain  in  1762.  He  was
then  ordered  to  the  West  Indies,  and  fought  in  the
campaigns  against  Martinique  and  Havana.  In
1763  he  returned  to  New  York,  after  which  he
spent  some  time  in  Great  Britain,  where  he  became
intimate  with  many  of  the  liberal  members  of
parliament,  numbering  among  his  friends  Isaac
Barre,  Edmund  Burke,  and  Charles  James  Fox.
His  claims  for  advancement  being  neglected,  he
sold  his  commission  in  1772  and  returned  to  this
country  early  in  1773.  purchasing  a  farm  of  sixty-
seven  acres  at  King's  Bridge  (now  part  of  New
York  city),  where  soon  afterward  he  married  Janet,
daughter  of  Judge  Robert  R  Livingston  (q.  v.).
He  purchased  a  handsome  estate  on  the  banks  of
Hudson  river,  but  spent  the  few  years  of  his  mar
ried  life  in  his  wife's  residence  of  Grassmere,  near
Rhinebeck.  In  May,  1775,  he  was  sent  as  a  delegate
to  the  1st  Provincial  congress  in  New  York  city,
and  in  June  of  the  same  year  was  made  a  brigadier-


MONTGOMERY


MONTGOMERY


371


general  in  the  Continental  army,  the  second  on  the
list  of  the  eight  that  were  appointed,  and  the  only
one  not  from  New  England.  It  is  said  that  of
the  three  from  those  who  had  been  officers  in  the
British  army  "  Montgomery,  though  perhaps  infe
rior  to  Charles  Lee  in  quickness  of  mind,  was  much
superior  to  both  him  and  Gates  in  all  the  great
qualities  which  adorn  the  soldier."  He  was  desig
nated  to  serve  as  second  in  command  under  Gen.
Philip  Schuyler  on  the  expedition  to  Canada,  but,
through  the  illness  of  the  superior  officer,  the  en
tire  command  devolved  upon  Montgomery.  Pro
ceeding  by  way  of  the  Sorel  river,  and  notwith
standing  the  mutinous  conduct  of  his  soldiers,  the
lack  of  proper  munitions,  and  incidental  suffering,
he  made  the  brilliant  campaign  that  resulted  in
the  reduction  of  the  fortresses  of  St.  John's  (where
the  colors  of  the  7th  fusileers  were  captured,  being
the  first  taken  in  the  Revolutionary  war),  and
Chambly  and  the  capture  of  Montreal  during  the
latter  part  of  1775.  He  then  wrote  to  congress :
"  Till  Quebec  is  taken  Canada  is  unconquered."
His  little  army  of  scarcely  300  men  joined  that  of
Benedict  Arnold,  consisting  of  about  600  men,
before  Quebec  early  in  December,  and  for  his  past
services  Montgomery  was  made  major-general  on
9  Dec.  The  term  of  enlistment  of  his  men  was
about  to  expire,  the  small-pox  was  prevalent  in  the
camp,  and,  with  the  winter  before  them,  a  pro
longed  siege  was  impossible,  and  therefore  the  im
mediate  capture  of  Quebec  became  a  necessity.
Montgomery  called  a  council  of  war,  at  which  it
was  decided  to  carry  the  city  by  assault,  and  to
him  was  intrusted  the  advance  on  the  southern
part  of  the  lower  town.  The  attack  was  made
early  in  the  morning  of  31  Dec.,  1775.  during  a
heavy  snow-storm.  Montgomery  himself  leading  his
men  from  Wolfe's  Cove,  along  the  side  of  the  cliff
beneath  Cape  Diamond,  to  a  point  where  a  fortified
block-house  stood  protected  in  front  by  a  stockade.
The  first  barrier  was  soon  carried,  and  Montgom
ery,  exclaiming,  '•  Men  of  New  York,  you  will  not
fear  to  follow  where  your  general  leads,"  pushed
onward,  when  with  his  two  aides  he  was  killed  by
the  first  and  only  discharge  of  the  British  artillery.
His  soldiers,  discouraged  by  his  fall,  retreated,  and
the  enemy,  able  to  concentrate  their  attention  on
the  forces  under  Col.  Arnold,  soon  drove  the
Americans  from  the  city,  besides  capturing  about
400  of  his  men.  Enemies  and  friends  paid  trib
ute  to  Montgomery's  valor.  The  governor,  lieu
tenant-governor,  and  council  of  Quebec,  and  all  the
principal  officers  of  the  garrison,  buried  him  with
the  honors  of  war.  At  the  news  of  his  death  '•  the
city  of  Philadelphia  was  in  tears ;  every  person
seemed  to  have  lost  his  nearest  friend."  Congress
proclaimed  for  him  "their  grateful  remembrance,
respect,  and  high  veneration ;  and  desiring  to
transmit  to  future  ages  a  truly  worthy  example  of
patriotism,  conduct,  boldness  of  enterprise,  insu
perable  perseverance,  and  contempt  of  danger  and
death,"  they  reared  a  marble  monument  in  the
front  of  St.  Paul's  church.  New  York  city,  in  honor
"  of  the  patriotic  conduct,  enterprise,  and  persever
ance  of  Maj.-Gen.  Richard  Montgomery."  In  the
British  parliament.  Edmund  Burke  contrasted  the
condition  of  the  8.000  men,  starved,  disgraced,  and
shut  up  within  the  single  town  of  Boston,  with  the
movements  of  the  hero  who  in  one  campaign  had
conquered  two  thirds  of  Canada.  To  which  Lord
North  replied :  "  I  cannot  join  in  lamenting  the
death  of  Montgomery  as  a  public  loss.  Curse  on  his
virtues  !  they've  undone  his  country.  He  was  brave,
he  was  able,  he  was  humane,  he  was  generous ;  but
still  he  was  only  a  brave,  able,  humane,  and  generous


rebel."  "  The  term  of  rebel."  retorted  Fox,  "  is  no
certain  mark  of  disgrace.  The  great  asserters  of
liberty,  the  saviors  of  their  country,  the  benefactors
of  mankind  in  all  ages,  have  been  called  rebels."
High  on  the  rocks  over  Cape  Diamond,  along
which  this  brave  officer  led  his  troops  on  that  fatal
winter  morning,  has  been  placed  the  inscription  :
"  Here  Major-General  Montgomery  fell,  December
31st,  1775."  He  is  described,  when  he  was  about
to  start  from  Saratoga  on  his  Canadian  campaign,
••  as  tall,  of  fine  military  presence,  of  graceful  ad
dress,  with  a  bright,  magnetic  face,  winning  man-


ners,  and  the  bearing  of  a  prince " ;  and  it  was
here  that  he  parted  from  his  wife  after  her  two
brief  years  of  happiness  with  her  "soldier,"  as  she
always  afterward  called  him.  Many  of  the  letters
that  he  wrote  to  her  during  the  winter  months  of
1775  have  been  preserved,  and  in  one  of  the  last  he
writes  :  "  I  long  to  see  you  in  your  new  home,"  re
ferring  to  Montgomery  Place,  a  mansion  that  he
had  projected  before  his  departure  on  the  property
purchased  by  him  near  Barrytown  and  that  was
completed  during  the  following  spring.  In  1818.  by
an  "Act  of  honor"  passed  by  the  New  York  legis
lature  in  behalf  of  Mrs.  Montgomery,  Sir  John  Sher-
brooke,  governor-general  of  Canada,  was  requested
to  allow  her  husband's  remains  to  be  disinterred
and  conveyed  to  New  York.  This  being  granted,
De  Witt  Clinton,  then  governor  of  the  state,  ap
pointed  her  nephew,  Lewis,  son  of  Edward  Liv
ingston,  to  take  charge  of  the  body  while  it  was  on
its  way.  As  the  funeral  cortege  moved  down  the
Hudson,  nearing  the  home  that  he  had  left  in  the
prime  of  life  to  fight  for  his  adopted  country,  Mrs.
Montgomery  took  her  place  on  the  broad  veranda
of  the  mansion  (shown  in  the  engraving)  and  re
quested  that  she  might  be  left  alone  as  the  body
passed.  She  was  found  unconscious  stretched  upon
the  floor,  where  she  had  fallen,  overcome  with
emotion.  Gen.  Montgomery's  remains  found  their
last  resting-place  in  St.  Paul's  chapel  in  New  York
city  near  the  monument  that  was  ordered  in  France
by  Benjamin  Franklin.  Mrs.  Montgomery  survived
her  husband  for  fifty-two  years,  and  on  her  death
in  1828  her  house  became  the  property  of  her
youngest  and  only  surviving  brother,  Edward  Liv
ingston  (q.  v.).  The  mansion  continued  to  be  his
residence  until  his  death,  and  there  his  widow.
Louise,  spent  the  remaining  twenty-five  years  of
her  life.  See  "  Life  of  Richard  Montgomery,"  by
John  Armstrong,  in  Sparks's  "  American  Biogra
phy  "  (Boston,  1834),  and  the  "  Ancestry  of  Gen
eral  Richard  Montgomery."  by  Thomas  H.  Mont
gomery,  in  the  "  New  York  Genealogical  and  Bio
graphical  Record"  (July,  1871),  where  his  relation
ship  to  the  ancestral  Scottish  family  is  traced.

MONTGOMERY,  Sir  Robert, "colonist,  b.  in
Skelmorie  castle,  Ayr,  Scotland,  about  1680 ;  d.  in
Ireland  in  August,  1731.  He  proposed  as  early  as


372


MONTGOMERY


MONTIGNY


1717  to  plant  a  colony  in  Georgia,  between  Alta-
mnha  and  Savannah  rivers,  and  to  this  end  pur
chased  territory  from  the  proprietors  on  condition
that  he  should  occupy  it  within  three  years.  Con
cerning  his  purchase,  he  writes  in  commending  it
to  public  attention :  "  My  design  arises  not  from
any  sudden  motive,  but  a  strong  bent  of  genius  I
inherit  from  my  ancestors  "  ;  and  he  then  proceeds
to  describe  how  certain  members  of  his  family  had
been  interested  in  colonizing  Nova  Scotia,  and
others  in  establishing  a  settlement  in  South  Caro
lina.  It  was  proposed  to  call  the  colony  the  "  Mar-
gravate  of  A/ilia,"  and  he  further  says  that  "Caro
lina,  especially  in  its  southern  bounds,  is  the  most
amiable  country  of  the  universe  ;  that  nature  has
not  bless'd  the  world  with  any  tract  which  can  be
preferable  to  it ;  that  paradise  with  all  her  virgin
beauties  may  be  modestly  suppos'd  at  most  but
equal  to  its  native  excellencies."  According  to  his
proposition,  the  country  was  to  be  divided  into  dis
tricts  as  population  increased,  each  district  to  be
twenty  miles  in  length  and  width,  surrounded  by  a
square  of  fortifications.  These  were  to  be  defended
by  garrisons,  who  should  maintain  themselves  and
the  margrave  by  the  cultivation  of  a  strip  of  land
one  mile  in  width  running  around  the  square  with
in  the  walls.  Inside  of  this  another  strip,  two
miles  in  width,  was  to  be  reserved  to  furnish  the
defenders  with  farms  of  their  own,  rent  free  for
life,  after  their  term  of  service  should  be  over.
The  remaining  land  was  to  be  laid  out  in  11(5
smaller  squares  of  one  mile  each,  excepting  for  the
highways  that  were  to  divide  them,  and  in  the  cen
tre  of  each  square  was  to  be  its  owners'  residences.
In  the  centre  of  the  district  there  was  a  large
square  for  a  city,  and  at  the  corners  there  were
others  for  great  parks,  each  four  miles  square,  in
which  were  to  be  kept  the  cattle  and  game,  while
at  the  central  point  of  all  was  to  be  the  mar
grave's  house.  This  ingenious  scheme  failed  to  ex
cite  the  admiration  its  designer  hoped  for,  and  no
emigrants  appeared,  in  consequence  of  which,  after
the  three  years  had  elapsed,  the  proprietors  re
sumed  their  ownership.  See  "  A  Discourse  con
cerning  the  Designed  Establishment  of  a  New
Colony  to  the  South  of  Carolina,  in  the  most  De
lightful  Country  of  the  Universe"  (London,  1717).

MONTGOMERY,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Can
ton,  Pa.,  11  April,  1819  ;  d.  in  Washington,  Pa.,  28
April,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Washington
college  in  1839  and  then  studied  law.  In  1842  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  settled  in  practice  in
Washington,  Pa.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Democrat,  and  served  from  7  Dec.,  1857,  till  3
March,  1861.  He  was  the  author  of  the  proposed
Crittenden-Montgomery  amendment  introduced  as
a  measure  of  pacification  on  the  slavery  question.

MONTGOMERY,  William  B.,  missionary,  b.
in  Danville,  Pa.,  about  1790;  d.  in  Union  Sta
tion,  Kan.,  17  Aug.,  1834.  He  was  a  member  of
the  first  missionary  family  that  was  sent  by  the
United  foreign  missionary  society  to  the  Osage  In
dians  of  the  Missouri,  and  left  Pittsburg  for  his
field  of  labor  in  April,  1821.  After  four  months
of  tedious  journeying  on  Ohio,  Mississippi,  Mis
souri,  and  Osage  rivers,  he  reached  his  destination.
He  devoted  his  time  largely  to  acquiring  a  knowl
edge  of  the  Osage  language  and  reducing  it  to
writing.  In  the  spring  of  1833  he  completed  an
elementary  book  that  contained  translations  of
various  passages  of  Scripture.  This  was  the  first
work  written  in  the  Osage  language,  and  was  pub
lished  in  Boston  alter  his  death.

MONTGOMERY,  William  Reading,  soldier,
b.  in  Monmouth  county,  N.  J.,  10  July,  1801 ;  d.  in


Bristol,  Pa.,  31  May,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1825  and  became
2d  lieutenant  in  the  3d  infantry,  with  which  regi
ment  he  served  until  1838  on  garrison  and  frontier
duty,  also  performing  the  duties  of  disbursing  offi
cer  during  the  removal  of  the  Choctaw  Indians
from  Mississippi  to  their  reservation.  After  at
taining  a  captaincy  on  7  July,  1838,  he  served  on
the  Canadian  border  during 'the  disturbances  of
1838-'4(i,  in  the  Florida  war  of  1840-'2,  and  in  the
occupation  of  Texas  in  1845.  He  took  part  in  the
war  with  Mexico.  He  was  wounded  at  Kesaca  de
la  Pal  ma  and  brevetted  major,  and  at  Molino  del
Key  he  was  again  wounded,  although  not  until  af
ter  he  had  succeeded  to  the  command  of  his  regi
ment,  which  he  led  at  Chapultepec  and  the  capture
of  Mexico.  His  services  again  gained  for  him  the
further  brevet  of  lieutenant-colonel,  and  he  was
promoted  major  in  December,  1852.  Meanwhile
he  served  in  garrisons,  on  the  frontier,  and  on  re
cruiting  duty,  until  1855,  when  he  was  removed
from  the  army.  He  was  stationed  at  Fort  Riley,
in  Kansas,  during  the  trouble  in  that  territory,
and  there  pursued  a  course  of  strict  impartiality,
although  his  personal  feelings  were  in  favor  of  the
free-state  men  ;  but  his  actions  failed  to  meet  with
the  approval  of  his  superiors,  and  he  was  dismissed
from  the  service.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  organized  the  1st  Xew  Jersey  volunteers,
joined  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  aided  in  cov
ering  its  retreat  from  Bull  Run.  He  was  commis
sioned  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  17  May,
18(51,  and  appointed  military  governor  of  Alexan
dria,  Va.  Subsequently  he  held  a  similar  office  in
Annapolis,  Md.,  and  then  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  un
til  18(53,  after  which  he  served  on  a  military  com
mission  in  Memphis,  Tenn.  Failing  health  caused
his  resignation  on  4  April,  1864,  and,  after  a  brief
interval  of  mercantile  occupation  in  Philadelphia,
he  retired  to  his  home  in  Bristol.

MONTI,  Luigi,  author,  b.  in  Palermo,  Sicily,
in  1830.  He  was  educated  in  his  native  place,
served  in  the  revolutionary  army  in  1848-'9,  and,
being  exiled  in  1850,  came  to  Boston,  where  he  be
came  a  teacher  of  Italian.  He  was  instructor  in
Harvard  in  1854-'9,  and  from  1861  till  1873  was
U.  S.  consul  at  Palermo,  after  which  he  devoted
himself  to  teaching  and  literature  at  Boston.  He
has  lectured  before  the  Lowell  institute  on  "  Con
temporary  Representative  Men  of  Italy,"  and  has
also  given  courses  of  lectures  at  Wellesley,  Vassar,
and  Peabody  institute,  Baltimore.  Longfellow  in
troduced  him  as  the  young  Sicilian  in  his  "  Tales
of  a  Wayside  Inn."  Besides  contributions  to  maga
zines  he  has  published  an  Italian  grammar  and
reader  (Boston,  1855) ;  "  The  Adventures  of  a  Con
sul  Abroad  "  (1878) ;  and  "  Leone,"  a  novel,  in  the
"  Round  Robin  Series  "  (1882) ;  and  has  translated
Guerrazzi's  "  Beatrice  Cenci  "  (1857):  "Manfred"
(1875) ;  and  '•  Isabella  Orsini "  (1881).

MONTIGNY,  Casimir  Amable  Testard  de,
Canadian  merchant,  b.  in  Canada,  3  June,  1787;  d.
in  St.  Jerome,  Canada,  15  Feb.,  1863.  After  leav
ing  college  he  engaged  in  the  fur-trade  near  the
Lac  des  Deux-Montagnes  and  soon  acquired  a
large  fortune,  part  of  which  he  employed  in  colo
nizing  the  country  where  he  had  settled.  In  a
short  time  he  cleared  the  forests  of  what  was  then
known  as  the  Riviere  du  Nord,  and  founded  the
parish  of  St.  Jerome.  During  the  war  of  1812  he
held  a  command  in  the  Canadian  militia  and  took
part  in  the  engagements  that  led  to  the  retreat  of
Gen.  Henry  Dearborn.  In  1837  he  endeavored  to
prevent  the  insurrection  of  that  year,  and  was  taken
as  a  prisoner  to  St.  Eustache  by  the  insurgents,


MONTIGNY


MONTILLA


373


but  his  representatives  kept  large  numbers  from
joining  in  the  revolt.  The  rest  of  his  life  was  spent
in  St.  Jerome,  of  which  he  was  mayjr.

MONTIGNY,  Francis  Joliet"  de,  clergyman,
b.  in  Paris,  France,  in  1661 ;  d.  there  in  1725.
After  finishing  his  course  in  theology  he  went  to
Quebec,  where  he  was  ordained  on  8  March,  1698,
and  appointed  pastor  of  St.  Ange  Gardien,  and
director  of  the  Ursuline  nuns.  In  1698  he  was
made  vicar-general,  and  he  was  sent  by  the  Semi
nary  of  Quebec  in  the  following  year  to  found  new
missions  along  Mississippi  river.  lie  reached
Mackinaw  in  September  and  entered  the  Missis
sippi  in  December.  After  preaching  to  the  Tama-
rois  Indians,  he  sailed  down  the  river  to  the
villages  of  the  Arkansas,  Tonicas,  and  Taensas.
He  baptized  eighty-five  children  of  the  latter
tribe  and  built  a  chapel  among  them  in  1700.  He
then  proceeded  to  the  Tonicas  on  Yazoo  river,
where  he  built  a  mission-house  and  placed  a  mis-  j
sionary.  After  visiting  the  French  settlement  at  |
Biloxi  he  extended  his  labors  to  the  Natchez  Indi
ans,  but  the  Jesuits  complained  of  his  presence  as
an  intrusion  into  a  district  in  which  they  had  j
already  begun  to  labor,  and  Montigny  found  his
position  so  embarrassing  that,  with  a  view  of
arranging  matters,  he  sailed  for  France  in  May.
1700.  He  returned  to  Canada,  and  is  said  to  have
been  superior  of  the  Seminary  of  Quebec  in  1716-'19.

MONTIGNY,  Jacques  testard  de,  Canadian
soldier,  b.  in  Canada  about  1662 ;  d.  there  in  July,
1737.  He  went  to  France  at  an  early  age  and  en
tered  the  army.  After  taking  part  in  three  cam
paigns  he  returned  to  Canada  and.  as  a  volunteer,
accompanied  the  expedition  against  Schenectady,
where  he  was  severely  wounded  in  1690.  On  his
recovery  he  was  made  garde  marine  in  1693.  At
the  head  of  an  Indian  force  he  followed  Iberville
to  Acadia  in  1696,  and  forced  the  English  to  sur
render  Fort  Pemaquid,  threatening  to  abandon
them  to  the  savages  if  he  was  obliged  to  take  it  by
storm.  He  was  then  made  second  in  command  to
Iberville,  and  ordered  to  take  possession  of  the
heights  through  which  the  latter  intended  passing
on  his  way  to  besiege  St.  John.  On  the  route
Montigny  cut  to  pieces  an  English  detachment.
He  held  another  English  force  in  check  until  the
arrival  of  Iberville,  and,  after  defeating  it,  con
tinued  his  march  to  St.  John,  which  was  entered
on  28  Nov.,  1696.  He  afterward  drove  the  English
from  Portugal  cove  and  other  strong  places  in
Newfoundland,  taking  nearly  900  prisoners,  whom
he  was  obliged  to  release,  as  he  had  not  men  enough
to  guard  them.  In  1705  he  took  part  in  another
expedition  against  Newfoundland.  After  the  coast
was  reduced  he  occupied  Carbonniere  and  Bona-
vista.  He  commanded  the  van  of  the  Canadian
force  that  opposed  an  unsuccessful  attempt  of  the
English  to  invade  Canada  in  1710.  In  1712  he  re
ceived  the  cross  of  St.  Louis  for  his  services. — His
son,  Jean  Baptiste  Testard,  Canadian  soldier,  b.
in  Villemarie,  Canada,  in  1724 ;  d.  in  Blois,  France,
20  Nov.,  1786,  entered  the  military  service  at  the
age  of  twelve,  and  was  made  ensign  four  years
afterward.  He  served  with  the  garrison  of  Fort
Frederick  till  1745,  when  he  took  part  in  several
expeditions,  in  one  of  which  he  defeated  an  Eng
lish  detachment.  In  1748  he  commanded  part  of
the  troops  that  were  sent  to  invade  Connecticut,
and,  having  been  ordered  to  reconnoitre,  advanced
several  leagues  in  front  of  the  main  body  at  the
head  of  a  small  force.  While  making  the  circuit
of  a  wood  he  suddenly  came  on  a  superior  body  of
sixty  English  troops,  which  he  routed,  killing
twenty  and  taking  nine  prisoners.  In  1754  he


was  sent  to  Belle  Riviere  with  100  Indians,  with
directions  to  proceed  afterward  to  Fort  Duquesne.
He  did  much  to  bring  about  the  defeat  of  Brad-
dock's  army,  and  was  proposed  by  the  French
commander  for  the  cross  of  St.  Louis  in  conse
quence.  In  1758  he  was  stationed  among  the
Miarnis,  who  were  wavering  in  their  allegiance.
He  was  entirely  successful  in  his  mission,  and  on
his  return  to  Montreal  was  appointed  to  a  com
mand  in  the  force  that  was  sent  to  besiege  Oswego.
where  he  did  good  service.  After  the  capture  of
this  town  he  marched,  in  1758,  at  the  head  of  800
men  to  the  aid  of  Fort  Niagara,  which  was  threat
ened  by  the  English.  He  returned  to  Montreal  in
1759,  but  was  immediately  sent  back  with  550  men
to  the  same  port.  On  the  capture  of  Fort  Niagara
he  was  taken  prisoner  and  kept  for  two  years  in
New  England.  After  the  cession  of  Canada  by
France  the  English  government  made  him  tempt
ing  offers  to  enter  their  service,  while  the  French
government  promised  to  indemnify  him  for  his
losses  in  Canada  if  he  would  enter  theirs.  He
sailed  for  France  in  1764,  and  was  well  received  at
court,  but  the  government's  promises  were  not
kept,  and  he  died  in  poverty.

MONTILLA,  Tomas  (mon-tee'-yah),  Venezue
lan  soldier,  b.  in  Caracas  in  1778  ;  d.  there,  25  June,
1822.  He  was  an  active  member  of  the  revolu
tionary  junta  of  1810,  and  an  intimate  associate  of
Bolivar.  Refusing  to  accept  the  conditions  of  the
capitulation  at  Victoria,  he  was  imprisoned  by
Monteverde,  but  soon  recovered  his  liberty  and
went  to  Colombia,  where  he  served  in  the  cam
paigns  of  1813-'14,  and  accompanied  Bolivar  in
the  occupation  of  Bogota  on  12  Dec.  of  the  lat
ter  year.  He  was  in  the  campaign  against  the
rebellious  junta  of  Carthagena  in  1815,  and.  after
being  sent  by  Bolivar  to  Bogota,  went  thence  to
Barinas  and  was  the  companion  of  Paez  in  1816  at
Arichuna,  the  battle  of  Yagtial,  and  the  taking  of
Achaguas.  In  1818  he  was  governor  of  Guayana,
and  on  15  Feb.,  1819,  became  a  member  of  the
congress  of  Angostura.  On  12  June,  1819.  he
fought  in  the  battle  of  Cantaura.  He  accompanied
Bolivar  after  the  battle  of  Carabobo  to  Caracas,
where  he  remained  in  garrison  till  his  death. — His
brother.  Mariano,  Venezuelan  soldier,  b.  in  Cara
cas,  8  Sept.,  1782;  d.  there,  22  Sept.,  1851,  was
sent  to  Spain  to  be  educated,  and  in  the  war
against  Portugal  served  in  the  royal  body-guard
at  the  siege  of  Olivenca  in  1799.  After  obtaining
his  discharge  he  returned  to  Venezuela  in  1806.
and  was  a  member  of  the  revolutionary  juntas  of
1809  and  1810.  He  fought  against  the  royalists  in
Valencia  in  1811,  but  at  the  time  of  the  capitula
tion  of  Miranda  he  was  in  the  Antilles,  whence  he
returned  in  1813  and  assisted  in  the  campaigns  of
j  that  year  and  1814.  In  1815  he  aided  in  the  de-
I  fence  of  Carthagena,  and  after  the  evacuation  took
I  part  in  the  expedition  of  Mina  against  Mexico,  but,
I  not  being  in  full  accord  with  Bolivar  regarding
•  his  expedition  from  Hayti  in  1816,  permitted  his
officers  and  men  to  join  the  latter  while  he  re
mained  in  the  Antilles.  In  1819  he  joined  Gen.
Urdaneta  in  Margarita,  became  his  chief-of-staff,
and  accompanied  him  in  the  campaign  of  Barce
lona.  He  was  sent  in  1820  as  chief  of  an  expedi
tion  to  Colombia,  where  he  attacked  Carthagena  in
July,  and  was  forced  to  raise  the  siege,  but  cap
tured  the  city  in  the  following  year.  He  was
promoted  gene'ral  of  division  in  1824",  and  appointed
military  governor  of  Santa  Marta.  but  after  Boli
var's  death  he  retired  to  private  life.  In  1834  he
was  sent  as  the  first  regular  minister  of  Venezuela
|  to  England,  where  he  signed  a  treaty  of  commerce,


374


MONTMAGNY


MONTT


and  he  also  took  steps  toward  a  treaty  of  peace  and
friendship  with  Spain.
MONTMAUNY,  Charles  Jacques  Huaiilt  de,

governor  of  Canada,  d.  in  France  about  1649.  He
was  the  second  governor-general  of  Canada,  and
administered  the  affairs  of  that  colony  with  great
ability  from  1636  till  1648.  He  defeated  the  Iro-
quois,  and  concluded  a  lasting  peace  with  them  at
Three  Rivers  in  1645.  Other  matters  that  signal
ized  his  administration  were  the  beginning  of  the
ruin  of  the  Hurons,  which  was  completed  in  the
time  of  his  successor,  and  the  extension  of  the
explorations  of  the  Jesuits  to  the  north  and  west
far  beyond  the  limits  that  had  been  reached  be
fore.  He  was  a  man  of  great  sagacity  and  piety.

MONTMORENCY,  Henri,  Due  de,  governor
of  Canada,  b.  in  Chantilly,  Prance,  30  April,  1595 :
d.  in  Toulouse,  30  Oct.,  1632.  He  was  the  fourth
and  last  Duke  de  Montmorency,  and  was  appointed
by  Louis  XIII.  an  admiral  of  France  and  viceroy
of  Canada  before  he  was  seventeen  years  old.  He
succeeded  his  father  as  governor  of  Languedoc,
fought  against  the  Protestants,  rendered  distin
guished  services  at  the  sieges  of  Montauban  and
Montpellier,  and  in  1625  conquered  the  islands  of
Re  and  Oleron.  He  served  in  Italy,  took  part  in
the  rebellion  of  Gaston  of  Orleans,  and,  having  been
taken  prisoner,  was  executed  by  order  of  Richelieu.
His  life  was  written  by  Simon  Ducros,  one  of  his
officers  (Paris,  1632).

M  ON  TOUR,  Catherine,  a  half-breed  Indian,  b.
in  Canada :  d.  in  Chemung  county,  N.  Y.,  about
1752.  She  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  daughter
of  Count  de  Frontenac,  governor  of  New  France.
She  was  captured  during  the  wars  between  the
French,  the  Hurons,  and  the  Six  Nations,  and  was
carried  into  the  Seneca  country,  where  she  married
a  young  chief,  by  whom  she  had  several  children.
Her  husband  became  known  in  the  wars  against
the  Catawbas. — Her  granddaughter,  Esther,  a
daughter  of  "  French  Margaret,"  was  the  wife  of
Echobund,  or  Eghobund,  chief  of  the  village  of
Sheshequin,  on  the  site  of  Ulster,  Bradford  co.,  Pa.,
which  was  built  about  1765.  It  was  for  a  number
of  years  the  seat  of  a  Moravian  mission,  which  in
1772  was  removed  farther  west.  After  the  place
was  abandoned  by  the  Moravians  and  their  con
verts,  Echobund,  with  the  remnant  of  his  tribe,
moved  four  or  five  miles  farther  up  the  river  and
died.  Esther's  superior  mind  gave  her  a  great
ascendency  over  the  Senecas,  and  she  ruled  as  a
sovereign  among  them,  being  known  as  "  Queen
Esther."  On  several  occasions  she  accompanied
the  delegates  of  the  Six  Nations  to  Philadelphia,
where  her  refined  manners  and  attractive  person
secured  her  many  courtesies  from  the  ladies  of  that
city.  In  spite  of  these  qualities,  she  is  chiefly  re
membered  by  the  part  she  took  in  the  Wyoming
massacre  in  July,  1778,  when,  to  avenge  the  death
of  her  son,  she  tomahawked  fourteen  prisoners.

MONTOYA,  Antonio  Ruiz  de  (mon-toh  -yah),
clergyman,  b.  in  Lima,  Peru,  13  June,  1585  ;  d.  there,
11  April,  1652.  He  became  a  Jesuit,  was  appointed
rector  of  several  colleges  of  the  society  in  Peru,  and
as  a  missionary  was  very  successful  in  converting
the  Indians  of  the  province  of  Paraguayans.  He
visited  Spain  several  years  before  his  death.  His
works  include  "  Tesoro  de  la  lengua  Guarani "
(Madrid,  1639) ;  "  Historia  de  la  conquista  espiri-
tual  de  la  provincia  del  Paraguay  "  (1639) ;  "  Arte
yvocabulario  de  la  lengua  Guarani"  (1640);  and
"  Cateeismo  en  la  misma  lengua  "  (1640).

MONTRUEIL,  Desire  Amable  Ferdinand
(mong-truh'-ee),  French  botanist,  b.  in  Saulieu,
Burgundy,  in  1709 ;  d.  in  St.  Gratien,  near  Paris,


in  1760.  He  was  given  in  1737  a  mission  to
explore  northern  Canada,  and  in  particular  the
territories  around  Hudson  bay,  and  during  six
years  collected  many  specimens  of  the  Canadian
flora,  but  while  he  was  returning  to  France  he  was
captured  by  the  English  and  taken  to  London.  He
was  released  after  the  conclusion  of  peace  in  1748,
and  vainly  endeavored  to  recover  his  property,  but
the  British  authorities  refused  to  surrender  it,  in
spite  of  the  protests  of  the  Paris  academy  of  science
to  the  London  royal  society.  Returning  to  this
continent  in  1750,  he  again  explored  northern
Canada,  and  after  forming  a  new  collection  visited
the  New  England  states,  Philadelphia,  and  New
foundland  during  1750-'4.  In  1755  he  was  given  a
like  mission  to  Santo  Domingo,  and  passing  after
ward  to  the  continent,  explored  for  two  years  the
Guianas  and  Venezuela.  He  published  "Voyage  a
la  baie  d'Hudson "  (Paris,  1749) ;  "  Etudes  sur
1'histoire  naturelle  du  Canada  on  Nouvelle  France
du  Nord  "  (1754) ;  "  Expose  du  systeme  vegetal  de
la  vallee  du  Saint  Laurent  au  Canada"  (1755);
"  Histoire  et  description  des  plantes^  modieinales
propres  a  la  Guiane  "  (1758) ;  "  and  "  Etudes  sur  la
nature  tropicale  "  (Paris,  1759).

MONTS,  Pierre  dn  Quasi,  Comte  de,  French
colonist,  b.  in  Saintonge,  France,  about  1560;  d.  in
Paris  in  1611.  He  belonged  to  an  Italian  Roman
Catholic  family,  but,  becoming  a  Protestant,  at
tached  himself  to  the  fortunes  of  Henry  IV.,  and
was  appointed  by  him  to  an  important  office  in
the  royal  household.  He  had  made  a  voyage  to  St.
Lawrence  river,  and  in  1603  the  king  "appointed
him  director  of  the  Canadian  company,  to  which
he  granted  Acadia,  a  region  that  was  defined  as
extending  from  the  40th  to  the  46th  degree  of
north  latitude.  De  Monts  was  made  lieutenant-
general,  with  viceregal  powers,  and,  accompanied
by  Samuel  Champlain  and  others,  he  sailed  from
Havre,  7  March,  1604.  He  explored  the  Bay  of
Fundy,  discovered  Annapolis  harbor,  and  ascended
and  named  St.  John  river.  He  planted  a  colony  on
an  islet  at  the  mouth  of  the  St.  Croix  river,  and
passed  the  winter  there,  but  in  the  following  Au
gust  removed  to  Port  Royal  (now  Annapolis),  where
he  began  a  settlement.  He  soon  afterward  returned
to  France.  On  his  arrival  at  court  De  Monts  found
his  monopoly  at  an  end,  and,  though  he  failed  to
receive  indemnification  for  what  he  had  expended,
he  despatched,  in  March,  1606,  a  vessel  to  relieve  the
colony  in  Canada.  He  also  sent  Champlain  and
Pontgrave,  in  1607,  on  a  new  voyage  to  the  St.
Lawrence,  and  other  vessels  in  1608,  by  the  aid  of
which  Quebec  was  founded.  After  the  death  of
Henry  IV.,  in  1610,  De  Monts  was  regarded  with
disfavor  at  court.

MONTT,  Manuel,  Chilian  statesman,  b.  in  Pe-
torca,  5  Sept.,  1809 ;  d.  in  Santiago  in  March,  1881.
He  was  graduated  at  the  National  institute  of  San
tiago,  and  soon  rose  to  its  rectorship,  introducing
many  useful  reforms.  There  he  attracted  the
attention  of  the  vice-president  and  chief  minister,
Portales,  who  appointed  him  in  1836  assistant
secretary  of  state,  and  when  that  statesman  perished
in  the  mutiny  of  Quillota,  6  June,  1837,  Montt
took  energetic  measures  to  suppress  the  revolt.
Next  year  he  was  chosen  judge  of  the  supreme
court,  and  in  1839  he  was  elected  deputy  to  con
gress  and  president  of  that  body,  but  was  soon  ap
pointed  secretary  of  the  interior  and  foreign  rela
tions,  and  in  March,  1840,  became  secretary  of
justice  and  public  instruction.  He  was  subse
quently  twice  secretary  of  state,  introduced  many
useful  reforms,  and  organized  in  1843  the  Univer
sity  of  Chili.  In  1848  he  was  again  elected  to  con-


MONTUFAR


MOODIE


375


gress,  where  he  attacked  the  Liberal  party,  and  soon
became  chief  of  the  Conservatives.  As  such  he
was  elected  president  in  1851,  and  re-elected  for  a
second  term  in  1856,  and  ruled  the  country  with  a
firm  hand,  repressing  many  revolutionary  move
ments.  Although  much  blood  was  spilled  at  Lon-
gomilla,  Cerro  Grande,  and  San  Felipe,  he  crushed
all  opposition,  and  the  year  1859  witnessed  the  last
military  revolution  in  Chili.  Notwithstanding  his
oppressive  rule,  the  country  owes  to  him  in  a  great
measure  its  progress  and  flourishing  condition.  He
fostered  the  construction  of  the  first  railroads,
established  telegraph-lines,  protected  immigration,
founded  in  the  province  of  Valdivia  the  flourishing
colony  that  bears  his  name,  abolished  tithes,  intro
duced"  steam  navigation  to  the  southern  ports,  and
established  a  thorough  system  of  popular  educa
tion.  His  services  to  the  country  were  recognized
by  his  appointment  as  deputy  for  Chili  to  the
American  congress  that  met  in  Lima  in  1865,  of
which  body  he  was  chosen  president.  At  the  time
of  his  death  he  was  president  of  the  supreme  court,
which  place  he  had  held  since  1844,  with  the  excep
tion  of  his^terms  as  minister  and  president.

MONT U FAR,  Lorenzo  (mon-too'-far),  Central
American  statesman,  b.  in  Guatemala,  11  March.
1823.  He  studied  philosophy  and  jurisprudence  in
the  university  of  his  native  city,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1845,  and  soon  attracted  notice.  In  1848,
when  Gen.  Rafael  Carrera  (q.  v.)  executed  nine  citi
zens  without  trial,  Montufar  published  a  violent
pamphlet  against  him,  and  was  forced  to  secrete
himself.  The  supreme  court,  whose  members  were
all  of  the  opposition,  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
after  an  examination  in  secret  session,  and  on  24
June  he  left  for  Salvador.  He  was  well  received  by
President  Vasconcelos,  and  appointed  district  attor
ney  of  San  Vicente ;  but  when  Carrera,  to  appeavse
the  opposition,  convoked  a  constituent  assembly.
Montufar  was  elected  a  member  by  his  party,  and
returned  on  8  Sept.  After  Carrera's  resignation,
and  his  recall  from  Mexico  in  August,  1849,  Mon
tufar  emigrated  to  Costa  Rica,  where  he  was  ap
pointed  in  1850  judge  of  the  supreme  court  and
professor  of  jurisprudence  in  the  university.  In
1856  he  became  minister  of  foreign  relations  and
public  instruction,  and  during  the  invasion  of
William  Walker  he  was  sent  as  minister  to  Hon
duras.  After  the  war  he  resigned,  and  began  to
practise  law,  but  was  subsequently  obliged  to  flee
to  Salvador.  President  Gerardo  Barrios  appointed
him  minister  to  the  United  States,  and  also  sent
him  to  London  on  a  financial  mission.  After  the
deposition  of  Barrios,  Montufar  went  to  Costa  Rica,
where  he  resumed  practice  and  edited  the  paper
"  El  Quincenal  Josefino."  In  the  latter  he  opposed
the  administration  of  President  Jesus  Jimenez,  and
in  1866,  being  ordered  to  leave  the  country,  went
to  Salvador,  where  President  Duefias  appointed  him
minister  to  Peru.  A  treaty  of  commerce  that  he
negotiated  with  that  country  was  disapproved  by
Duefias,  and,  seeing  the  ^instability  of  affairs  in
Central  America,  Montufar  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  Lima  and  practised  his  profession  there.  After
the  fall  of  President  Jimenez  on  27  April,  1870,
Montufar  returned  to  Costa  Rica,  and  was  ap
pointed  minister  of  foreign  affairs.  In  1871  he  was
president  of  the  Liberal  convention  from  the  five
republics  at  Amapala.  and  in  June  of  that  year  was
called  by  the  new  president  of  Guatemala,  Grana-
dos,  to  the  ministry  of  foreign  affairs,  but  declined,

g-eferring  to  resume  the  same  post  in  Costa  Rica,
e  resigned  the  portfolio  in  1874,  and  when  Guardia
recalled  the  Jesuits  in  1875.  Montufar's  opposition
became  offensive  to  the  dictator,  and  the  former


left  the  republic,  returning  to  his  native  Guate
mala,  where  President  Barrios  (q.  r.)  appointed  him
'  minister  to  Madrid. On  his  return  he  was  elected
judge  of  the  supreme  court,  and  commissioned  to
form  a  new  code  of  law. He  was  minister  of  pub
lic  instruction  and  foreign  affairs  in  1877-'8,  in
1879  deputy  to  the  constituent assembly,  and a
i  member  of  the  commission  to  revise  the  new  con
stitution,  and  in  1880-'!  held  again  the  portfolio  of
foreign  affairs. In  1882  he  was  sent  as  minister  to
Washington,  commissioned  to  obtain  the  arbitra
tion  of  the  United  States  in  the  boundary  dispute
with Mexico ; but when in  June of that year
Barrios  appeared  in  Washington,  and,  against  Mon
tufar's  advice,  ceded  a  strip  of  the  country  in  ques
tion,  the  latter  resigned,  but  remained  in  the  United
States. After  Barrios's  death  in  April,  1885,  Mon
tufar  returned  to  Guatemala,  but  a  Liberal  club
that  he  formed  displeased  President  Barillos,  and
I  on  16  Sept.  he  was  arrested,  carried  to  the  port  of
San  Jose,  and  sent  to  California. From  Acapulco
j  he  returned  to  San  Salvador,  where  President  Me-
!  nendez  commissioned  him  to  write  a  work  on  the
administrative  law  of  that  country,  but  he  was  ex
pelled  on  demand  of  President  Barillos,  and  went
I  to  Costa  Rica,  where  he  was  appointed  professor  of
I  political  economy,  and  ordered  by  the  government
i  to  write a  work  on  William  Walker's  career  in
j  Central  America,  which  is  now  (1888)  ready  for  the
!  press. In  the  latter  part  of  1887  President  Barillos,
changing  his policy,  recalled Montufar  and ap-
'  pointed  him  minister  of  foreign  affairs. He  is  a
member  of  the  "  Real  Academia  Espanola "  and
'  numerous  other  scientific  associations  of  Europe
and  America,  and  has  written  '•  Critica  del  Gobier-
j  no  servil  de  Guatemala"  (Costa  Rica,  1854);  "  De-
!  fensa  del  General  Gerardo  Barrios"  (London,  1863) ;
a  volume  containing  three  pamphlets  against  the
Jesuits  (Costa  Rica,  1872) ; •'  Memorias  Historicas
de Centro  America" (5 vols..  Guatemala,  1881);
"El  Evangelic  y  el  Syllabus"  (Costa  Rica,  1884);
"Un  Dualismo  Imposible"  (San  Salvador,  1886);
and many  pamphlets on  legal  questions  and  in
favor  of  Central  American  unity.

MOOAR,  George,  educator,  b.  in  Andover,
Mass.,  27  May,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams
in  1851,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in
1855.  He  was  pastor  at  Andover  in  1855-'61,  at
Oakland,  Cal.,  in  1861-'72  and  since  1874,  and  has
been  professor  of  systematic  theology  and  church
history  in  Pacific  theological  seminary,  Oakland,
since  1870.  He  was  one  of  the  commission  of
twenty-five  appointed  by  the  national  council  of
Congregational  churches  to  prepare  a  church  creed
and  catechism  in  1881-'4.  He  has  been  associate
editor  of  "  The  Pacific "  since  1863,  and  is  the
author  of  "  Historical  Manual  of  the  South  Church,
Andover  "  (Andover,  1859) ;  "  Handbook  of  the
Congregational  Churches  of  California  "  (San  Fran
cisco,  1863) ;  "  The  Religion  of  Loyalty"  (Oakland,
1865) ;  and  "The  Prominent  Characteristics  of  the
Congregational  Churches  "  (San  Francisco,  1866).

MOODIE,  John  TVedderbar  Dnnbar,  Cana
dian  author,  b.  in  Malsetter,  Orkney  islands.  7  Oct.,
1797;  d.  in  Belleville,  Out.,  22  Oct.',  1869.  He  was
the  son  of  Maj.  James  Moodie,  and  in  1813  entered
the  British  army  as  2d  lieutenant  in  the  21st  regi
ment  of  foot.  "  He  was  wounded  in  the  attack  at
Bergen-op-Zoom  on  8  March,  1814,  and  soon  after
ward  retired  from  the  service  on  half-pay.  In  1819
he  joined  his  elder  Brother,  Benjamin,  who  had  emi
grated  to  South  Africa,  and  remained  in  that
country  ten  years.  He  returned  to  England  in
1829,  married  Susanna  Strickland  in  1831,  and,
emigrating  with  her  to  Canada  in  1832,  settled


376


MOODY


finally  in  Douro,  near  Peterborough.  During  the
rebellion  of  1837  Mr.  Moodie  served  at  Toronto  and
subsequently  as  captain  in  the  Queen's  own  regi
ment  on  the  Niagara  frontier,  and  in  the  autumn
of  1838  he  was  appointed  to  command  the  militia
along  the  shores  of  Lake  Ontario  and  the  Bay  of
Quiiite.  In  November,  1839,  he  was  appointed  by
Sir  George  Arthur  sheriff  of  the  district  of  Victoria
(now  the  county  of  Hastings),  but  he  resigned  in
1863.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Ten  Years  in  South
Africa  "  (2  vols.,  London,  1855) ;  "  Scenes  and  Ad
ventures  as  a  Soldier  and  a  Settler"  (Montreal,
1866);  and  of  miscellaneous  sketches.— His  wife,
Susanna,  Canadian  author,  b.  in  Rcydon  Hall,
Suffolk,  England,  6  Dec.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Toronto,  8
April.  1885,  was  the  sixth  daughter  of  Thomas
Strickland,  and  sister  of  Agnes  Strickland,  Mrs.

Catherine  Parr
Traill,  Elizabeth
and  Jane  Strick
land,  all  of  whom
are  authors.  Su
sanna  began  writ
ing  when  she
was  sixteen  years
old.  Accompa
nying  Mr.  Moodie
to  Canada,  she
suffered  all  the
hardships  and  dis
comforts  incident
to  frontier  life  in
her  new  home.
In  1839  she  re-
moved  with  Mr.
Moodie  to  Belle
ville,  after  which  she  resided  during  the  rest  of
her  life  in  Toronto.  She  wrote  "  Enthusiasm  and
other  Poems"  (London,  1829);  "Roughing  it  in
the  Bush,  or  Life  in  Canada"  (2  vols.,  1852);
"Life  in  the  Clearings  versus  the  Bush"  (1853);
"Mark  Hurdlestone,  the  Gold  Worshipper"  (2
vols.,  1853) ;  "  Matrimonial  Speculations  "  (1854) ;
"Flora  Lindsay"  (1854);  and  "The  Mono-tons"
(2  vols.,  1856).  Some  of  her  books  have  been  re-
published  in  the  United  States.

MOODY,  Dwiglit  Lyinan,  evangelist,  b.  in
Northfield,  Franklin  co.,  Mass.,  5  Feb.,  1837.  He
received  a  limited  education,  and  worked  on  a
farm  till  he  was  seventeen  years  old,  when  he
became  a  clerk  in  a  shoe-store  in  Boston.  He
united  with  a  Congregational  church  soon  after
ward,  and  in  1856  went  to  Chicago,  where  he
engaged  with  enthusiasm  in  missionary  work
among  the  poor,  and  in  less  than  a  year  estab
lished  a  Sunday-school  with  more  than  1,000
pupils.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  employed
by  the  Christian  commission,  and  subsequently  by
the  Young  men's  Christian  association  of  Chicago,
as  a  lay  missionary.  A  church  was  built  for  his  con
verts  and  he  became  its  unordained  pastor.  In  the
fire  of  1871  the  church  and  Mr.  Moody's  house  and
furniture  were  destroyed,  but  a  new  and  much
larger  church  has  been  since  erected.  In  1873,  ac
companied  by  Ira  D.  Sankey,  he  visited  Europe  and
instituted  a  series  of  weekly  day  religious  services
in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  which  resulted
in  great  religious  awakenings  in  the  principal  cities
in  these  countries.  The  evangelists  returned  to
the  United  States  in  1875  and  organized  similar
meetings  in  various  parts  of  the  country.  In  1883
they  again  visited  Great  Britain,  and  since  that
time  have  been  engaged  in  evangelistic  work  there
and  in  their  own  country.  Mr.  Moody  has  pub
lished  "  The  Second  Coming  of  Christ "  (Chicago,


1877) ;  "  The  Way  and  the  Word  "  (1877) ;  "  Se
cret  Power,  or  the  Secret  of  Success  in  Christian
Life  and  Work  "  (1881) ;  "  The  Way  to  God,  and
how  to  find  It  "  (1884).  Of  his  collected  sermons
there  have  been  published  "  Glad  Tidings  "  (New
York,  1876);  "Great  Joy"  (1877);  " To  all  Peo
ple  "  (1877) :  "  Best  Thoughts  and  Discourses,"
with  a  sketch  of  his  life  and  that  of  Mr.  Sankey
(1876) ;  and  "  Arrows  and  Anecdotes,"  with  a
sketch  of  his  life  (1877).

MOODY,  (jranville,  soldier,  b.  in  Portland,
Me.,  2  Jan.,  1812 ;  d.  near  Jefferson,  Iowa,  4  June,
1887.  His  ancestor,  William  Moody,  a  native  of
Scotland,  settled  in  the  Plymouth  colony  in  1632,
and  his  father,  William,  was  graduated'  at  Dart
mouth  in  1 798,  and  became  principal  in  1816  of  the
first  female  seminary  established  in  Baltimore,
Md.  When  four  years  of  age  Granville  removed
with  his  parents  to  Baltimore,  and  was  educated
there.  In  1831  he  became  a  clerk  in  his  brother's
store  at  Norwich,  Ohio,  and  on  15  June.  1833,  he
was  licensed  as  a  local  preacher  in  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church.  lie  was  received  into  the  Ohio
conference,  and,  after  holding  various  pastorates  in
that  state,  was  appointed  in  1860  to  Morris  chapel
(now  St.  Paul's  church),  Cincinnati.  In  1861  he
was  invited  to  take  command  of  the  74th  Ohio
regiment,  and  asked  the  advice  of  his  colleagues
in  the  church  as  to  the  propriety  of  resigning  his
pastorate  to  enter  the  military  service.  They  ap
proved  of  his  acceptance,  and  he  served  till  16  May,
1863,  when  illness  forced  him  to  resign.  By  his
bravery  at  the  battle  of  Stone  River  he  won  the
title  of  "  the  fighting  parson."  He  was  struck  four
times  with  bullets,  and  his  horse  was  shot,  but  he
refused  to  leave  the  field.  On  the  recommenda
tion  of  the  secretary  of  war,  on  13  March,  1865,
Col.  Moody  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  "  for  distinguished  services  at  the  battle
of  Stone  River."  After  his  return  from  the  army
he  resumed  his  place  in  the  itinerant  ministry,
and  served  with  acceptance  in  various  localities  till
1882,  when,  on  account  of  failing  health,  he  took
a  supernumerary  relation.  Removing  to  his  farm
near  Jefferson,  Ohio,  he  resided  there  till  his  death,
which  was  caused  by  an  accident  while  he  was  on
his  way  to  preach  a  memorial  sermon  before  a  part
of  the  Grand  army  of  the  republic  at  Jefferson.

MOODY,  .1  amcs.  soldier,  b.  in  New  Jersey  in
1744;  d.  in  Sissibon,  Nova  Scotia,  3  April,  180!).
lie  was  a  farmer  in  New  Jersey  at  the  beginning
of  the  Revolutionary  war,  but,  being  molested  by
the  Whigs,  fled,  and,  accompanied  by  seventy-
three  of  his  neighbors  in  April,  1777,  joined  the
British  army  at  Bergen.  lie  afterward  marched
seventy  miles  with  one  hundred  men  to  attack
his  former  neighbors,  but  was  met  and  beaten  by
the  patriots,  and  all  his  command  was  captured
but  himself  and  eight  others.  In  June.  1779,  he
captured  several  Continental  officers,  and  destroyed
some  powder  and  arms.  In  the  same  year  he  was
sent  to  lurk  in  the  neighborhood  of  Gen.  Wash
ington's  troops,  watched  the  movements  of  Gen.
John  Sullivan,  and  was  also  a  spy  upon  Gen.  Ho
ratio  Gates  when  he  was  moving  to  the  south.  In
May,  1780,  he  formed  the  design  of  capturing
Gov.  William  Livingston,  and,  failing  in  the  at
tempt,  tried  without  success  to  blow  up  the  maga
zine  at  Suckasunna.  Soon  afterward  he  captured
eighteen  officers  of  militia  and  committee-men.
He  was  subsequently  arrested,  but  escaped,  and  in
March,  1781,  was  employed  by  Oliver  De  Lancey,
the  younger,  to  intercept  Washington's  despatches,
which  he  succeeded  in  doing.  Late  in  the  same
year  he  attempted  to  seize  the  most  important


MOODY


MOORE


377


books  and  papers  of  the  Continental  congress  at
Philadelphia,  but  failed,  and  narrowly  escaped  with
his  life.  Of  all  the  spies  employed"  by  the  royal
ists  during  the  Revolution,  he  was  the  most  fear
less  and  daring,  and  his  numerous  escapes  from
capture  and  death  were  little  short  of  marvellous.
For  several  years  his  name  was  a  terror  in  New
Jersey  and  parts  of  Pennsylvania.  At  the  close
of  the  Revolutionary  war  he  went  to  England,
and  subsequently  to  Nova  Scotia,  where  he  re
ceived  an  estate  and  the  half-pay  of  an  officer  of
his  grade.  He  became  a  colonel  of  militia  in  Nova
Scotia,  and  wrote  a  narrative  of  his  services  to  the
crown  (London,  1783). — His  brother,  John,  b.  in
New  Jersey  in  1759  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia  in  No
vember,  1781,  was  engaged  in  the  attempt  to  break
into  the  state-house  in  Philadelphia  and  seize  the
papers  of  the  Continental  congress,  and  was  cap
tured  and  executed  as  a  spy.

MOODY,  Joshua,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wales  in
1633;  d.  in  Boston,  4  July,  1697.  William,  his
father,  settled  in  Newbury"  in  1634.  Joshua  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1653.  was  ordained  a
minister  of  the  Congregational  church,  11  July.
1671,  and  began  to  preach  about  1658.  His  re
gard  for  the  purity  and  reputation  of  his  church
having  brought  upon  him  the  enmity  of  Gov.  Ed
ward  Cranfield,  he  was  imprisoned,  but  was  short
ly  released  upon  condition  that  he  would  preach
no  more  in  New  Hampshire.  On  23  May,  1684,
he  became  assistant  minister  of  the  First  church,
Boston,  and  was  invited  to  take  charge  of  Har
vard,  but  declined.  During  the  witchcraft  troubles
in  1692,  he  opposed  the  unjust  and  violent  meas
ures  toward  the  imagined  offenders,  and  aided
Philip  English  and  his  wife  to  escape  from  prison.
His  zeal  in  this  matter  occasioned  his  dismission
from  his  church,  and  he  passed  the  rest  of  his  life
in  Portsmouth.  He  published  "  Communion  with
God"  (1685)  and  an  "Election  Sermon"  (1692).
His  four  thousand  and  seventeenth  sermon  closes
a  manuscript  volume  of  his  discourses  that  is  pre
served  in  the  Massachusetts  historical  society.

MOODY.  Paul,  mechanic,  b.  in  Byfield.'Mass.,
23  May,  1779 ;  d.  in  Lowell,  Mass.,  7  July,  1831.
He  received  a  common-school  education,  and  then
worked  in  a  woollen-factory  in  his  native  town.
Subsequently  he  attracted  the  attention  of  the  in
ventor  Jacob  Perkins,  who  placed  him  in  charge
of  his  machine-shop.  About  1813  he  was  called
to  the  management  of  the  mechanical  part  of  the
VValtham  cotton-factory,  and  later,  when  similar
works  were  established  in  Lowell,  he  transferred
his  services  to  that  city.  Among  his  inventions
are  a  dead  spindle  and  a  governor.

MOODY,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newbury.
Mass.,  4  Jan.,  1676 ;  d.  13  Nov.,  1747.  He  was  the
son  of  Caleb  Moody,  a  representative  of  Newbury
in  the  general  court  of  Massachusetts  in  1677-'8.
and  a  grandson  of  Samuel  Moody,  who  was  said
to  have  emigrated  from  Wales  in  1634.  The
grandson  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1697.  and
ordained  a  minister  of  the  Congregational  church
in  York,  Me.,  29  Dec.,  1700.  He  was  a  member  of
the  convention  of  ministers  that  met  at  Boston.  7
July,  1743,  to  pass  judgment  on  the  remarkable
religious  revivals  that  followed  George  White-
field's  preaching  in  this  country.  In  1745,  at  the
instance  of  Sir  William  Pepperell,  he  accompanied
the  expedition  to  Cape  Breton.  He  was  instru
mental  in  founding  a  Congregational  church  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  and  possessed  great  influence
among  the  churches.  His  publications  include
"  State  of  the  Damned  "  (1710) ;  "  Judas  Hung  up
in  Chains"  (1714);  ''Election  Sermon"  (1721);


summary  account  of  the  life  and  death  of  Joseph
Quasson.  an  Indian.

MOOERS,  Benjamin,  soldier,  b.  in  Haverhill,
Mass.,  1  April,  1758 :  d.  in  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  20
Feb.,  1838.  He  entered  the  Revolutionary  army
as  an  ensign,  served  as  a  lieutenant  and  adjutant
till  the  end  of  the  war.  and  while  acting  in  this
capacity  kept  an  order-book  which  was  printed  in
Albany,  in  1876.  In  1783  he  settled  in  the  vicinity
of  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  then  a  wilderness,  was  for
eight  years  a  member  of  the  New  York  legisla
ture,  and  held  various  other  offices.  He  was  a
major-general  of  militia,  and  as  such  commanded
at  the  battle  of  Plattsburg,  11  Sept..  1814.

MOONEY,  Edward  Ludlow,  artist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  25  March.  1813;  d.  there  in  July.
1887.  He  began  his  art  studies  by  attending  the
night-school  of  the  Academy  of  design  at  the
age  of  eighteen.  After  this  he  worked  as  a  sign-
painter  until  his  twenty-third  year,  when  he  be
came  a  pupil  of  Henry  Inman.  While  in  that
artist's  studio  he  executed  six  admirable  copies  of
Inman's  portrait  of  Martin  Van  Buren.  and  also
received  the  first  gold  medal  that  was  awarded  by
the  National  academy  of  design.  Subsequently
Mr.  Mooney  studied  with  William  Page,  and  was
elected  an  associate  of  the  academy  in  1839  and  an
academician  in  1840.  His  career  was  eminently
successful,  and  marked  by  various  admirable  por
traits  of  eminent  men.  Among  these  were  likenesses
of  Com.  Oliver  H.  Perry  and  of  Gov.  William  H.
Seward.  the  latter  now  in  the  state-house  at  Al
bany,  also  that  of  Achmet  Ben  Aman,  the  com
mander  of  the  Imam  of  Muscat's  frigate  "Sultan,"
purchased  by  the  common  council  of  New  York.
He  passed  several  winters  in  the  south  painting
the  portraits  of  southern  celebrities.

MOOR,  Wyinan  Bradbury  Serey,  senator,
b.  in  Waterville.  Me.,  3  Nov..  1814  :  d.  'in  Lynch-
burg.  Ya.,  16  Feb..  1869.  He  was  educated  at
Colby  university,  studied  law  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
and  in  1833  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  was  in
the  Maine  legislature  in  1839,  attorney-general  of
that  state  in  1844-'8,  and  by  appointment  suc
ceeded  John  Fairfield  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  serving
from  January  to  June,  1848.  He  subsequently  de
voted  much  attention  to  the  railroad  interests  of
his  state,  and  was  consul-general  to  the  British-
American  provinces  in  1857-'61.  He  removed  to
Virginia  a  few  months  previous  to  his  death.

MOORE,  Andrew,  lawyer,  b.  in  Canniscello.
Augusta  co.  (now  Rockbridge),  Ya.,  in  1752 ;  d.
near  Lexington,  Ya.,  14  April,  1821.  In  early
years  he  made  a  vcyage  to  the  West  Indies,  and
was  cast  away  on  a  desert  island.  On  his  return
he  studied  law.  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1774.  In  1776  he  entered  the  Revolutionary  army
as  lieutenant,  participated  in  the  battle  of  Sara
toga,  attained  the  rank  of  captain,  and  resigned
his  commission  after  three  years'  service.  The
legislature  of  Virginia  made  him  brigadier-general
of  militia,  and  major-general  in  1808.  From  1781
till  1789  he  served  in  the  Virginia  legislature,  and
in  1788  was  a  member  of  the  State  convention  that
ratified  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  He
was  then  elected  to  the  first  congress,  serving
from  4  March,  1789.  till  3  March.  1797,  and  was
again  a  member  of  the  legislature  from  1789  till
1800.  He  successfully  contested  the  election  of
Thomas  Lewis  in  the  8th  congress,  serving  from
5  March,  1804.  till  6  Nov..  1804,  when  he  was  ap
pointed  a  U.  S.  senator  in  place  of  Wilson  Cary
Nicholas.  He  was  subsequently  elected  to  this
office,  serving  from  17  Dec..  1807.  till  3  March,
1809.  In  1810  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  marshal  for


378


MOORE


MOORE


Virginia,  and  he  held  this  office  until  his  death.
— His  son,  Samuel,  congressman,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  9  Feb.,  1790;  d.  in  Lexington,  Va.,  17
Sept.,  1875,  was  educated  at  Washington  college
(now  Washington  and  Lee  university),  Va.  In
1825  he  was  elected  to  the  Virginia  legislature,
serving  until  1838.  He  was  a  member  of  the  con
vention  of  1829  to  amend  the  constitution  of  Vir
ginia,  and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,
serving  from  2  Dec.,  1833.  till  3  March,  1835.  Sub
sequently  he  was  again  a  member  of  the  legisla
ture.  In  1861  he  was  elected  to  the  convention  of
Virginia,  and  actively  opposed  secession,  for  which
he  was  threatened  with  violence  in  Richmond.
Notwithstanding  this,  he  signed  the  ordinance,  and
served  in  the  Confederate  army.

MOORE,  Andrew  Barry,  governor  of  Ala
bama,  b.  in  Spartanburg  district,  S.  C.,  7  March,
1806;  d.  in  Marion,  Ala.,  5  April,  1873.  He  re
moved  to  Perry  county,  Ala.,  in  1826.  and  after
teaching  for  two  years  studied  law  in  Marion,  and
was  enrolled  as  an  attorney  in  1833.  He  was  many
times  in  the  legislature  after  1839.  and  served  three
terms  as  speaker.  He  was  a  Whig  presidential
elector  in  1848,  and  a  state  circuit  judge  from  1852
till  1857,  when  he  resigned  to  accept  the  Demo
cratic  nomination  for  governor.  He  was  elected
and  chosen  again  in  1859.  In  1861  he  directed  the
seizure  of  U.  S.  forts  and  arsenals  before  the  seces
sion  of  the  state,  and  aided  greatly  in  the  equip
ment  of  state  troops.  At  the  close  of  his  term  he
was  appointed  special  aide-de-camp  to  the  new
governor,  John  G.  Shorter.  He  was  confined  in
Fort  Pulaski  in  1865.  and  after  his  release  prac
tised  law  in  Marion  till  his  death.

MOORE,  Bartholomew  Figures,  lawyer,  b.  in
Halifax  county,  N.  C.,  29  Jan.,  1801 ;  d.  in 'Raleigh,
N.  C.,  27  Nov..  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  North  Carolina  in  1820,  licensed  to
practise  law  in  1823,  and,  after  residing  first  in
Nashville,  Tenn.,  and  subsequently  in  Halifax,
N.  C.,  settled  in  Raleigh,  where  he  afterward  re
sided.  He  was  in  the  legislature  in  1836-'44,  and,
declining  a  renomination  in  1846,  devoted  himself
to  his  profession.  He  was  attorney-general  of
North  Carolina  in  1848,  and  was  appointed  to  re
vise  the  laws  of  that  state  in  1849-'54.  During  the
civil  war  he  was  a  strong  Unionist,  was  a  member
of  two  constitutional  conventions,  and  was  one  of
the  commissioners  from  North  Carolina  to  confer
with  President  Lincoln  in  1865  as  to  the  best  mode
of  restoring  the  state  to  the  Union.  He  was  called
the  father  of  the  North  Carolina  bar.  Mr.  Moore
was  a  friend  of  public  instruction,  and  left  bequests
to  be  applied  to  that  purpose.

MOORE,  Benjamin,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  New-
town,  L.  I.,  N.  Y.,  5  Oct.,  1748 ;  d.  in  Greenwich
village  (now  part  of  the  city  of  New  York),
27  Feb.,  1816.  He  entered  King's  (now  Columbia)
college,  and  was  graduated  in  1768.  He  then  en
gaged  in  teaching  Greek  and  Latin,  and  prepared
for  entering  the  ministry.  He  went  to  England  in
May,  1774,  and  was  ordained  deacon  in  the  chapel
of  Fulham  palace,  24  June,  1774,  by  the  bishop  of
London,  and  priest  in  the  same  place  the  following
day  by  the  same  bishop.  Soon  after  his  return  he
was  appointed  an  assistant  minister  of  Trinity
church,  and  he  was  made  rector  of  Trinity  parish,
22  Dec.,  1800.  He  received  the  degree  of 'S.  T.  D.
from  Columbia  in  1789.  Bishop  Provoost  re
signed  his  jurisdiction  in  1801,  and  Dr.  Moore  was
unanimously  elected  his  successor.  He  was  conse
crated  bishop-coadjutor  (during  Bishop  Provoost's
life,  which  lasted  till  1815)  in  St.  Michael's  church,
Trenton,  N.  J.,  11  Sept.,  1801.  He  was  also  presi


dent  of  Columbia  college  from  1801  till  1811.
Early  in  1811  he  was  attacked  by  paralysis  and
disabled  from  further  active  service.  Bishop
Moore  published  a
few  single  sermons
and  a  controversial
pamphlet  in  defence
of  his  church.  His
son.  Clement  C.
Moore,  published  se
lected  sermons  of  his
father's.  —  His  son,
Clement  Clarke,
educator,  b.  in  New
York  city,  15  July,
1779;  d.  in  Newport.
R,  I.,  10  July,  1863.
was  graduated  at  Co
lumbia  in  1798.  Al
though  educated  and
prepared  for  the  min
istry,  he  never  took
orders,  but  devoted
himself  chiefly  to

oriental  and  classical  literature.  In  1818  he  made
a  generous  gift  to  the  General  theological  semi
nary,  just  organized,  on  condition  that  its  build
ings  be  erected  on  the  ground  where  they  are
now  standing.  He  was  appointed  by  the  trus
tees  professor  of  biblical  learning  in  1821,  and
afterward  of  oriental  and  Greek  literature,  and
served  the  institution  for  nearly  thirty  years.  In
1850  he  was  made  professor  emeritus.  Dr.  Moore
published  a  "Hebrew  and  Greek  Lexicon."  the
first  of  the  kind  in  America  (2  vols..  New  York,
1809) ;  "  Bishop  B.  Moore's  Sermons "  (2  vols.,
1824);  "Poems"  (1844);  "George  Castriot,  sur-
named  Scanderbeg,  King  of  Albania,"  a  condensa
tion  of  the  old  English  translation  of  Jacques  La-
vardin's  "  Historic  "  of  that  hero  (New  York,  1850) ;
and  also  at  various  times  made  contributions  to
journals  and  magazines.  He  was  the  author  of
the  well-known  ballad  "  'Twas  the  Night  before
Christmas,"  and  is  considered  the  pioneer  of  He
brew  lexicography  in  this  country. — Benjamin's
brother,  William,  physician,  b.  on  Long  Island,
N.  Y.,  in  1754;  d.  in  New  York,  1824,  was  educated
by  his  brother.  He  went  to  London  in  1778,  and
thence  to  Edinburgh,  where  he  was  graduated  in
medicine  in  1780.  He  then  returned  to  New  York,
where  he  practised  for  forty  years,  making  a
specialty  of  obstetrics.  He  was  president  of  the
New  York  county  medical  society  and  a  trustee  of
the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons.  He  con
tributed  to  the  "  American  Medical  and  Philosophi
cal  Register,''  to  the  "  New  York  Medical  Reposi
tory,"  and  to  the  "  New  York  Medical  and  Physical
Journal." — William's  son,  Nathaniel  F.,  clergy
man,  b.  in  Newtown,  L.  L,  25  Dec.,  1782;  d.  in  the
highlands  of  the  Hudson,  27  April,  1872,  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1802,  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1805,  and  practised  for  a
few  years.  In  1817  he  was  appointed  adjunct  pro
fessor  of  Greek  and  Latin  in  Columbia,  and  in
1820  was  made  professor,  holding  this  chair  until
1835,  when  he  went  to  Europe.  On  his  return  in
1837  he  was  made  librarian,  and  in  1839  again  went
to  Europe,  travelling  also  in  the  Orient.  In  1842
he  was  made  president  of  Columbia,  which  office
he  held  until  1849,  when  he  resigned  and  retired
to  private  life.  He  was  a  trustee  of  Columbia
from  1842  till  1851,  and  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  that  institution  in  1825.  His  publi
cations  are  "  Remarks  on  the  Pronunciation  of
the  Greek  Language,"  in  reply  to  a  pamphlet  by


MOORE


MOORE


379


John  Pickering  (Xew  York,  1819) ;  "  Ancient
Mineralogy"  (1834;  new  ed.,  1859) ;  "  Lectures  on
the  Greek  Language  and  Literature  "  (1835) ;  and
an  "  Historical  Sketch  of  Columbia  College  "  (1849),
besides  pamphlets  and  essays.

MOORE,  Charles  Leonard,  poet,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  16  March,  1854.  His  father,  Joseph,
was  for  many  years  in  the  Pennsylvania  legislature,
and  served  as  a  major  in  the  National  army  during
the  civil  war.  The  son  was  educated  at  home  and
in  Philadelphia  high-school,  and  engaged  in  busi
ness.  He  was  one  of  the  managers  of  an  unsuc
cessful  expedition  from  Philadelphia  to  build  a
railroad  between  Bolivia  and  Brazil,  and  during
its  operations  in  1878-'9  he  was  U.  S.  consul  at
San  Antonio,  Brazil.  He  is  now  (1888)  connected
with  a  drainage-company  in  Florida,  but  resides
in  Philadelphia.  Mr.  Moore  has  published  "  At
las  "  (Philadelphia,  1882);  and  "Poems"  (1883).

MOORE,  Clara  Jessup,  author,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  16  Feb.,  1824.  Her  father,  Augustus  E.
Jessup,  was  the  scientist  of  Maj.  Stephen  H.  Long's
Yellowstone  expedition  of  1816.  Her  parents  were
residents  of  Massachusetts.  She  was  educated  in
Xew  Haven,  Conn.,  and  on  27  Oct.,  1842,  married
Bloomfield  H.  Moore,  of  Philadelphia.  She  has
occupied  herself  with  literary  and  philanthropic-
labors.  During  the  war  she  established  the
woman's  Pennsylvania  branch  of  the  U.  S.  sanitary
commission,  and  the  special  relief  committee  for
hospital  work,  and  she  projected  and  aided  in
founding  the  Union  temporary  home  for  children
in  Philadelphia.  Several  of  her  early  stories  were
successful  in  competition  for  prizes,  and  she  wrote
at  first  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Mrs.  Clara  More-
ton."  Mrs.  Moore's  husband  died  in  1878.  and  she
is  now  (1888)  a  resident  of  London.  England.  She
has  obtained  the  legal  right  to  write  her  surname.
Bloomfield-Moore.  Her  works  include  "  The  Dia
mond  Cross  "  (Philadelphia.  1857) ;  "  Mabel's  Mis
sion  "  ;  "  Master  Jacky's  Holiday  " ;  "  Poems  and
Stories  "  (1875) ;  "  On  Dangerous  Ground."  a  novel,
which  was  translated  into  French  and  Swedish
(1876);  "Sensible  Etiquette "(1878);  "  Gondaline's
Lesson"  (1881):  "Slander  and  Gossip"  (printed
privately,  1882) ;  and  "  The  Warden's  Tale  and
Other  Poems,  Xew  and  Old  "  (London,  1883).

MOORE,  David  Albert,  physician,  b.  in  Lan
sing.  Tompkins  co.,  N.  Y.,  8  Xovl.  1814.  He  studied
medicine  at  Cazenovia  and  Albany,  X.  Y.,  and  was
given  the  honorary  degree  of  M.  D.  by  Syracuse
university  in  1877.  Dr.  Moore  was  president  in
1869-'73  of  the  Xew  York  state  life  insurance  com
pany  of  Syracuse,  where  he  has  resided  for  many
years.  He  has  written  under  the  pen-name  of
Paul  Wright,  and  published  '•  A  Panorama  of
Time"  (New  York,  1857).  and  "How  She  won
Him,"  a  romance  (Philadelphia,  1880).

MOORE,  Dunlop,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lurgan,
County  Armagh,  Ireland.  25  July,  1830.  He
studied  at  Edinburgh  and  Belfast,  and  was  gradu
ated  in  1854.  From  1855  till  1867  he  was  mission
ary  of  the  Irish  Presbyterian  church  to  Gujurat.
India,  and  from  1869  till  1874  to  the  Jews  in  Yien-
na.  Since  1875  he  has  been  pastor  of  the  First
Presbyterian  church  in  Xew  Brighton,  Pa.  He
assisted  in  translating  the  Scriptures  into  the
Gujurati  language,  wrote  treatises  on  Mohamme
danism  and  Jainism,  and  edited  a  monthly  periodi
cal,  "The  Gnyandipaka,"  in  the  same  tongue.  He
translated,  with  Dr.  Samuel  T.  Lowrie,  Xagelsbach's
"  Isaiah  "  in  the  American  Lange  series  (New  York,
1878).  and  has  contributed  to  various  reviews.

MOORE.  Edward  Mott,  surgeon,  b.  in  Rahway,
X.  J.,  15  July,  1814.  He  is  the  son  of  Lindley


Murray  Moore,  a  prominent  member  of  the  Society
of  Friends  and  an  early  leader  in  the  anti-slavery
movement,  and  Abigail  Mott,  a  descendant  of  a
Huguenot  family  that  came  to  this  country  after
the  siege  of  Rochelle.  His  early  years  were  spent
in  Xew  York  and  its  neighborhood,  but  the  family
removed  to  Rochester,  X.  Y..  in  1830,  and  that
place  has  since  been  his  home.  He  pursued  his
professional  studies  in  Xew  York  and  Philadel
phia,  being  graduated  as  a  physician  from  the
University  of  Pennsylvania.  He  served  as  resi
dent  physician  at  Blockley  hospital  and  the  Frank-
ford  lunatic  asylum  for  one  year  in  each,  and  then
began  the  practice  of  his  profession  at  Rochester.
In  1842  he  was  chosen  professor  of  surgery  in  the
medical  school  at  Woodstock,  Vt..  and  continued
to  give  lectures  during  the  sessions  of  the  col
lege  for  eleven  years.  He  occupied  afterward  the
same  chair  in  Berkshire,  Mass.,  medical  college
and  in  Starling  medical  college  of  Columbus,
Ohio.  He  filled  the  chair  of  surgery  in  the  Buf
falo  medical  college  for  twenty-five  years  till  1883,
when  he  resigned,  after  having  been  a  lecturer  for
about  forty  years.  He  has  been  president  of  the
Medical  society  of  the  state  of  Xew  York,  and
was  one  of  the
founders  of  the
Surgical  associa
tion  of  the  United  _•<;
States,  and  was  the
first  successor  of
Dr.  Gross  in  its
presidency.  He
was  president  of
the  State  board  of
health  from  its
organization  till
1886,  and  took  a
deep  interest  and
exerted  a  strong
influence  in  the
constitution  of  the
new  body.  He  was
a  delegate  to  the

International  congress  of  physicians  at  Copenhagen
in  1884,  has  been  for  many  years  a  trustee  of  the
University  of  Rochester,  and  is  prominent  in  many
movements  of  local  interest.  He  has  confined  his
professional  writing  to  papers  on  certain  subjects
in  regard  to  which  he  considered  standard  authori
ties  incomplete  or  in  the  wrong,  in  each  case
aiming  to  contribute  some  new  fact  or  thought
to  the  existing  store  of  knowledge,  or  advocating
some  new  departure  in  medical  practice,  basing
his  action  on  original  experiment  and  observation.
These  papers  have  been  published  in  various  medi
cal  journals  and  in  the  transactions  of  medical  so
cieties,  but  have  never  been  collected  in  book-form.
Among  his  discussions  of  original  views  and  meth
ods  of  treatment  may  be  mentioned  papers  on  frac
tures  and  dislocations  of  the  clavicle  :  on  fractures
of  the  radius,  accompanied  with  dislocation  of  the
ulna :  on  fractures,  during  adolescence,  at  the  up
per  end  of  the  humerus :  and  a  treatise  on  trans
fusion  of  blood  based  on  original  investigations.
Shortly  after  graduation.  Dr.  Moore  made  at  Phila-
'  delphia  a  series  of  important  experiments  on  the
!  heart's  action,  in  connection  with  Dr.  Pennock,  of
i  that  city.  Two  years  earlier  the  subject  had  been
investigated  in  Dublin,  but  these  were  the  first  ex
periments  of  the  kind  on  this  continent,  and  in
the  following  year  the  work  done  in  Dublin  and
Philadelphia  was  carefully  tested  by  a  committee
of  the  London  medical  society  appointed  for  that
purpose  and  making  investigation  under  the  most


380


MOORE


MOORE


favorable  circumstances.  Before  this  time  an  ac
curate  knowledge  of  the  diseases  of  the  heart  was
impossible,  but  the  observations  then  made  at
Dublin,  Philadelphia,  and  London  were  so  thorough
as  to  render  knowledge  of  diseases  of  the  heart
more  accurate  perhaps  than  that  on  which  the
treatment  of  diseases  of  any  other  internal  organ
is  based.  As  a  lecturer,  Dr.  Moore  is  fluent,  but
clear,  natural,  and  entertaining :  in  the  practice  of
his  profession  he  has  been  eminently  successful,
having,  in  addition  to  wide  knowledge  and  readi
ness  of  resource,  a  sustaining  coolness  and  confi
dence  in  the  most  critical  cases.

MOORE,  Edwin  Ward,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Alexandria,  Va.,  in  1811;  d.  in  New  York  city,
5  Oct.,  1865.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  a  mid
shipman  in  1825,  and  became  lieutenant  in  1885.
His  first  cruise  was  in  the  sloop-of-war  "Hornet,"
and  he  was  much  in  service  until  the  Texan  war  of
independence  of  1836.  when  he  was  selected  by  the
new  government  of  Texas  for  the  chief  command  ,
of  its  navy,  with  the  rank  of  commodore.  On  16
July,  1836,  he  resigned  his  commission  in  the
U.  'S.  service,  and  partly  from  the  credit  of  the
republic  and  partly  from  his  own  resources  pur
chased  in  New  Orleans  two  small  ships,  which  he
equipped  as  vessels-of-war.  With  these  and  a  tend
er  he  set  sail  from  New  Orleans  in  the  spring  of
1843  for  a  trial  of  strength  with  the  Mexican  fleet
awaiting  him  in  the  Gulf.  This  fleet  consisted  of
eight  or  ten  vessels,  including  two  steamers,  the
"  Guadaloupe  "  and  "  Montezuma,"  which  had  been
constructed  in  England  at  an  expense  of  $1,000,000.
To  save  his  ships  from  what  he  believed  would  be
certain  destruction,  President  Houston  repeatedly
ordered  Com.  Moore  to  seek  shelter  in  Galveston
bay ;  but,  disregarding  these  orders,  or  failing  to
receive  them,  Moore  put  out  to  sea  in  search  of  the
enemy.  A  series  of  hot  engagements  ensued,  in
which  the  enemy  were  routed,  with  heavy  losses  in
ships  and  men.  Notwithstanding  this,  Com.  Moore
was  dismissed  from  the  service  by  President  Hous
ton  for  disobedience  of  orders,  but  the  Texan  con
gress  indemnified  him  for  pecuniary  losses,  and
granted  him  a  large  tract  of  land.  After  the
annexation  of  Texas,  Moore  and  his  associate
Texan  naval  officers  unsuccessfully  applied  to  con
gress  to  be  reinstated  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  with  the
rank  they  had  held  in  that  of  Texas.  A  com
promise  was  finally  passed  in  the  shape  of  an  ap-
Sropriation  to  these  officers  of  leave  pay  from  the
ay  of  annexation  to  the  passage  of  the  bill.  Of
this  appropriation  in  1855,  the  share  accruing  to
Com.  Moore  was  about  $17,000.  He  subsequently
resided  in  New  York  city  engaged  in  mechanical
experiments  and  inventions.

MOORE,  Erasmus  Darwin,  editor,  b.  in  Win-
sted.  Conn.,  30  Sept.,  1802.  He  studied  theology
at  New  Haven  in  1830-'3,  and  held  Congregation-
alist  pastorates  at  Natick,  Barre,  and  Kingston,
Mass.  He  was  editor  of  the  "  Boston  Recorder "
from  1844  till  1846,  the  "  Boston  Reporter  "  from
1846  till  1849,  the  "  Congregational ist "  from  1849
till  1851,  and  the  "  Old  Colony  and  Massachusetts
Bay  Record,"  published  by  the  state.  In  1861  he
held  an  office  in  the  Boston  custom-house.  Since
1862  he  has  been  the  Boston  correspondent  to  the
"  New  York  Evangelist "  and  other  papers.  He
was  associate  editor  of  a  "  Cyclopaedia  of  Missions  "
(New  York,  1852),  and  the  author  of  "Life  Scenes
in  Mission  Fields"  (1857),  and  other  works.

MOORE,  Gabriel,  senator,  b.  in  Stokes  county,
N.  C.,  about  1790 ;  d.  in  Caddo,  Tex.,  9  June,  1844.
He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  practised
in  Huntsville,  Ala.,  and  held  several  local  offices.


He  was  elected  a  representative  to  congress  from
Alabama,  in  place  of  John  W.  Walker,  resigned,
serving  from  21  Jan.,  1823,  till  3  March,  1829.  was
governor  of  Alabama  from  1829  till  1831.  and  U.  S.
senator  from  5  Dec.,  1831,  till  3  March.  1837.

MOORE,  Harry  Humphrey,  artist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  2  July,  1844.  After  studying  in  his  na
tive  city  and  in  San  Francisco,  he  went  to  Dres
den  in  1865,  and  afterward  entered  the  studio  of
Gerome  in  Paris.  He  then  visited  Spain,  where  he
became  the  pupil  of  Fortuny,  and  afterward  devoted
two  years  to  the  study  of  Moorish  life  in  Morocco.
He  worked  in  Rome  under  Fortuny  in  1873-'5,  and
in  the  latter  year  returned  to  the  United  States.
He  spent  the  years  1880-'!  in  Japan,  and  since  that
time  has  resided  in  Paris.  In  1886  he  was  made
chevalier  of  the  order  of  Charles  III.  by  the  queen-
regent  of  Spain.  His  works,  which  are  chiefly  on
Moorish.  Spanish,  and  Japanese  subjects,  include
"Almeh,"  the  figure  of  a  Moorish  dancer  in  the
Alhambra,  for  which  he  received  a  medal  at  the
Philadelphia  centennial  exhibition  in  1876;  "The
Blind  Guitar-Player,"  "A  Moorish  Bazaar,"  "A
Bulgarian,"  "A  Moorish  Merchant."  "A  Morning
Call  in  Japan."  "The  Daimio,"  and  "A  Garden-
Party  at  the  Alhambra."

MOORE,  Sir  Henry,  governor  of  New  York.  b.
in  Jamaica,  W.  I.,  in  1713;  d.  in  New  York  city,
11  Sept..  1769.  He  became  governor  of  Jamaica  in
1 756,  and  was  made  a  baronet  for  suppressing  a  slave
insurrection  in  that  year.  He  was  appointed  gov
ernor  of  New  York  in  1764,  and,  arriving  in  that
city  in  November,  1765,  occupied  the  executive  chair
until  his  death.  He  espoused  the  popular  inter
est  with  warmth,  and  immediately  on  his  arrival
gained  the  good  will  of  the  colonists  by  dismantling
the  fort  and  suspending  his  power  to  execute  the
stamp-act.  They  erected  floral  pyramids,  and  made
a  magnificent  bonfire  in  his  honor.  In  December,
1707,  he  dissolved  the  assembly  in  order  to  enable
it  to  regain  the  ground  that  it  had  lost  in  the  pre
vious  election.  Although  as  a  representative  of
the  government  he  was  often  forced  to  come  into
collision  with  the  people,  his  amiability,  courtesy,
and  indolent  disposition  made  him  a  favorite  with
all  parties  except  the  Presbyterians,  whom  he  of
fended  by  his  attempt  to  establish  a  play-house.  He
was  the  only  native  colonist  that  was  ever  governor
of  New  York.  He  died  suddenly,  and  was  suc
ceeded  by  Lieut.-Gov.  Cadwallader  Golden.

MOORE,  Horatio  Newton,  author,  b.  in  New
Jersey  in  1814;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  26  Aug.,
1859.  He  published  his  first  important  work,  "Or
lando,  or  Woman's  Virtue."  a  tragedy  (Philadel
phia.  1833),  at  nineteen  years  of  age.  This  was  fol
lowed  by  "  The  Regicide,"  a  five-act  drama  (1834).
He  then  devoted  himself  to  novel-writing,  and
subsequently  to  historical  sketches  and  memoirs.
Among  the  latter  his  "  Memoir  of  the  Duanes,"
published  in  the  "  Boston  Museum,"  is  a  curious
and  interesting  account  of  these  famous  refugees.
His  first  short  novel,  "  Mary  Morris  "  (Philadelphia,
1840),  enjoyed  great  popularity.  His  other  works
include  "  The  Lives  of  Marion  and  Wayne  "  (1854).

MOORE,  Jacob  Bailey,  physician,  b.  in  George
town,  Me.,  5  Sept.,  1772 ;  d.  in  Andover,  N.  H.,  10
Jan.,  1813.  His  ancestors  emigrated  to  this  country
from  Scotland.  Jacob  studied  medicine,  settled  in
Andover  in  1796,  and  practised  successfully  till
1812,  when  he  was  appointed  surgeon's  mate  in  the
U.  S.  army.  He  wrote  verses  and  numerous  news
paper  articles,  and  composed  several  pieces  of
music  that  were  published  in  Samuel  Holyoke's
"Columbian  Repository." — His  son.  Jacob  Bailey,
author,  b.  in  Andover,  N.  H.,  31  Oct.,  1797 ;  d.  in


MOORE


MOORE


381


Bellows  Falls,  Vt.,  1  Sept.,  1853,  in  early  life  was  a
printer  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  and  in  1823  became  a
bookseller  and  publisher.  He  edited  the  "  New
Hampshire  Journal "  in  1826-'9,  from  the  latter
year  till  1833  was  sheriff  of  Merrimack  county,  and
in  1839  edited  the  "  New  York  Daily  Whig."  For
four  years  he  was  a  government  clerk  at  Washing
ton,  I).  C.,  then  became  librarian  to  the  New  York
historical  society,  and  from  1849  till  1853  he  was
postmaster  of  San  Francisco,  Cal.  His  principal
works  are  "  Collections,  Topographical,  Historical,
and  Biographical,  relating  principally  to  New
Hampshire."  in  which  he  was  assisted  by  John
Farmer,  and  which  was  one  of  the  first  publications
devoted  to  local  history  in  this  country  (3  vols.,
Concord,  1822-'4) ;  "A  Gazetteer  of  the  State  of
New  Hampshire"  (1823);  "Annals  of  Concord,
with  a  Memoir  of  the  Penacook  Indians"  (l823-'6);
"  Laws  of  Trade  in  the  United  States  "  (1840) ;  and
"  Memoirs  of  American  Governors  "  (1846).  The
last-named  work  was  left  uncompleted,  but  was
designed  to  embrace  all  the  pre-Revolutionary,
colonial,  and  provincial  governors. — Another  son,
Henry  Eaton,  musical  composer,  b.  in  Andover,
N.  H.,  31  July,  1803 ;  d.  in  East  Cambridge,  Mass.,
23  Oct.,  1831,  was  apprenticed  as  a  printer  to
Gov.  Isaac  Hill.  He  established  and  edited  the
"  Grafton  Journal "  in  Plymouth,  N.  H.,  in  1824-'6,
and  subsequently  taught  music  in  Concord,  N.  H.,
and  in  Cambridge.  Mass.  A  short  time  before  his
death  he  began  the  publication  of  the  Boston
•'  Eoliad,"  a  weekly  musical  journal.  His  publi
cations  include  "  The  Musical  Catechism "  (Con
cord,  N.  H.,  1829) ;  "  The  New  Hampshire  Collec
tion  of  Church  Music  "  (1832) :  "  The  Merrimack
Collection  of  Instrumental  and  Martial  Music "'
(1833) ;  "  The  National  Choir,  a  Collection  of  An
thems  and  Set  Pieces  "  (1834) ;  and  "  The  Northern
Harp"  (1837). — Another  son.  John  Weeks,  mu
sical  editor,  b.  in  Andover,  N.  H.,  11  April,  1807,
was  educated  at  Concord  high-school  and  Plymouth
academy,  became  a  printer,  and  was  connected
with  several  journals.  In  1834  he  established  the
first  musical  newspaper  in  New  Hampshire,  and  he
afterward  edited  "The  World  of  Music,"  a  quarto,
"  The  Musical  Library,"  a  folio,  and  the  "  Daily
News."  His  musical  publications  include  "  Vocal
and  Instrumental  Instructor"  (Bellows  Falls,  Vt.,
1843) ;  "  Sacred  Minstrel "  (1848) ;  "  Complete  En
cyclopaedia  of  Music,  Elementary,  Technical,  His
torical,  Biographical,  Vocal,  and  Instrumental "
(1854) ;  "  American  Collection  of  Instrumental
Music"  (1856);  "Star  Collection  of  Instrumental
Music"  (1858);  "Appendix  to  Encyclopaedia  of
Instrumental  Music"  (Manchester,  N.  H.,  1858);
"  Musical  Record  "  (5  vols.,  1867-'70) ;  and  "  Songs
and  Song- Writers  of  America"  (200  numbers,
1859-'80).  He  is  also  the  author  of  "  Historical,
Biographical,  and  Miscellaneous  Gatherings  rela
tive  to  Printers,  Printing,  Publishing  of  Books,
Newspapers,  Magazines,  and  other  Literary  Pro
ductions  from  1820  to  1886"  (1886),  a  second  vol
ume  of  which  is  now  (1888)  in  preparation. — The
second  Jacob  Bailey's  son,  George  Henry,  author,
b.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  20  April,  1823,  removed  to
New  York  city  in  1839,  was  graduated  at  the  Uni
versity  of  New  York  in  1843,  became  assistant  li
brarian  to  the  New  York  historical  society  in  1841,
librarian  in  1849,  and  on  3  Oct..  1872,  superintend
ent  and  trustee  of  the  Lenox  library,  which  latter
office  he  still  (1888)  holds.  The  University  of  New
York  has  given  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  He  is
the  author  of  "  The  Treason  of  Charles  Lee  "  (New
York,  1858).  which  is  an  account  of  the  military
career  of  Lee  in  this  country,  with  documents  in


Lee's  handwriting  that  had  not  previously  ap
peared  in  print,  which  were  conclusive  evidence
of  his  treasonable  designs.  (See  LEE,  CHARLES.)
Dr.  Moore's  other  works  are  "Employment  of
Negroes  in  the  Revolutionary  Army "  (1862) ;
"  Notes  on  the  History  of  Slavery  in  Massachu
setts  "  (1866) ;  and  "  History  of  the  Jurispru
dence  of  New  York  "  (1872),  "  Washington  as  an
Angler"  (1887),  and  numerous  pamphlets. — An
other  son,  Frank,  editor,  b.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  17
Dec.,  1828,  removed  to  New  York  city,  was  assistant
secretary  of  legation  in  Paris  in  1869-'72,  and  in
1876-'7' conducted  "The  Record  of  the  Year,"  a
monthly  magazine  published  in  New  York.  He
has  edited  "  Songs  and  Ballads  of  the  American
Revolution"  (New  York,  1856);  "Cyclopaedia  of
American  Eloquence "  (1857) ;  "  Diary  of  the
American  Revolution  "  (2  vols..  1860) ;  "  Materials
for  History"  (1861);  "The  Rebellion  Record,"  a
collection  of  documents,  reports,  descriptions,  po
etry,  anecdotes,  and  other  contemporaneous  matter
relating  to  the  civil  war  (12  vols.,  1861-'5) ;  "  Lyrics
of  Loyalty"  (1864);  "Rebel  Rhymes  and  Rhap
sodies  "  (1864) ;  "  Personal  and  Political  Ballads "
(1864) ;  "  Speeches  of  Andrew  Johnson,  with  a  Bio
graphical  Introduction  "  (1865) ;  "  Life  and  Speeches
of  John  Bright "  (Boston,  1865) ;  "  Women  of  the
War,  1861-'6"  (Hartford,  1866);  and  "Songs  and
Ballads  of  the  Southern  People,  1861-r5,"  a  collec
tion  of  war  songs  (New  York,  1887).

MOORE,  James,  governor  of  South  Carolina,  b.
in  Ireland  about  1640 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  in
1729.  He  was  the  descendant  of  Roger  Moore,  the
leader  of  the  Irish  rebellion  in  1640.  He  emigrat
ed  to  this  country  in  1665,  settled  in  Charleston,
S.  C.,  and  in  1700  was  governor  of  the  state.  He
married  in  the  year  after  his  arrival  the  daughter
of  Sir  John  Yeamans.  They  had  ten  children. —
Their  son,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  in
1667 ;  d.  near  Cape  Fear.  N.  C..  10  Nov.,  1740,  early
acquired  military  renown  in  his  campaigns  against
the  Indians.  In  1702  he  undertook  an  expedition
against  the  Spaniards  in  St.  Augustine,  Fla.,  that
proved  unsuccessful  and  entailed  a  heavy  burden
on  the  colony,  to  meet  which  the  first  paper  money
used  in  South  Carolina  was  issued  iinder  the  name
of  bills  of  credit.  The  next  year  he  commanded
an  expedition  against  the  Appalachian  Indians,  who
had  done  great  injury  in  the  Cape  Fear,  N.  C.,  re
gion,  completely  subd\ied  them,  and  in  1713  was  in
charge  of  the  forces  that  were  sent  by  Gov.  Charles
Craven  to  the  aid  of  the  settlers,  whose  lands  had
been  ravaged  by  the  Tuscaroras.  In  1719,  on  the
deposition  of  Robert  Johnson,  he  was  elected  gover
nor  of  the  state,  the  office  the  latter  had  occupied ;
Arthur  Middleton  succeeded  him  the  same  year,
and  Moore  subsequently  became  attorney-general
and  judge  of  the  admiralty  court,  and  was  speaker
of  the  South  Carolina  assembly  in  1721-'5.  He
removed  to  North  Carolina  about  1735,  and  settled
near  Cape  Fear. — Another  son,  Maurice,  soldier,
b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  about  1670  ;  d.  in  Cape  Fear,
N.  C.,  after  1740.  accompanied  his  brother  James
in  his  expedition  against  the  Cape  Fear  Indians
in  1713,  commanded  a  troop  of  horse  under  Gov.
Charles  Eden,  and  did  good  service  against  the  In
dians.  He  was  one  of  the  first  settlers  of  the  Cape
Fear  region. — Maurice's  son,  Maurice,  jurist,  b.  in
Brunswick  county,  N.  C.,  in  1735;  d.  in  Wilming
ton,  N.  C.,  15  Jan.,  1777.  early  won  reputation  at
the  bar,  and  was  one  of  the  three  colonial  judges  of
North  Carolina  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,
having  been  appointed  with  Richard  Henderson
and  Martin  Howard  in  March,  1758.  He  joined  the
patriot  cause  at  the  beginning  of  the  struggle,  de-


382


MOORE


nounced  the  high-handed  measures  of  Gov.  Tryon
in  a  series  of  letters  signed  "  Atticus,"  and  in  con
sequence  was  recommended  by  him  for  removal,
but  continued  on  the  bench  until  the  Revolution
closed  the  courts.  So  great  was  his  popularity  that,
during  the  Hillsborough  riots  in  1770,  he  was  un
molested.  He  was  a  member  of  the  provincial
house  of  burgesses  in  1775-'6,  one  of  a  committee
to  draw  up  an  address  to  the  people  of  Great
Britain  on  the  wrongs  of  the  North  American  col
onies,  and  materially  aided  in  forming  the  state
constitution.  His  death  and  that  of  his  brother
James  occurred  at  the  same  hour  in  adjoining
rooms. — Another  son  of  the  first  Maurice.  James,
soldier,  b.  in  New  Hanover,  N.  C.,  in  1737:  d.  in
Wilmington.  N.  C.,  15  Jan.,  1777,  was  a  captain  of
artillery  under  Gov.  Tryon  at  the  defeat  of  the
regulators  at  Alarnance  in  1771,  colonel  of  the  1st
regiment  of  North  Carolina  troops  that  was  raised
for  the  defence  of  the  state,  and  in  February,  1776,
was  in  command  of  the  forces,  a  part  of  which,
under  Col.  Richard  Caswell  and  Col.  John  A.  Lil-
lington,  won  the  first  victory  of  the  Revolution  at
Moore's  creek  bridge,  near  Wilmington,  over  1,500
Scotch  Tories.  He  was  promoted  brigadier-gen
eral  for  this  exploit,  made  comrnander-in-chief  of
the  southern  department,  and  received  the  thanks
of  congress.  He  died  of  a  fever  on  his  way  to  join
Washington. — The  second  Maurice's  son,  Alfred,
jurist,  b.  in  Brunswick  county,  N.  C.,  21  May,  1755;
d.  in  Bladen  county,  N.  C.,  15  Oct..  1810,  was  edu
cated  in  Boston,  where  he  acquired  a  knowledge  of
military  tactics,  and  de
clined  a  commission  in
the  royal  army.  He  was
admitted  to  the  bar
when  he  was  twenty
years  old,  but  relin
quished  his  profession
to  join  the  army ;  was
made  captain  in  the  1st
North  Carolina  regi
ment  in  1775,  of  which
his  uncle  James  was
colonel,  and  participat
ed  in  the  battles  of
Charleston  and  Fort
Moultrie.  He  subse
quently  raised  a  troop
of  volunteers  that  did
good  service  in  harass
ing  Lord  Cornwallis  in
his  march  from  Guil-
ford  to  Wilmington.
While  the  British  occupied  that  town,  they  de
stroyed  all  his  property,  and  at  the  end  of  the
Revolution  he  was  without  means  to  support  his
family.  He  was  elected  by  the  North  Carolina  legis
lature  state  attorney-general  in  1792,  and  he  rose
to  high  rank  in  the  profession.  He  was  called  to
the  bench  in  1798,  and  the  next  year  was  appointed
by  the  president  an  associate  justice  of  the  supreme
court  of  the  United  States,  but  he  resigned  in  1805
on  account  of  the  failure  of  his  health.— Alfred's
son,  Alfred,  lawyer,  b.  in  Brunswick  county,  N.  C.,
in  1783 ;  d.  there,  28  July,  1837,  possessed  brilliant
oratorical  gifts,  became  an  eminent  lawyer,  and  was
frequently  elected  a  member  and  several  times
speaker  of  the  legislature.

MOORE,  James  W,  physicist,  b.  in  Easton,  Pa.,
14  June,  1844.  He  was  graduated  at  Lafayette  in
1864,  and  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Univer
sity  of  Pennsylvania.  Meanwhile  he  was  a  tutor
in  1866-'8  and  adjunct  professor  from  1868  till
1872,  when  he  was  made  professor  of  mechanics  and


c^  zsU '


experimental  philosophy  in  Lafayette.  The  de
partment  of  physics  in  this  college  was  organized
principally  under  his  direction,  and  the  equipment
of  the  laboratory  was  accomplished  by  him.  Prof.
Moore  is  a  fellow  of  the  American  philosophical
society  and  of  the  American  association  for  the  ad
vancement  of  science,  and  a  member  of  other  soci
eties,  also  contributing  to  scientific  journals  papers
on  his  specialty.

MOORE,  Jesse  Hale,  soldier,  b.  in  St.  Clair
county.  111.,  22  April,  1817;  d.  in  Callao,  Peru,  11
July,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  McKendree  col
lege  in  1842,  taught  two  years  in  Nashville,  111.,
and  then  became  principal  of  Georgetown  semi
nary.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1846,  was  pas
tor  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  Shelby-
ville,  subsequently  principal  of  Paris  (Ky.)  semi
nary,  and  president  of  Quincy  college,  111.,  in
1854-'6.  He  resigned  his  pastorate  at  Decatur,  111.,
in  1802,  and  raised  the  115th  regiment  of  Illinois
volunteers,  which  lie  commanded  at  Chickamauga
and  the  subsequent  battles  of  that  campaign.  He
also  participated  in  the  pursuit  of  General  John  B.
Hood,  and  a  part  of  the  time  led  the  2d  brigade  of
the  Army  of  the  Cumberland.  He  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  in  1865  for  services
during  the  war,  returned  to  the  pulpit,  and  was  pre
siding  elder  of  Decatur,  111.,  district  in  1868.  At
that  date  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republi
can,  serving  in  1869-'73,  and  was  chairman  of  the
committee  on  invalid  pensions  in  the  42d  congress.
He  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul  in  Callao  in  1881,
and  held  that  office  until  his  death.

MOORE,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  England,  about
1658;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  about  1  Dec.,  1732.  He
is  said  to  be  one  of  the  sons  of  Sir  Francis  Moore,
whose  father,  Sir  John  Moore,  was  knighted  by
Charles  II.  in  1627.  He  was  liberally  educated,
and  adopted  the  profession  of  the  law.  About
1680  he  emigrated,  with  his  brother  James,  to
South  Carolina,  and  there  no  doubt  practised  in
his  profession  until  1697,  when  he  removed  with
his  family  and  settled  in  Philadelphia,  doing  so,  it
is  conjectured,  at  the  instance  of  Col.  Robert  Quar
ry,  who  in  the  same  year  removed  from  South
Carolina  to  Philadelphia  to  become  the  judge  of
'  the  vice-admiralty  for  Pennsylvania,  Moore  becom
ing  the  advocate  for  the  crown  in  this  court.  In
1698  he  was  appointed  by  the  king  attorney-gen
eral  for  Pennsylvania,  and  at  first  declined  the
office,  but  afterward  accepted  it,  when  he  was  also
appointed  attorney-general  by  William  Penn.  In
1700  he  was  deputy  judge  under  Quarry,  and  in
1 704  was  deputy  and  acting  judge  in  Pennsylvania.
In  1700  he  was  appointed  register-general  of  Penn
sylvania,  and  when  Penn  in  1703  commissioned
Col.  Markham  to  fill  the  place,  Moore  refused  to
relinquish  the  office,  saying  that  it  was  his  "  prop
erty  and  freehold,  and  conceived  it  to  be  a  point
of  law,"  and  demanded  a  trial  thereof,  which  was
granted,  and  he  and  Markham  filled  the  office
jointly  while  contesting  the  matter.  Markham
died  during  the  next  year,  when  Gov.  Evans  ap
pointed  himself  to  the  office,  and  thus  settled  the
matter.  In  the  same  year  Moore  was  commissioned
collector  of  the  customs  in  Pennsylvania  for  the
king,  which  office  he  filled  until  his  death.  Next
to  David  Lloyd,  Moore  was  the  most  eminent  law
yer  in  Pennsylvania  during  its  early  colonial  his
tory.  He  was  among  the  first  members  of  Christ
church,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the  vestrymen  dur
ing  many  years  preceding  his  death. — His  son,
.loli n.  merchant,  b.  in  South  Carolina  in  1686;  d.
in  New  York  city  in  1749,  was  sent  to  England  to
be  educated.  On  his  return  to  this  country  he


MOORE


MOORE


383


settled  in  New  York,  where  he  became  a  merchant.
He  was  one  of  the  aldermen  of  the  city,  served
several  years  in  the  legislature,  was  colonel  of  a
regiment,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  a  member
of  the  provincial  council.  He  was  the  first  person
that  was  buried  in  Trinity  church-yard,  New  York
city. — Another  son,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in
South  Carolina  in  1689  :  d.  in  Little  Britain,  Lon
don,  England,  was  graduated  at  Oxford  university,
took  orders  and  became  chaplain  to  Bishop  Atter-
bury,  of  Rochester,  whose  sermons  were  published
under  the  direction  of  Dr.  Moore. — Another  son,
Daniel,  was  also  educated  at  Oxford,  became  a
distinguished  lawyer,  acquired  a  large  estate,  and
was  for  several  years  a  member  of  parliament.
His  daughter,  Frances,  became  the  wife  of  Chan
cellor  Erskine. — Another  son,  William,  jurist,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  6  May,  1699:  d.  in  Moore
Hall,  Chester  co..  Pa.,  30  May,  1783,  was  sent  by
his  father  to  England,  where  he  was  educated,
and,  after  graduation  at  the  University  of  Oxford
in  1719,  he  returned  to  this  country  and  settled
at  Moore  Hall.  He  served  in  the  assembly  from
1733  till  1740,  and  in  1741  was  commissioned  a
justice  of  the  peace  and  judge  of  the  county  court.
For  forty  years  thereafter  he  was  president  judge
of  the  court,  and  during  the  Indian  troubles  he
commanded  a  militia  regiment.  He  took  an  ac
tive  part  in  the  disputes  between  the  governor
and  the  assembly,  favoring  the  proprietaries.  In
his  published  writings  in  Franklin's  "  Gazette "
and  elsewhere  he  attacked  the  assembly,  and  by
this  and  other  actions  made  himself  so  obnoxious
to  this  body  that  they  addressed  the  governor  and
asked  that  Moore  be  removed  from  office.  He  was
finally  arrested,  imprisoned,  and  impeached,  and
in  August,  1758,  was  tried  before  the  governor  and
his  council  and  acquitted,  the  governor  declaring
"  that  Mr.  Moore  had  purged  himself  from  every
one  of  them  [the  charges],  and  appeared  to  them
to  be  perfectly  innocent."  Moore  was  character
ized  as  "  the  most  conspicuous  and  heroic  fig
ure  in  the  county  of  Chester."  His  residence,
Moore  Hall,  was  situated  on  the  Schuylkill  river,
twenty-three  miles  from  Philadelphia,"  and  within
three  miles  of  Valley  Forge.  The  old  stone  man
sion  is  still  standing,  and  in  1787,  when  Washing
ton  went  there  on  a  fishing  excursion,  was  known
as  the  "  Widow  Moore's."  See  "  William  Moore,
of  Moore  Hall,"  in  "  Historical  and  Biographical
Sketches  "  (Philadelphia,  1883),  and  "  Keith's  Pro
vincial  Councillors"  (1883). — The  second  John's
grandson.  Richard  Channing1,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  New  York  city,  21  Aug.,  1762;  d.  in  Lynch-
burg,  Va.,  11  Nov.,  1841,  was  prepared  to  enter
King's  (now  Columbia)  college,  but  at  the  begin
ning  of  the  Revolution  his  parents  took  him  to
West  Point,  N.  Y.,  where  he  remained  for  four
years.  He  then  studied  medicine,  obtained  his
diploma,  and  practised  for  several  years,  but  after
ward  studied  theology  under  Bishop  Provoost's  di
rection,  and  was  ordained  deacon  in  St.  George's  \
chapel.  New  York  city,  15  July,  1787,  and  priest
in  St.  Paul's  chapel,  19  Sept.,  1787,  by  that  bishop.
He  was  rector  of  Christ  church.  Rye,  N.  Y.,  for  two  j
years,  when  he  accepted  a  call  to  St.  Andrew's.  '
Richmond,  Staten  island,  N.  Y.  This  post  he  held
for  twenty-one  years.  He  received  the  degree  !
of  D.  D.  from  Dartmouth  in  1805.  In  1808  he  was  I
a  clerical  deputy  to  the  general  convention  of  his  \
church  in  Baltimore.  Md.,  and  was  chairman  of  the  |
committee  on  additions  to  its  hymnal.  In  1809  he  :
accepted  the  rectorship  of  St.  Stephen's,  New  York  j
city,  where  he  remained  for  five  years.  He  was  |
elected  bishop  of  Virginia  in  1814,  and  was  conse


crated  in  St.  James's,  Philadelphia,  18  May.  1814
On  removing  to  Virginia  he  accepted  the  rectorship
of  the  Monumental  church  in  Richmond,  where
he  remained  during  the  rest  of  his  life.  In  1828

j  he  asked  for  an  as-

i  sistant,  owing  to
age  and  infirmity,

!  and  in  1829  Rev.
William  Meade

;  was  consecrated  to

|  this  office. Bishop

|  Moore  was  emi
nently  successful
in  rousing  the

i  Episcopal  church
in  Virginia  from

!  its  state  of  leth
argy  and  depres-

'  sion.  His  death  at
a  good  old  age  oc
curred  suddenly
while  he  was  on  a
visitation  of  his  di
ocese.  He  published  various  addresses,  charges  to
his  clergy,  and  a  sermon  on  "  The  Doctrines  of  the
Church,"  which  he  preached  before  the  General
convention  in  1820.  A  memoir  of  his  life  was  pub
lished  shortly  after  his  death  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  John
P.  K.  Henshaw  (Philadelphia,  1842).— His  son,
David,  b.  in  New  York  city,  3  June,  1787;  d.  on
Staten  island.  30  Sept.,  1856.  was  graduated  at  Co
lumbia  in  1806,  ordained  in  May,  1808.  and  the
next  year  succeeded  his  father  in  the  rectorship  of
St.  Andrew's.  Staten  island,  where  he  remained  for
the  rest  of  his  life.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Union  college  in  1841.

MOORE,  John,  soldier.  He  was  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  North  Carolina  loyalists,  having
joined  that  corps  late  in  1779,  and  in  the  following
summer  returned  to  Tryon  county  under  orders
from  Lord  Cornwallis  to  excite  the  loyalty  of  the
people,  but  not  to  raise  a  force  until  after  harvest.
He  brought  detailed  accounts  of  the  siege  and  sur
render  of  Charleston,  with  an  authoritative  message
from  Cornwallis  that  he  would  march  into  North
Carolina  after  the  harvests  were  gathered.  Under
Moore  and  Maj.  Nicholas  Welsh,  contrary  to  the
orders  of  Cornwallis,  a  force  of  1,300  men  was  im
mediately  collected,  which  encamped  at  Ramsour's
Mills,  about  forty  miles  beyond  Catawba  river.  In
less  than  five  days  Col.  Matthew  Locke  and  other
officers,  having  received  orders  from  Gen.  Griffith
Rutherford  to  oppose  the  march  of  the  British,
levied  their  several  quotas,  crossed  the  Catawba.  and
effected  a  junction  within  sixteen  miles  of  the  roy
alists'  camp  on  19  June,  1780.  numbering  350  men.
At  sunrise  the  next  morning,  without  any  com
mander  or  military  arrangement,  they  attacked  the
Tories,  and  after  a  well-sustained  and  bloody  en
gagement  compelled  them  to  retreat.  Relatives
and  friends  fought  in  the  opposing  ranks,  and  after
the  smoke  of  the  battle  recognized  each  other — the
Tories  wearing  the  badge  of  a  green  pine-twig  in
front  of  the  hat,  and  the  Whigs  a  similar  badge  of
white  paper,  which  were  the  only  means  of  distin
guishing  the  two  parties  in  the  fray.  With  thirty
survivors  Moore  reached  the  royal  army  at  Camden,
but  was  treated  with  disrespect  by  the  British  offi
cers,  and  threatened  with  a  trial  by  court-martial
for  his  disobedience  and  the  consequences  of  it.  He
was  afterward  attainted  of  treason  in  South  Caro
lina,  and  his  property  was  confiscated.

MOORE,  John,  surgeon,  b.  in  Indiana.  16  Aug.,
1826.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  army  as  assistant  sur
geon  in  June,  1853.  and,  after  serving  in  Florida


384


MOORE


and  on  the  Utah  expedition  of  1857,  was  in  the
Cincinnati  marine  hospital  in  1801-'2.  He  was
promoted  surgeon  in  June  of  the  latter  year,  and
assigned  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  as  medical
director  of  the  central  grand  division.  He  became
medical  director  of  the  Department  and  Army  of  the
Tennessee  in  May,  1803,  accompanied  Gen.  William
T.  Sherman  on  his  march  to  the  sea  and  through
the  Carolinas,  and  received  the  brevets  of  lieuten
ant-colonel  for  the  Atlanta  campaign,  and  colonel
for  services  during  the  whole  war.  He  was  made
assistant  medical  purveyor,  with  rank  of  lieutenant-
colonel,  8  Oct.,  1883,  and  on  18  Nov..  188(5,  was
appointed  surgeon-general  of  the  army,  with  the
rank  of  brigadier-general.

MOORE,  John,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Castletown-
Delvin,  County  Westmeath,  Ireland,  27  June,  1835.
He  came  to  Charleston,  S.  C.,  in  1848,  and  in  1849
entered  the  Collegiate  institute  of  this  city.  He
afterward  studied  theology  in  France  and  Rome,
and  was  ordained  priest,  9  April,  1860.  Before
leaving  Rome  he  underwent  a  public  examination
for  the  degree  of  doctor  of  divinity,  and  received
the  cap  of  doctor  of  theology,  which  is  conferred
only  upon  distinguished  theologians.  He  returned
to  Charleston  in  October,  and  was  appointed  first-
assistant  at  the  cathedral,  and  shortly  afterward
pastor.  During  the  civil  war  Dr.  Moore  was  active
in  attendance  at  the  hospitals,  nursing  the  sick  and
wounded  of  both  armies  in  many  parts  of  the  state,
and  especially  at  Florence.  During  the  absence  of
Bishop  Lynch  in  Europe  he  was  appointed  admin
istrator  of  the  diocese  of  Charleston.  In  1865  he
became  pastor  of  St.  Patrick's  church,  and  he  was
made  vicar-general  in  1872.  His  administration  of
the  parish  of  St.  Patrick's,  which  had  become
utterly  disorganized  during  the  war,  was  remarka
bly  successful.  He  rebuilt  the  parish  church  and
residence,  revived  the  Sunday-school,  which  soon
had  more  members  than  that  of  any  other  de
nomination  in  this  city,  and  established  a  temper
ance  society.  He  was  consecrated  second  bishop
of  St.  Augustine.  Fla..  by  Bishop  Lynch  in  the  pro-
cathedral,  Charleston,  on  13  May,  1877.  The  Ro
man  Catholic  church  in  Florida  has  made  rapid
progress  under  the  administration  of  Bishop  Moore.
He  has  taken  great  interest  in  colonization,  and  has
also  paid  much  attention  to  the  spiritual  advance
ment  of  the  colored  population,  establishing  several
associations  for  their  benefit.

MOORE,  Martin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Sterling,
Mass.,  22  April,  1790;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  12
March,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1810,
and  held  Congregational  pastorates  at  Natick  and
Cohasset,  Mass.  He  edited  the  "  Boston  Recorder  "
twenty  years,  and  in  1861-'6  was  a  vice-president
of  the  New  England  historic-genealogical  society.
He  published  a  "  History  of  Natick  "  (Natick,  1817),
and  "  Life  of  John  Eliot  "  (Boston,  1842).

MOORE,  Thomas  Patrick,  congressman,  b.  in
Charlotte  county,  Va.,  in  1797;  d.  in  Harrodsburg,
Ky.,  21  July,  1853.  He  removed  to  Kentucky  in
childhood,  was  educated  at  Transylvania  univer
sity,  and  during  the  war  of  1812  was  private  sec
retary  to  Col,  John  A.  Campbell.  After  several
terms  in  the  legislature,  he  was  elected  to  congress
in  1822  as  a  Democrat,  served  in  1823-'9,  and  at  the
latter  date  was  appointed  minister  to  Colombia.  On
his  return  to  Kentucky  in  1834,  he  was  again  a  can
didate  for  congress,  and  received  a  certificate  of
election,  but  after  much  discussion  that  body  gave
his  seat  to  Robert  P.  Letcher.  He  was  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  3d  U.  S.  dragoons  during  the  Mexi
can  war,  and  a  delegate  to  the  Kentucky  constitu
tional  convention  in  1«49-'50.


MOORE,  Thomas  Vernon,  clergyman,  b.  in
Newville,  Pa.,  1  Feb.,  1818;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,
5  Aug..  1871.  He  was  graduated  at  Dickinson  in
1838,  studied  theology  at  Princeton  seminary,  and
in  1842  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  Carlisle,  Pa.  He  subsequently  held
charges  in  Greenville,  Pa.,  and  Richmond,  Va.,  in
1847-'68,  and  from  the  latter  date  till  his  death
was  in  Nashville,  Tenn.  In  1867  he  was  mod
erator  of  the  general  assembly  of  the  Presbyterian
church.  Dr.  Moore  was  an  eloquent  preacher  and
a  voluminous  writer.  He  edited,  with  Dr.  Moses
D.  Hoge,  the  "  Central  Presbyterian  "  in  185(j-'60,
contributed  to  church  literature,  and  published
"  Commentaries  on  Haggai.  Zachariah,  and  Mal-
achi "  (Philadelphia,  1856) ;  "  Last  Words  of  Jesus  "
(1859) ;  '•  God's  University,  or  the  Family  a  School,
a  Government,  and  a  Church "  (Richmond,  Va.,
1864);  "The  Culdee  Church"  (1865);  and  "  The
Corporate  Life  of  the  Church  "  (1867).

MOORE,  Walter  linrritt,  editor,  b.  in  Bristol,
Vt..  25  Sept.,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  in  1861,  and  in  that
year  became  a  captain  in  the  100th  New  York  volun
teers.  He  was  wounded  at  Fair  Oaks,  31  May,  1862,
taken  prisoner,  and  confined  in  Libby  prison,  Rich
mond,  Va.  After  his  exchange  he  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Chicago  in  1864.  Sub
sequently  he  removed  to  New  York.  With  Paul  A.
Chadbourne  he  edited  "  The  Public  Service  of  the
State  of  New  York  "  (3  vols.,  Boston,  1881).

MOORE,  William,  statesman,  b.  probably  in
Philadelphia  about  1735;  d.  there,  24  July,  1793.
His  father,  Robert,  came  to  this  country  from  the
Isle  of  Man.  The  son  began  a  mercantile  career,
and  on  11  Dec.,  1776,  was  appointed  by  the  assem
bly  on  the  council  of  safety,  which,  on  13  March,
1777,  placed  him  on  the  newly  organized  board
of  war.  In  the  same  year  he  was  chosen  a  dele
gate  to  the  Continental  congress,  but  declined  to
serve.  He  became  a  member  of  the  supreme  ex
ecutive  council  of  the  state  in  1779,  was  elected  its
vice-president,  and  in  1781  was  chosen  president
and  proclaimed  "captain-general  and  commander-
in-chief  in  and  over  the  commonwealth  of  Penn
sylvania."  His  term  as  councillor  expired  in  Oc
tober,  1782,  and  the  constitution  prohibited  a  re
election.  Gov.  Moore  was  commissioned  a  judge
of  the  high  court  of  errors  and  appeals  in  March,

1783,  and  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  assembly  in

1784.  In February  of  that  year  he  was  made  a
director  of  the  Bank  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  July
he  was  chairman  of  a  meeting  of  the  citizens  of
Philadelphia  that  was  convened  to  place  the  pub
lic  debts  on  a  permanent  foundation. He  was  a
trustee  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1784-'9.
Gov.  Moore  during  the  Revolution  was  a  friend
and  associate  of  Robert  Morris. — His  only  daugh
ter,  Elizabeth,  married  the  Marquis  de  Marbois,
French  charge  d'affaires  in  this  country,  who  ne
gotiated  the  treaty  for  the  sale  of  Louisiana  to
the  United  States.

MOORE,  William  Eves,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stras-
burg.  Pa.,  1  April,  1823.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1847,  studied  theology  with  the  Rev.  Lyman  H.
Atwater  at  Fairfield,  Conn.,  and  became  pastor  of
the  Presbyterian  church  at  West  Chester,  Pa.,  in
1850,  and  of  that  at  Columbus,  Ohio,  in  1872.
Since  1884  he  has  been  permanent  clerk  of  the
General  assembly.  Marietta  college,  Ga.,  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1873.  He  is  the  author  of
the  "  New  Digest  of  the  Acts  and  Deliverances  of
the  Presbyterian  Church  (New  School)"  (Philadel
phia,  1861).  and  "  The  Presbyterian  Digest  (United
Church)"  (1873;  new  ed.,  1886).


MOORE


MORA


MOORE,  Zephaniah  Swift,  clergyman,  b.  in
Palmer,  Mass.,  20  Nov.,  1770;  d.  in  Amherst,
Mass.,  30  June.  1823.  He  was  graduated  at  Dart
mouth  in  1793.  taught  for  the  next  three  years,
subsequently  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Congre
gational  church,  and  in  1798-1811  preached  at
Leicester.  He  then  became  professor  of  languages
at  Dartmouth,  and  was  elected  president  of  Will
iams  in  1815,  but  resigned  on  account  of  the  un
popularity  that  was  occasioned  by  his  support  of
the  proposition  to  remove  the  college  to  Hampshire
county.  On  the  organization  of  Amherst  college
he  became  its  first  president,  continuing  in  office
until  his  death.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  both  Williams  and  Dartmouth  in  1816.  He
published  an  "  Oration,  5  July,  1802  ''  (Worcester.
Mass..  1802):  "Address  to  the  Public  in  Respect  to
Amherst  College  "  (1823);  and  two  sermons.

MOORHEAD.  James  Kennedy,  congressman,
b.  in  Halifax,  Dauphin  co.,  Pa..  7 'Sept.,  1806;  d.
in  Pittsburg.  Pa.,  6  March,  1884.  He  received  a
limited  education,  spending  his  youth  on  a  farm,
and  was  apprenticed  to  a  tanner.  He  was  a  con
tractor  for  building  the  Susquehanna  branch  of
the  Pennsylvania  canal,  became  superintendent  of
the  Juniata  division,  and  was  the  first  to  place  a
passenger  packet  on  this  line.  In  1836  he  removed
to  Pittsburg  and  established  there  the  Union  cot
ton-factory.  In  1838  he  was  appointed  adjutant-
general  of  the  state,  and  in  1840  he  became  post
master  of  Pittsburg.  lie  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  Republican,  holding  his  seat  from  5  Dec.,
1859,  till  3  March,  1869,  and  serving  on  the  com
mittees  on  commerce,  national  armories,  manufac
tures,  naval  affairs,  and  ways  and  means.  In  1868
he  was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Republican  con
vention  at  Chicago.  He  was  identified  with  the
principal  educational  and  charitable  institutions  of
Pittsburg,  was  president  of  its  chamber  of  com
merce,  of  the  Monongahela  navigation  company,
and  several  telegraph  companies,  and  was  a  dele
gate  to  the  Pan-Presbyterian  council  in  Belfast,
Ireland,  in  1884.

MOQUIHUIX  (mo-kee-wiss'),  king  of  Tlalte-
lolco,  b.  about  1420 ;  d.  in  Mexico  in  1470.  Tlalte-
lolco  was  a  small  city  in  the  suburbs  of  Mexico,
and  was  governed  for  110  years  by  a  branch  of  the
imperial  family  of  the  Aztecs.  Under  the  reign  of
Montezuma  I.,  Moquihuix  served  with  distinction,
and  greatly  contributed  to  the  victories  and  con
quests  of  the  Aztec  emperor,  who  rewarded  him
with  the  hand  of  his  cousin,  the  sister  of  Axaya-
catl.  After  the  death  of  Montezuma  and  the  ac
cession  of  Axayacatl,  Moquihuix  organized  a  league
between  the  dissatisfied  Mexican  caciques,  but.  on
the  eve  of  receiving  strong  re-enforcements  and
declaring  open  rebellion,  his  wife  gave  informa
tion  of  his  plans  to  her  brother.  The  latter  imme
diately  collected  all  his  forces,  and  marching
against  Moquihuix  defeated  him  and  besieged
Tlaltelolco,  which,  after  several  weeks,  was  taken
by  storm.  Moquihuix  was  sacrificed  upon  the
altar  of  the  god  Mexitli  by  Axayacatl,  who  opened
his  victim's  breast  and  offered  his  heart  to  the  di
vinity.  After  defeating  also  the  partisans  of  Mo
quihuix.  the  emperor  annexed  their  territory,  and
Tlaltelolco  never  regained  its  independence.

MORA,  Diego  de  (mo'-rah),  Spanish  soldier,
b..  according  to  some  historians,  in  Pamplona  in
1494.  according  to  others,  in  Ciudad  Real  in  1501  ;
d.  in  Peru  about  1555.  He  came  to  Peru  with
Almagro  in  1532,  and,  quickly  learning  the  Qui-
chua  language,  was  ordered  to  assist  in  interro
gating  the  Inca  Atahualpa  at  his  trial  by  special
desire  of  that  monarch,  who  distrusted  the  official
VOL.  iv. — 25


interpreter,  Felipillo  (q.  v.).  Before  the  execution
of  Atahualpa,  Mora,  who  was  an  expert  at  draw
ing,  by  order  of  Pizarro,  drew  a  portrait  of  that
prince,  which,  according  to  Velasco,  was  preserved
j  for  more  than  two  centuries  in  Cajamarca,  and  was
i  copied  by  Andre  Thevet  for  his  "  Les  grands
!  homines  de  1'histoire."  This  is  not  the  portrait
j  that  appears  with  the  article  "  Atahualpa"  in  this
\\ork.  The  latter  is  taken  from  a  copy  of  the
"  Imperial  genealogical  tree,"  formerly  in  the  ca
thedral  of  Cuzes.  Mora  marched  with  Almagro
against  Alvarado  and  received  command  of  the
tatter's  vessels  after  the  agreement  by  which  Al
varado  relinquished  his  claims.  He  was  one  of
the  founders  of  the  city  of  Trujillo  and  was  ap
pointed  its  first  governor,  which  place  he  kept  dur
ing  the  different  political  changes  in  Peru  till
Gonzalo  Pizarro  ordered  him  to  Lima.  He  es
caped  with  his  family  to  Panama,  joined  De  la
Gasca  (q.  v.\  and  served  under  his  orders  till  the
battle  of  Sacsahuana.  In  1553  he  was  invited  to
join  the  revolution  of  that  year;  but  he  remained
loyal,  and,  when  the  army  marched  south,  he  was
appointed  chief  justice  of  Lima,  according  to  Her-
rera.  Garcilaso  de  la  Vega  says  he  returned  to  his
government  of  Trujillo  and  soon  died.

MORA.  Francis,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  near  Vich,
Spain,  25  Nov.,  1827.  He  received  his  secular  and
theological  education  in  his  native  city.  In  1854
he  volunteered  for  the  California  mission  under
Bishop  Amat,  by  whom  he  was  ordained  at  Santa
Barbara.  19  March.  1856.  He  displayed  great  zeal
and  activity  in  his  clerical  work,  and,  after  per
forming  the  duties  of  rector  in  several  churches  in
the  diocese  of  Monterey,  he  was  appointed  to  the
pro-cathedral  of  Los  Angeles,  1  Feb.,  1863.  In
1865  he  was  appointed  vicar-general  of  the  diocese,
and  on  3  Aug.,  1873,  he  was  consecrated  bishop  of
Mossinopolis  in  partibus  and  coadjutor  of  Bishop
Amat  with  the  right  of  succession.  On  the  death
of  that  prelate,  12  May,  1878,  he  succeeded  to  the
see  of  Monterey  and  Los  Angeles.  He  was  present
at  the  3d  plenary  council  of  Baltimore  in  Novem
ber,  1884.  Bishop  Mora  has  done"  much  to  infuse
new  energy  into  the  Roman  Catholic  church  in
Lower  California.

MORA,  Jos6  Joaquin,  Spanish  author,  b.  in
Cadiz,  Spain,  in  1784;  d.  in  Spain  after  1848.  He
was  the  son  of  a  magistrate  of  Cadiz,  educated  at
the  University  of  Grenada,  and  became  professor
in  the  College  of  San  Miguel.  After  the  French
invasion  he  joined  the  army  and  was  captured  by
the  enemy,  who  sent  him  to  Autun,  where  he
married  a  French  lady.  On  his  return  to  Madrid
in  1814  he  established  himself  as  a  lawyer,  and  be
came  the  editor  of  various  literary  reviews.  In
1820  he  translated  Jeremy  Benthanvs  address  to
the  cortes  into  Spanish,  and  in  that  year  was
charged  by  Ferdinand  VII.  with  a  mission  to  Rome.
On  the  restoration  of  the  absolutist  government  in
1823  he  went  to  England,  where  he  was  book-agent
for  various  South  American  states  and  a  contribu
tor  to  periodicals.  His  efforts  in  supplying  the
South  Americans  with  Spanish  works  procured  for
him  in  1827  the  editorship  of  the  official  journal
of  Buenos  Ayres.  entitled  "  Cronica  Politica."
Afterward  he'  exerted  considerable  influence  in
Chili  as  director  of  the  lyceum,  as  a  journalist,  and
as  under-secretary  of  state,  in  which  capacity  he
drew  up  the  constitution  of  Chili.  He  was  also
instrumental  in  the  promulgation  of  the  Chilian
free-trade  tariff  of  1830.  He  lectured  on  philosophy
and  other  subjects  in  Peru,  and  was  private  secre
tary  to  Gen.  Santa  Cruz  in  Bolivia  from  1834  till
1838,  when  he  returned  to  London  as  consul-


386


MOKAES  E  SILVA


general  of  the  Peru-Bolivian  confederation.  In
1843  he  returned  to  Spain  and  directed  the  College
of  San  Felipe  in  Cadiz,  and  in  1850  he  was  again
made  consul-general  to  London.  He  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  Royal  academy  of  Madrid.  He  trans
lated  into  Spanish  "Ivanhoe"  and  "The  Talis
man,"  and  was  the  first  to  familiarize  the  Spaniards
with  the  writings  of  Walter  Scott.  His  works  in
clude  a  "  History  of  the  Arabs  "  (2  vols.,  London,
1826),  and  "  Spanish  Legends,"  on  which  his  fame
chiefly  rests  (1840).  Many  of  his  lyrical  and  sa
tirical  poems  are  contained  in  Ferdinand  Wolf's
"  Floresta  do  Rimas  modernas  Castellanas"  (1832).
He  also  edited  the  works  of  Luis  de  Grenada,  in  a
collection  of  the  Spanish  classics  (1848).

MORAES  E  SILVA,  Antonio  de  (mo-rnli '-
ess-ay-si  1'- vali),  Brazilian  lexicographer,  b.  in  Rio
Janeiro  in  1750 ;  d.  in  Pernambuco  in  1825.  He
studied  in  Rio  Janeiro,  was  graduated  at  Coiinbra,
and,  returning  to  Brazil,  became  a  judge  in  Bahia,
but  resigned  in  1803  and  retired  to  Pernambuco,
where  he  acquired  much  property  and  was  created
Count  of  Engenho  in  1805.  At  the  time  of  the
revolution  of  1817  he  was  elected  colonel  of  the
militia  of  Maribeea  and  refused  the  nomination  for
governor  of  the  province.  He  afterward  led  a  re
tired  life  devoted  to  literary  researches  and  re
spected  by  all  parties  and  administrations,  which
often  sought  his  advice.  As  an  author  he  obtained
a  great  reputation,  and  most  of  his  works  are  yet
in  use  in  the  universities  of  Brazil.  They  include
'•  Historia  de  Portugal  composta  em  Inglez  por  uma
sociedade  do  litteratos,  transladada  em  vulgar,  com
as  addicoes  da  versao  franceza  e  notas  do  traductor
portuguez"  (3  vols.,  Lisbon,  1788;  second  ed.,  re
vised,  4  vols.,  Pernambuco,  1800) ;  and  "  Dicciona-
rio  da  Lingua  Portugueza"  (2  vols.,  Lisbon,  1789;
revised  cd.,  Pernambuco,  1815).  The  lalter  was
enlarged  by  Agostinho  do  Mendonca  Falcao,  and
in  its  new  form  is  the  standard  dictionary  of  the
Portuguese  language.  He  also  wrote  "Recrecao
do  hoinem  sensivel,  o  collecilo  de  Exemplos  verda-
deiros  e  patheticos"  (2  vols.,  Pernambuco,  1819);
and  several  less  important  works.

MORA  IS,  Sabato  (mo-rah'-ees),  clergyman,  b.
in  Leghorn,  Italy,  29  April,  1824.  After  careful
Hebrew  and  rabbinical  training  he  went  to  London
in  1845,  and  in  1840  was  elected  head-master  in  the
Orphans'  school  of  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese
synagogue.  In  1851  he  came  to  this  country  and
settled  in  Philadelphia  as  minister  of  a  synagogue,
which  post  he  has  since  occupied.  He  has  been
connected  with  all  the  Jewish  movements  of  his
time  and  has  powerfully  defended  conservative
Judaism.  On  the  opening  of  Maimonides  college,
Philadelphia,  in  1807,  he  was  chosen  professor  of
Hebrew  and  biblical  literature.  He  has  been  a
frequent  contributor  to  the  American  Jewish  press,
principally  on  themes  connected  with  Hebrew  lit
erature.  He  has  been  connected  with  Italian  poli
tics,  became  a  Freemason  to  advocate  liberty  and
unity  in  Italy,  and  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Jo
seph  Mazzini.  His  outspoken  opposition  to  slavery
led  to  his  being  chosen  an  honorary  member  of  the
Union  league  of  Philadelphia  during  the  civil  war.
He  took  an  active  part  in  the  establishment  of  the
conservative  Jewish  theological  seminary  of  Xew
York,  opened  in  January,  1887,  of  which  he  was
chosen  president,  and  has  been  active  in  further
ing  Jewish  charitable  and  educational  progress  in
Philadelphia.  In  1887  he  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.

MORALES,  Agustin  "(mo-rah'-lays),  Bolivian
soldier,  b.  in  La  Paz  in  1810 ;  d.  there,  28  Nov.,
1872.  He  entered  the  military  service  in  his  youth,


MORALES

and  served  throughout  the  campaign  of  the  Peru-
Bolivian  confederation  under  Gen.  Santa  Cruz.
After  attaining  the  rank  of  colonel,  he  took  part  in
numerous  military  revolutions  in  his  country.  His
last,  expedition,  in  October,  1809,  being  totally  de
feated,  he  took  refuge  in  Peru,  and  was  specially
excepted  from  the  amnesty  of  March,  1870.  The
prestige  and  popularity  that  he  had  acquired,  and
his  reputation  as  an  enterprising  and  audacious
leader,  called  him  to  the  command  of  the  uprising
against  the  tyranny  of  Melgarejo  (q.  v.)  in  Nov.,
1870,  and,  after  the  final  overthrow  of  the  latter
on  15  Jan.,  1871,  Morales  assumed  the  executive,
and  in  June  was  promoted  general  by  congress,
and  elected  provisional  president  for  one  year.
On  23  Aug.,  1872,  he  was  declared  constitutional
president  for  the  term  of  four  years,  but  soon  his
overbearing  character  and  oppressive  rule  roused
general  opposition,  and  on  24  Nov.,  after  the  cele
bration  of  the  anniversary  of  Melgarejo's  deposi
tion,  when  he  tried  to  intimidate  congress  by  mili
tary  force  into  granting  him  the  mines  of  Aullaga,
he  met  with  firm  resistance  and  dissolved  the  legis
lative  body.  This  brought  affairs  to  a  climax,  and
being  informed  that  an  insurrection  was  on  foot,
and  that  one  of  his  adjutants  had  been  commis
sioned  to  arrest  him,  he  rushed  in  a  drunken  frenzy
into  the  room  that  was  occupied  by  the  officers  in
attendance  on  him,  accused  them  of  being  traitors,
and  assaulted  them  indiscriminately,  until  he  was
shot  bv  his  own  nephew,  La  Faye.

MORALES,  Juan  Bautista,  Mexican  author,
chiefly  known  by  his  pen-name  "Gallo  Pitagorico."
b.  in  Guanajuato.  29  Aug.,  1788;  d.  in  Mexico,  29
July,  1850.  He  began  his  education  in  his  native
city,  in  1809  came  to  Mexico  to  study  jurisprudence
in  the  College  of  San  Ildefonso  and  in  the  theoretic-
practical  academy  of  law,  but  on  account  of  strait
ened  circumstances  was  not  graduated  till  1820,
when  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  strenuously
opposed  Itnrbide,  when  the  latter  assumed  the  im
perial  crown,  and  was  imprisoned.  After  Iturbide's
fall,  Morales  was  elected  to  the  constituent  con
gress  of  1824,  which  modelled  the  first  constitution,
and  he  was  afterward  several  times  a  member  of
congress  and  senator  whenever  the  Federal  party
was  in  power.  In  1835  he  obtained  by  competition
the  chair  of  canonical  law  in  the  College  of  San
Ildefonso.  and  in  1837  he  was  elected  judge  of  the
Federal  supreme  court.  When  Santa-Anna  usurped
power  in  1841,  and  the  junta  de  notables  published
in  1843  the  famous  "  bases  organicas,"  which  abol
ished  the  federal  system,  Morales  defended  his
ideas  in  the  press,  and  published  critical  articles  in
the  "  Siglo  XIX.,"  of  which  he  was  editor.  He  was
banished  by  Santa-Anna,  was  one  of  the  principal
instigators  of  the  revolution  of  0  Dec.,  1844,  which
overthrew  the  dictator,  and  was  elected  governor
of  Guanajuato,  where,  in  his  short  administration,
he  established  many  useful  reforms.  After  the
pronunciamento  of  Gen.  Paredes  in  January,  1840,
a  congress,  elected  by  classes,  was  instituted,  and
Morales  was  appointed  to  represent  the  magistracy ;
but,  true  to  his  Federal  opinions,  he  declined.  He
was  elected  by  congress  president  of  the  supreme
court  in  1850,  but  deposed  by  Santa-Anna  at  his
return  to  power.  After  the  final  fall  of  that  gen
eral  in  1855,  Morales  was  reinstated  in  the  supreme
court,  and  in  the  last  years  of  his  life  he  defended
the  Church  party,  and  wrote  a  pamphlet  against
religious  toleration.  He  was  the  founder  of  the
"  Semanario  Judicial,"  and  at,  different  times  edited
"El  Hombre  Libre,"  "La  Gaceta."  "Aguila  Mexi-
cana,"  "Siglo  XIX.,"  "Monitor,"  "Debates,"  "  I>e-
mocrata,"  and  "  Republicano  "  ;  but  his  principal


MORALES


MORAN


387


fame  depends  on  the  series  of  brilliant  critical  and
politico-satirical  articles  that  he  published  from
time  to  time  in  different  journals.  A  collection
of  these  appeared  after  his  death  under  the  title  of
"El  Gallo  Pitagorico"  (Mexico,  1858).

MORALES,  Pedro,  Mexican  clergyman,  b.  in
Valdepenas,  Spain,  in  1537;  d.  in  Mexico  in  1614.
lie  was  a  lawyer,  but  abandoned  the  profession  to
become  a  Jesuit  in  1570.  His  superiors  sent  him
to  Mexico,  where  he  taught  theology  and  became
rector  of  several  colleges.  He  wrote  "De  las  reli-
quias  de  Santos  que  fueron  colocadas  en  la  ciudad
do  Mexico  el  afio  de  1570"  (Mexico,  1570),  and
theological  works  that  were  published  in  Mexico
and  in  Lyons  (1614).

MORALES,  Sebastian  A.  de,  Cuban  botanist,
b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  in  1823.  He  received  his  edu
cation  in  his  native  city,  and  in  1842  began  the
publication  of  "  La  Aurora,''  a  newspaper,  which
soon  became  one  of  the  most  influential  in  Cuba.
From  1848  till  1858  he  travelled  through  Europe,
Egypt,  and  Asia,  and  he  published  a  narrative  of
his  travels  under  the  title  of  "  Viajes  de  un  Viaje-
ro  "  (1860).  He  contributed  numerous  papers  to
scientific  reviews  about  the  plants  and  minerals  of
his  native  island  and  other  subjects  in  natural  his
tory  until  1868,  when  he  was  obliged  to  emigrate
on  account  of  his  liberal  political  views.  He  then
travelled  through  Xorth  and  South  America,  but  in
1878  returned  again  to  Cuba.  Jn  1887  he  began
the  publication  of  his  "Flora  Cubana,"  a  work  in
which  he  has  been  engaged  for  many  years,  and
which  is  an  important  contribution  to  the  natural
history  of  the  West  Indies.  Morales  is  a  member
of  several  scientific  societies.

MORALES-LEMUS,  Jose"  (mo-rah'-lays-lay1-
mus),  Cuban  patriot,  b.  in  Gibara,  Cuba,  in  1808  ;
d.  in  New  York  city  in  1870.  He  studied  law  at
Havana,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1835,  and  soon
attained  reputation  as  a  lawyer.  He  was  one  of
the  first  Cubans  to  free  his  slaves,  and  on  account
of  his  liberal  political  views  and  anti-slavery  ideas
was  forced  to  emigrate  to  the  United  States  in
1856.  After  living  several  years  in  this  country
he  returned  to  Havana  and  became  one  of  the  lead
ers  of  his  party,  advocating  liberal  reforms  in  the
island.  He  was  one  of  the  delegates  sent  to  Spain
in  1866  to  lay  before  the  Madrid  government  the
wants  of  his  countrymen.  On  his  return  to  Ha
vana  he  devoted  himself  to  his  profession,  but
the  insurrection  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  island
in  1868  compelled  him  to  take  refuge  again  in  the
United  States.  As  soon  as  he  arrived  in  Xew  York
he  was  appointed  president  of  the  Cuban  commit
tee  that  was  formed  to  aid  the  cause  of  the  insur
gents.  The  provisional  government  that  had  been
established  intrusted  Morales-Lemus  with  the  task
of  obtaining  from  the  U.  S.  government  the  rec
ognition  of  their  belligerent  rights,  in  which  he
did  not  succeed.

MORAN,  Benjamin,  diplomatist,  b.  in  Lancas
ter  county,  Pa.,  in  1820  ;  d.  in  London,  England,  20
June,  1886.  His  father  was  manager  of  a  small
cotton-factory  in  Trenton,  X.  J.,  and  the  son  began
life  as  a  printer  in  Philadelphia,  but  when  thirty
years  of  age  he  went  to  Europe  and  travelled
through  England  on  foot.  In  1854  he  became
private  secretary  to  James  Buchanan,  who  was
then  U.  S.  minister  to  England,  and  in  1855  he
%vas  appointed  secretary  of  legation,  remaining  in
this  office  until  1874  and  frequently  serving  as
charge  d'affaires.  He  was  appointed  minister-
resident  to  Portugal  in  1874,  which  post  he  held
until  1882.  Mr.  Moran  was  popular  in  the  politi
cal  circles  of  English  society,  and  was  noted  for


|  his  thorough  familiarity  with  the  archives  of  the
U.  S.  legation  in  London  and  the  annals  of  Ameri
can  diplomacy.  He  contributed  to  periodicals,  and
was  the  author  of  "  The  Foot-Path  and  Highway,
or  Wanderings  of  an  American  in  Great  Britain  in
1851-'2  "  (Philadelphia,  1853).

MORAN,  Edward,  artist,  b.  in  Lancashire,
England,  in  1829.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1844.
and  was  a  pupil  of  James  Hamilton,  the  marine
artist,  and  of  Paul  Weber,  the  landscape-painter,
in  Philadelphia.  He  went  abroad  in  1862,  studied
in  the  National  gallery  in  London,  and,  return
ing  to  the  United  States  in  1869,  settled  in  Xew
York.  In  1877  he  removed  to  Paris,  where  he
still  (1888)  resides.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Penn
sylvania  academy  of  fine  arts,  and  since  1873
has  been  an  associate  of  the  Xational  academy.
He  has  devoted  himself  especially  to  landscape
and  marine  paintings,  and  is  an  intelligent  inter
preter  of  nature.  Among  his  best-known  paint
ings  are  "  The  Bay  of  Xew  York."  "  The  Lord
Staying  the  Waters,"  the  "  Launch  of  the  Life-
Boat,"  "  The  Last  of  the  Wreck,"  "  Old  Fort  DumjH
ling.  Xewport,"  and  "  In  the  Narrows." — His  broth
er,  Thomas,  artist,  b.  in  Bolton,  Lancashire,  Eng
land,  12  Jan.,  1837,  came  to  the  United  States  in  1844,
was  apprenticed  to  a  wood-engraver  in  Philadel
phia,  and  subsequently  became  a  pupil  of  James
Hamilton.  His  first  picture  in  oils  was  an  illus
tration  of  Shelley's  '•  Alastor  "  (1860).  He  went  to
Europe  in  1862,  studied  and  copied  the  works  of
Turner  in  London,  and.  returning  in  1867,  studied
in  Paris  and  in  Italy,  and  achieved  a  reputation  as
an  illustrator  and  landscape-painter.  He  accom
panied  the  U.  S.  exploring  expedition  to  the  Yel
lowstone  country  in  1871,  and  in  1873  went  on
a  similar  expedition  and  made  sketches  for  his
"  Grand  Canon  of  the  Yellowstone "  and  the
"  Chasm  of  the  Colorado,"  which  were  purchased
by  congress  for  f  10.000  each,  and  are  in  the  capitol
at  Washington.  He  removed  from  Philadelphia
to  New  York  in  1872,  where  he  still  resides  (1888).
He  became  a  National  academician  in  1884,  and  is
a  member  of  the  New  York  water-color  society,  of
the  New  York  etching  club,  of  the  Society  of  paint
ers  and  etchers  of  London,  and  of  the  Philadelphia
academy  of  design.  In  1886  he  was  president  of
the  New  York  art  guild.  Besides  painting  in  oil
and  water-color  he  has  illustrated  numerous  books
of  travel  and  history  and  practised  nearly  every
form  of  etching,  engraving,  and  lithography.
Among  his  important  works  are  "  The  Pass  of
Glencoe '' ;  "  The  Mountain  of  the  Holy  Cross,"
which  he  exhibited  at  the  Centennial  of  1876,  and
for  which  he  received  a  medal  and  diploma :  "  A
Dream  of  the  Orient  "  :  "  Ponce  de  Leon  in  Flori
da"  ;  "  The  Azure  Cliff  "  ;  "  Green  River.  Wyom
ing";  "The  Open  Sea";  and  "A  Storm  on  the
Coast  of  Easthampton."  which  he  exhibited  at  the
National  academy  of  design  in  1887. — Thomas's
wife,  Mary  Nimmo,  artist,  b.  in  Strathaven,  Scot
land,  16  May,  1842.  came  to  this  country  in  1852
and  became  a  pupil  of  Mr.  Moran.  whom  she  mar
ried  in  1863.  She  is  a  member  of  the  Society  of
painters  and  etchers  of  London  and  of  the  New
York  etching  club.  Her  earliest  work  was  in  oil
and  water-colors,  but  since  1879  she  has  etched
fifty-four  plates  of  varied  sizes,  styles,  and  subjects,
all  of  which  show  delicacy  of  touch  and  feeling
and  mastery  of  the  resources  of  the  needle.  Her
etchings  include  "  A  Goose-Pond,"  "  Twilight,"
"  The  Coast  of  Florida,"  "  Summer  at  Easthamp
ton,"  "  Under  the  Oaks,"  and  "  A  Windmill  and
Pond." — Thomas's  brother.  Peter,  artist,  b.  in
Bolton,  Lancashire,  England,  in  1842,  began  the


388


MORANVILLE


MORAZAN


study  of  art  under  his  brother  Thomas  in  Philadel
phia.  He  went  to  London  in  1803,  studied  the
English  masters,  and  has  spent  his  subsequent
professional  life  in  Philadelphia.  He  became  a
member  of  the  Artists'  fund  society  of  Philadel
phia  in  1807,  and  in  1808  of  the  Pennsylvania
academy  of  design.  He  has  devoted  much  time
and  study  to  etching,  and  has  attained  to  the  first
rank  in  that  art.  Among  his  works  are  "Santa
Barbara  Mission,"  "On  the  Road  to  Santa  Fe."
"The  Challenge,"  "Wolves  on  the  Buffalo  Trail,"
and  "  Pueblo  of  Zia,"  New  Mexico. — Edward's  son,
Percy,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1802,  was  suc
cessful  as  an  artist  at  an  early  age  by  a  series
of  water-color  sketches  of  figure  subjects.  lie
has  studied  under  his  father,  in  London,  in  Phila
delphia,  in  the  National  academy  of  design,  New
York  city,  and  for  four  years  in  Paris.  He  ex
cels  in  portraying  female  heads  and  figures,
and  his  touch  is  crisp  and  decided.  Among  his
recent  paintings  are  "  Divided  Attention,"  for
which  he  received  the  first  prize  at  the  New  York
academy  of  design  in  1880 ;  "  A  Corner  of  the
Studio  "  :  "  The  Wood-Cutter's  Daughter  "  ;  "  The
Duet  "  ;  "  Afternoon  Tea  "  ;  "  The  Miller's  Daugh
ter  "  ;  "  The  Dancing  Lesson  "  ;  and  "  A  Japanese
Fantasy."  His  exhibitions  at  the  Academy  of  de
sign  include  "1  am  Ready"  (1880)  and  "The  Re
hearsal  for  the  Ball  "  (188?).— Another  son  of  Ed
ward,  Leon,  artist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1808,
studied  under  his  father  and  in  England  and
France.  He  then  settled  in  New  York  city,  and
took  high  rank  among  the  younger  members  of  his
profession.  He  has  exhibited  numerous  paintings
at  the  National  academy,  which  include  "  Way
laid"  (1885):  an  "Interrupted  Conspiracy"  (1880);
and  "An  Amateur"  (1887).  Among  his  most  suc
cessful  works  are  "The  Duel."  "An  Idyl,"  "  Eel-
Fishing,"  and  "Intercepted  Dispatches."

MORANVILLE,  John  Francis,  French  mis
sionary,  b.  in  Cagny,  France,  19  July,  1700;  d.
there,  17  May,  1824.  He  entered  the  seminary  of
Saint  Esprit  in  1778,  and  was  ordained  priest  in
1784.  He  was  sent  immediately  afterward  tb  Cay
enne,  where  he  applied  himself  to  the  instruction
of  the  slaves.  H is  influence  among  the  negroes
was  of  the  greatest  benefit  to  the  colony,  and  in
1792  the  authorities,  in  order  to  retain  him,  per
suaded  him  to  take  the  oath  that  was  prescribed
in  the  civil  constitution  of  the  clergy.  He  did
so  under  the  belief  that  it  was  simply  a  declara
tion  of  obedience  to  the  constituted  authorities.
Learning  afterward  that  the  oath  was  condemned
by  his  church,  he  published  an  energetic  retrac
tion  and  embarked  for  Demerara  on  a  Dutch  ves
sel.  He  was  pursued  by  a  French  ship,  but  ar
rived  safely.  As  the  authorities  in  Cayenne  de
manded  his  surrender,  he  sailed  for  the  United
States,  which  he  reached  early  in  1795.  He  taught
for  a  time  in  Baltimore,  and  was  then  given  charge
of  St.  Peter's  church.  He  had  a  profound  knowl
edge  of  ecclesiastical  music  and  did  much  to  im
prove  the  condition  of  the  choirs  in  Roman  Catho
lic  churches,  reforming  the  choral  services,  for
which  he  composed  hymns  in  English  and  appro
priate  music.  His  best-known  hymn  is  "  Sion,  re
joice  with  Grateful  Lays."  He  i's  regarded  as  the
creator  of  the  religious  chant  in  the  Roman  Catho
lic  church  of  the  United  States.  He  visited
France  in  1801,  but  after  a  few  years  returned  to
Baltimore,  and  was  appointed  p'astor  of  St.  Pat
rick's  church.  He  soon  acquired  a  reputation  for
eloquence,  and  his  church  could  not  contain  the
crowds  that  wished  to  hear  him.  In  1807  he  com
pleted  a  new  church,  which  was  the  finest  in  Bal


timore.  In  1815  he  founded  the  charitable  so
ciety  of  St.  Patrick,  and  opened  a  free  school  for
girls,  the  first  of  the  kind  in  the  city.  The  same
year  he  introduced  a  body  of  Trappists  into  his
parish,  but  they  remained  with  him  only  a  few
years.  He  retired  to  St.  Mary's  college,  Emmet  ts-
burg,  in  failing  health,  but,  on  learning  that  Balti
more  was  likely  to  be  attacked  by  an  English  fleet,
he  returned  to  his  flock.  During  the  yellow-fever
epidemics  of  1819  to  1821  in  Baltimore  he  was
constant  in  his  attendance  at  the  bed-side  of  the
sick,  even  when  he  was  attacked  by  the  disease.
His  labors  during  these  years  impaired  his  health,
and  he  was  advised  to  return  for  a  time  to  his  na
tive  country.  He  sailed  from  New  York,  1  Oct.,
1823,  but  was  still  further  weakened  by  the  storms
to  which  his  vessel  was  exposed  on  the  passage,  and
he  landed  in  France  in  a  dying  condition.

MORARI)  I)E  GALL'E,  Justin  Bonaven-
ture  (mo-rarr),  French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Gonse-
lin,  Danphiny,  80  March,  1741 ;  d.  in  Gueret,  23
July,  1809.  He  entered  the  navy  in  1755,  and
served  in  Canada  till  1703.  During  the  whole  of
the  war  of  American  independence  he  was  flag-
captain  of  the  Count  de  Grasse,  and  he  served  after
ward  under  Count  de  Guichen.  lie  fought  at  the
battles  off  Dominica.  17  April,  and  15  and  19  May,
1780,  and  served  in  the  fleet  that  under  Count  de
Grasse  blockaded  Chesapeake  bay  in  October,  1781,
contributing  to  the  surrender  of  Yorktown.  He
served  afterward  in  Santo  Domingo  and  Brazil,
was  commissioned  rear-admiral  in  1792,  went
again  to  the  West  Indies,  and  became  vice-admiral
in  1790.  In  1799  he  was  created  a  senator,  which
post  he  held  till  his  death.

MORAUI),  Diemloniie  dJahriel  Charles  Hen
ry  (mo-ro),  Swiss  missionary,  b.  in  Soleure,  Swit
zerland,  about  1503;  d.  in  Brazil  in  1572.  He  was
a  Jesuit,  was  sent  in  1530  to  Bahia.  where  he
learned  the  Indian  dialects,  and  employed  after
ward  in  the  missions  of  the  Mamalucos  or  half-
breeds.  In  1550  he  became  assistant  to  Leonardo
Nunes,  the  superior  general,  and  founded  missions
in  the  province  of  Espiritu  Santo.  When  Ville-
gaignon  attacked  Rio  Janeiro  in  1558.  he  marched
to  the  succor  of  the  city  with  a  body  of  loyal  In
dians,  and  was  afterward  employed  as  negotiator
between  the  Portuguese  authorities  and  the  French
admiral.  He  was  also  instrumental  in  bringing
about  the  treaty  of  Upabeba  with  the  Tupinambis,
allies  of  the  French,  who  devastated  the  Portu
guese  settlements,  and  became  in  1507  visitor  of
the  missions  in  south  Brazil.  He  died  from  ex
haustion  during  a  journey  through  the  province
of  Espiritu  Santo.  He  left  in  manuscript  "  De
arte  linguae  Tupiorum,  guaranorumque,"  which
has  since  been  published  in  the  collection  of  the
"  Bibliotheca  Scriptorum  Societatis  Jesu."

MORAZAN,  Francisco  (mo-rah-thahn'),  Central
American  statesman,  b.  in  Tegucigalpa,  Honduras,
in  1799;  d.  in  San  Jose,  Costa"  Rica,  15  Sept.,  1842.
He  was  descended  from  a  French  West  Indian
family,  received  only  a  primary  education  from  his
uncle,  the  parish  priest  of  Texiguat,  and  entered
business:  but  when  the  independence  of  his  coun
try  was  declared  in  1821.  he  began  to  take  an  active
part  in  politics.  The  president  of  Honduras,  Dio-
nisio  Herrera,  appointed  him  secretary-general,  and
as  such  he  assisted  in  the  organization  of  the  state,
and  was  afterward  elected  member  of  the  first  rep
resentative  council.  When  the  troops  that  were
sent  by  the  government  of  Guatemala,  usurping
preponderance  in  Federal  affairs,  invaded  Hon
duras  in  1827,  Morazan,  at  the  head  of  the  state
troops,  resisted  them,  but  was  taken  prisoner  in


MOKDECAI


MOREAU


389


Ojojona.  He  escaped,  and,  when  he  was  about  to
sail  for  Mexico,  was  prevailed  on  in  Nicaragua  to  j
take  command  of  a  force  from  Leon  to  liberate
Honduras  and  Salvador.  He  marched  to  Hon
duras,  defeated  the  Federal  troops  at  Trinidad,
took  possession  of  Comayagua,  and  was  declared

president,  and,  col
lecting  new  forces,
marched  to  Salva
dor,  and  on  6  July,
1828,  totally  defeat
ed  a  Guatemalan
army.  The  army  of
the  Federals  under
Montufar  surren
dered  on  10  Sept.
near  San  Salvador.
and  the  last  divis
ion  capitulated  at  I
San  Antonio  on  9  j
Oct.  Morazan  now
occupied  Ahuacha-
pam  with  the  allied


jy  ana  Honduras,  ami

"  invested  Guatemala

in  February.  1829.  He  was  defeated  in  Mixco,
and  retired  to  Antigua ;  but.  after  receiving  re-
enforcements,  besieged  Guatemala  again,  and  oc
cupied  the  city  on  13  April.  Barrundia,  as  eld
est  senator,  was  elected  provisional  president ;  but,
after  defeating  insurrections  at  Olancho  and  Yoro,
Morazan,  whose  prestige  was  daily  increasing,  was
elected  to  the  Federal  executive.  He  at  once
expelled  the  archbishop,  Ramon  Casaus.  and  the
Franciscan  and  Dominican  friars,  who  had  vio
lently  opposed  the  Liberal  party,  and  congress
decreed  the  extinction  of  the  male  monastic  or
ders,  and  the  confiscation  of  their  property  by
the  state.  In  1832  the  chief  of  the  state  of"  Sal
vador,  Cornejo.  rebelled  against  the  Federal  gov-  I
eminent,  and  Morazan  personally  marched  against  I
him  and  defeated  him  at  Jocoro  on  14  March,  oc-  j
cupying  the  city  of  San  Salvador  on  28  March.  In
1838  a  revolution  began  in  Guatemala  under  the  j
leadership  of  Carrera  (q.  t:),  and  Morazan  marched  !
against  him  ;  but.  as  he  feared  trouble  in  Honduras  ]
and  Nicaragua  also,  he  left  in  command  Col.  Agus-  j
tin  Guzman  (g.  v.).  who  was  forced  to  make  a  treaty
with  Carrera  in  Rinconcito  on  23  Dec.  Morazan
several  times  defeated  the  revolutionary  forces  in
1839.  but  meanwhile  Carrera,  assisted  by  the  clergy
and  aristocracy,  had  overthrown  the  government  of
Guatemala.  Morazan,  by  forced  marches,  captured
that  city  at  the  head  of  1,300  troops  from  Salvador
on  18  March.  1840,  but  was  besieged  next  day  by
Carrera  with  5,000  men.  and  evacuated  the  city  after
a  twenty-two  hours'  fight.  Seeing  the  Federal  power
crumbling  under  the  repeated  revolutions,  he  re
signed  the  executive  on  5  April,  and  went  to  Peru
with  his  principal  followers.  There  he  found  as
sistance  from  political  friends  and  Central  Ameri
can  refugees,  and,  provided  with  arms  and  other
resources,  he  invaded  Costa  Rica  on  11  April,  1842.
soon  overthrew  the  government,  and  assumed  the
executive.  He  was  preparing  an  expedition  to  in
vade  the  other  Central  American  republics  for  the
re-establishment  of  federal  unity,  when  the  towns
of  Heredia,  Alhajuela,  and  San  'Jose  revolted,  and
he  was  delivered  to  the  rebels  and  shot.

MORDECAI,  Alfred,  soldier,  b.  in  Warrenton,
N.  C.,  3  Jan.,  1804 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  23  Oct.,
1887.  He  was  graduated  first  in  his  class  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1823,  assigned  to  the
corps  of  engineers,  and  was  assistant  professor  of  (


natural  and  experimental  philosophy  in  1823-'4
and  principal  assistant  professor  of  engineering  in
1824-'5.  From  1825  till  1828  he  was  assistant  en
gineer  in  the  construction  of  Fort  Monroe  and
Fort  Calhoun,  Va.,  and  he  was  assistant  to  the
chief  engineer  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  from  1828
till  1832.  He  became  captain  of  ordnance  on  30
May,  1832,  and  in  1833-'4  was  on  leave  of  absence
in  Europe.  In  1842  he  became  assistant  to  the
chief  of  ordnance  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  and  from
1839  till  1860  he  was  a  member  of  the  ordnance
board.  In  1840  he  was  a  member  of  a  commission
to  visit  the  arsenals  and  cannon-foundries  of  the
principal  powers  of  Europe,  and  in  1842  was  as
sistant  inspector  of  arsenals  and  engaged  in  con
structing  ballistic  pendulums.  He  was  a  member
of  a  military  commission  to  the  Crimea  in  1855-'?,
and  his  observations,  particularly  on  military  or
ganization  and  ordnance,  were  published  by  order
of  congress  (Washington,  1800).  He  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  board  to  revise  the  course  of  instruction
at  the  military  academy  in  1860.  He  was  brevet-
ted  major  on  30  May,  1848,  for  services  during  the
war  with  Mexico,  and  became  major  of  ordnance,
31  Dec.,  1854.  He  resigned  on  5  May,  1861.  and
from  1863  till  1866  was  a  railway  engineer  in  Mexi
co.  From  186?  till  his  death  he  was  treasurer  and
secretary  of  the  Pennsylvania  canal  company.  He
was  the  author  of  a  "Digest  of  Military  Laws"'
(Washington,  1833):  "Ordnance  Manual  for  the
Use  of  Officers  in  the  U.  S.  Army  "  (1841 ;  2d  ed.,
1850);  "Reports  of  Experiments  on  Gunpowder"
(1845  and  1849):  and  "Artillery  for  the  U.  S.
Land  Service,  as  devised  and  arranged  by  the  Ord
nance  Board,"  with  plates  (1849).

MORE,  Nicholas,  colonist,  b.  in  England ;  d.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1689.  He  was  a  physician,
and  a  man  of  more  than  ordinary  abilities.  On
the  organization  of  the  Free  society  of  traders  in
London,  he  was  chosen  its  president,  and  came
with  Williajn  Penn  to  Pennsylvania,  where  he
took  up  a  large  tract  of  land,  embracing  the  manor
of  Moreland,  now  in  the  counties  of  Philadelphia
and  Montgomery.  He  was  president  of  the  first
provincial  assembly  of  Pennsylvania,  which  con
vened  at  Chester,  4  Dec..  1682.  during  the  same
year  was  appointed  president  judge  of  the  several
courts  of  Philadelphia,  in  1683  was  clerk  to  the
provincial  council,  in  1684  was  elected  to  the  as
sembly  and  chosen  speaker  of  the  body,  and  by
appointment  became  the  first  chief  justice  of  the
supreme  court  of  the  province.  In  1685  he  was
again  elected  to  the  assembly.  By  his  course  as
chief  justice,  he  fell  under  such  displeasure  that
the  assembly  presented  articles  of  impeachment
against  him  to  the  council,  in  which,  among  other
offences,  he  was  charged  with  "  assuming  to  him
self  an  unlimited  and  arbitrary  power  in  his  office."
This  was  probably  the  first  case  of  impeachment
in  this  country.  As  Penn  had  gone  to  England,  a
letter  containing  the  impeachment  was  transmitted
to  him,  but  it  did  not  receive  his  approbation.  More
still  retained  Penn's  confidence,  which  was  shown
by  his  appointment  in  1686  as  one  of  the  five  com
missioners  to  whom  the  conduct  of  the  govern
ment  was  intrusted.

3IOREAU,  Jean  Yictor  (mo-ro).  French  sol
dier,  b.  in  Morlay.  11  Aug.,  1763  ;  d.  in  Laun.  Bo
hemia,  2  Sept..  1813.  He  was  graduated  in  law  at
Rennes.  and  had  applied  for  admission  to  the  bar
when  he  was  elected.  10  Sept.,  1791,  chief  of  battal
ion  of  the  Rennois  volunteers.  He  was  made  a  lieu
tenant-general  in  1794,  and  led  the  Army  of  the
Flanders  in  a  successful  campaign.  In  179(5  he  took
command  of  the  Armv  of  the  Rhine  and  Moselle


390


MOREAU


MOREHEAD


and  defeated  the  Archduke  Charles  of  Austria  at
Heydenheiin  and  in  many  engagements :  but  his
supplies  having  been  cut  off  by  the  withdrawal  of
Jourdan,  who  was  to  co-operate  with  him,  he  made
a  retreat  of  twenty-six  days  between  three  hostile
armies,  without  losing  a  gun,  bringing  back  7.000
prisoners.  He  defeated  the  Austrians  again  at  Mun-
ingen  in  the  following  year,  commanded  in  Italy
in  1799,  and  in  Germany  in  1800,  defeating  the  Aus
trians  at  Hohenlinden'on  3  Dec.  As  he  was  the
only  military  rival  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  the  first
consul,  becoming  jealous,  caused  him  to  be  accused
of  complicity  with  the  royalists,  and  he  was  sen
tenced  to  exile  in  1804.  Moreau  embarked  for  the
United  States,  arriving  with  his  wife  in  New  York
in  December.  He  was  received  with  enthusiasm  in
this  country,  but  refusing  all  offers  of  service  he
travelled  for  some  time  through  the  country  and
settled  in  1806  in  New  Jersey,  where  he  bought  a
villa  near  Delaware  river,  a  few  miles  from  Trenton.
He  lived  there  till  1813,  dividing  his  time  between
fishing,  hunting,  and  social  intercourse.  His  abode
was  the  refuge  of  all  political  exiles,  and  represent
atives  of  foreign  powers  tried  to  induce  him  to
raise  his  sword  against  Napoleon.  When  war
seemed  imminent  between  the  United  States  and
Great  Britain.  Moreau  was  offered  by  President
Madison  the  command  of  the  U.  S.  troops.  He
was  willing  to  accept,  but  the  events  of  the  Russian
campaign  decided  him  to  return  to  Europe.  He
was  received  with  enthusiasm  by  the  Emperor
Alexander  and  the  king  of  Prussia,  drew  the  plan
of  campaign  against  Napoleon,  and  was  directing
a  movement  during  the  battle  of  Dresden.  27  Aug.,
1813,  when  he  was  mortally  wounded.  His  inter
esting  correspondence  while  he  was  in  the  United
States  has  been  published  several  times.  Moreau's
biographies,  both  in  French  and  in  English,  are
also  numerous.  A  good  edition  was  published  by
Hyde  de  Neuville.  French  consul-general  in  New
York,  entitled  "  Eloge  historique  du  General
Moreau"  (New  York,  1814).

MOREAU,  Louis  Zepherin,  Canadian  R.  C.
bishop,  b.  in  Becancour,  Quebec,  1  April,  1824.  He
was  educated  at  the  Seminary  of  Nicolet,  and  or
dained  priest,  19  Dec.,  1846.'  Till  1876  he  was
assistant  secretary  of  the  bishopric  of  Montreal,
and  he  has  been  also  secretary  of  that  of  St.  Hya-
cinthe,  procureur  and  vicar-general  of  that  diocese,
and  cura  of  the  cathedral.  On  16  Jan.,  1876,  he
became  bishop  of  St.  Ilyacinthe.

MOREAU-CHRISTOPHE,  Louis  Mathnrin,
French  economist,  b.  in  Loches  in  1799;  d.  in
Paris  in  1883.  He  studied  law  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1825,  but  abandoned  his  profes
sion  in  1830,  when  he  was  appointed  inspector  of
the  prisons  of  the  department  of  the  Seine.  He
was  sub-prefect  of  Dreux  in  1833-'7,  and  in  the
latter  year  was  appointed  inspector-general  of  the
prisons  of  France,  which  post  he  held  till  the  revo
lution  of  1848.  He  undertook  to  reorganize  the
penitentiary  system,  and  studied  the  prisons  of
various  European  countries  and  of  the  United
States.  He  was  so  much  impressed  with  the  regu
lations  of  the  Cherry  Hill  penitentiary  in  Phila
delphia  that  he  thoroughly  reformed  the  French
prisons  on  the  same  plan!  In  1841  he  revisit
ed  the  United  States  to  study  the  institutions  of
refuge  for  deserted  and  criminal  children,  and  on
his  return  to  France  founded  the  colony  of  Met-
tray  on  a  plan  similar  to  that  of  the  reformatories
of  the  state  of  New  York.  Moreau  visited  the
United  States  many  times,  and  introduced  into
France  every  improvement  in  our  prison  system.
His  numerous  works  include  "  Do  la  mortalite  et


de  la  folie  dans  le  regime  penitcntiaire.  et  speciale-
ment  aux  Etats-Unis  de  1'Amerique  du  Nord "
(Paris,  1839);  ''Rapport  sur  les  prisons  de  1'Ame-
rique  du  Nord  "  {1844) ;  "  Documents  oiliciels  sur
le  penitencier  de  Cherry  Hill  a  Philadelphia "
(1844);  "Defense  du  nouveau  projet  de  loi  sur  les
prisons  contre  les  attaques  de  ses  adversaires "
(1844) ;  '•  Code  des  prisons  de  1670  a  1861  "  (4  vols.,
1845-'69) ;  "  Le  monde  des  coquins "  (2  vols..
1863-'5);  "  Du  probleme  de  la  misere,  et  de  sa  so
lution  chez  les  peuples  anciens  et  modernes  "  (1851 ;
revised  ed.,  2  vols..  1865).

MOREAU  DE  SAIN7T  MERY,  Mederic  Louis
Elie,  French  administrator,  1).  in  Fort  Royal,
Martinique,  13  Jan.,  1750;  d.  in  Paris,  28  Jan.,
1819.  At  the  age  of  about  twenty  years  he  went
to  France  and  entered  the  royal  police  force.  At
the  same  time  he  studied  law,  and  in  three  years
was  familiar  with  mathematics  and  the  code.  In
1773  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  by  the  parliament
of  Paris,  returned  to  Martinique  to  arrange  his
affairs,  and  began  to  practise  in  the  court  of  Cape
Francais.  In  1780  he  was  called  to  the  superior
council  of  French  Santo  Domingo,  and  occupied
his  leisure  time  in  collecting  material  about  the
laws,  geography,  and  history  of  the  French  colo
nies.  He  searched  the  archives  and  the  notary's
office  of  the  island  for  information,  and  during  a
visit  to  Santo  Domingo  in  1783  discovered  the  tomb
of  Christopher  Columbus,  which  he  restored  at  his
own  expense.  lie  was  sent  as  a  representative  for
Santo  Domingo  to  parliament,  and  contributed  to
the  election  of  Lafayette  as  chief  of  the  National
guard.  He  was  deputy  for  Martinique  in  1790  in
the  constituent  assembly,  occupying  himself  espe
cially  with  the  colonial  affairs.  He  was  imprisoned
with  the  Duke  of  Rochefoucauld  on  account  of
political  disturbances,  but  escaped,  and,  taking  ref
uge  in  the  United  States,  established  in  Philadel
phia  a  printing-office  and  book-store,  and  published
various  works.  About  1800  the  French  government
appointed  him  councillor  of  state,  but  in  1800  he
was  deposed  by  Napoleon,  and  after  that  time
lived  in  retirement.  He  left  many  works  of  merit,
including  "  Lois  et  constitutions  des  colonies  Fran-
caises  de  1'Amerique,  sous  le  vent,  de  1558  a  1785  "
(6  vols.,  Paris,  1784-'90) ;  "Description  topogra-
phique  et  politique  de  la  partie  Espagnole  dc  1'ile
dc  Saint  Domingue"  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1796);
"  Description  de  la  partie  Francaise  de  1'ile  tie
Saint  Domingue  "  (2  vols.,  1797-'8) ;  and  "  Reper-
toir  de  notions  coloniales"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1801).

MOREHEAD,  Charles  Slaughter,  governor
of  Kentucky,  b.  in  Nelson  county,  Ky.,  7  July,
1802;  d.  near  Greenville.  Washington  co.,  Miss.,  23
Dec.,  1868.  He  was  educated  at  Transylvania,
studied  law,  which  he  practised  in  Frankfort,  and
was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1828.  From  1830
till  1835  he  was  attorney-general  of  Kentucky,  and
he  served  again  in  the  legislature  in  1838-'45,  offici
ating  as  speaker  in  the  last  three  years.  He  was
then  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  serving  from  6
Dec.,  1847,  till  3  March.  1851.  He  was  again  a
member  of  the  legislature  in  1853.  was  governor  of
Kentucky  from  1855  till  1859,  and  was  one  of  the
most  devoted  friends  and  supporters  of  Henry
Clay.  He  then  removed  to  Louisville,  where  he
practised  law,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  peace  con
vention  in  Washington  in  1861,  and  also  a  member
of  the  border  state  convention  which  met  in  Frank
fort  in  that  year.  His  endeavors  to  bring  about
the  secession  of  Kentucky  occasioned  his  arrest  in
1861,  but  after  imprisonment  in  Fort  Lafayette  his
friends  secured  his  release  and  he  went  to  England,
where  he  resided  during  the  remainder  of  the  civil


MOREHEAD


MORELL


391


war.  Ho  then  returned  to  the  United  States  and
removed  from  Kentucky  to  a  plantation  near
Greenville.  Mis?.,  where  his  health  failed.  In  con
nection  with  Judge  Mason  Brown  he  published  a
••  Digest  of  the  Statute  Laws  of  Kentucky,  etc..  to
24  Feb.,  1834,''  which  was  in  use  until  the  adoption
of  the  new  constitution  (4  vols.,  Frankfort,  1834;.

MOREHEAD,  James  Turner,  statesman,  b.  in
Bullitt  county,  Ky.,  24  May.  1797;  d.  in  Coving-
ton.  Ky.,  28  Dec.,  1854.  He  received  his  edu
cation  'at  Transylvania  university,  studied  law
at  Russellville,  and  began  practice  at  Bowling
Green  in  1818.  lie  served  several  terms  in  the
Kentucky  legislature,  and  in  1882  was  elected  lieu
tenant-governor  of  the  state.  On  the  death  of  Gov.
Breathitt  in  1834,  Mr.  Morehead  succeeded  to  his
office.  He  was  elected  to  the  IT.  S.  senate  in  1841,
and  served  a  term  of  six  years  in  that  body.  After
its  expiration  he  practised  law  at  Covington.  He
published  an  "  Address  Commemorative  of  the
First  Settlers  of  Kentucky  at  Boonesborough "
(Frankfort.  1840);  and  "  Practice  and  Proceedings
at  Law  in  Kentucky  "  (1846).

MOREHEAD.  John  Motley,  governor  of  North
Carolina,  b.  in  Pittsylvania  county,  Va.,  4  July,
1796;  d.  in  Rockbridge  Alum  Springs,  Va.,  28
Aug.,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  North  Carolina  in  1817,  studied  law.  was  admit
ted  to  the  bar  in  1819,  and  acquired  a  large  practice.
He  served  in  the  North  Carolina  legislature,  and
early  became  a  Whig,  being  a  warm  friend  of  Henry
Clay.  From  1841  till  1845  he  was  governor  of
North  Carolina.  In  1848  he  was  president  of  the
National  Whig  convention  that  nominated  Gen.
Zachary  Taylor  for  president.

MOREHOt  SE,  Georare  Read,  physician,  b.  in
Mount  Holly,  N.  J.,  25  March,  1829.  He  was  grad
uated  at  Princeton  in  1848,  and  at  Jefferson  medical
college  in  1851.  From  1862  till  1865  he  was  acting
assistant  surgeon  in  charge  of  the  special  hospitals
for  nervous  diseases  in  Philadelphia,  and  he  is  a
member  of  the  principal  medical  societies  of  that
city,  where  he  practises  his  profession.  In  addition
to  many  papers,  including  one  on  "  Researches  on
the  Anatomy  and  Physiology  of  Respiration  in  the
Chelonia"  with  S.  Weir  Mitchell,  published  by  the
Smithsonian  institution  (1858),  he  also  wrote  with
the  same  author  "Gun-shot  Wounds  and  other
Injuries  of  the  Nerves"  (Philadelphia,  1864).

MOREIRA.  Luiz  da  Cunha  (mo-ray '-e-rah),
Brazilian  naval  officer,  .b.  in  Bahia,  1  Oct..  1777:
d.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  28  Aug.,  1865.  At  the  age  of
seven  he  went  with  his  parents  to  Lisbon  and
entered  the  College  Dos  Nobles,  where  he  was  grad
uated  as  pilot  in  1795.  In  1799  he  was  promoted
lieutenant,  and  two  years  afterward  captain  in  the
navy.  In  1807  he  commanded  one  of  the  vessels
that  conveyed  the  royal  family  to  Brazil.  In  180§
he  was  attached  to  the  expedition  for  the  conquest
of  Cayenne,  led  the  forces  that  occupied  Proaqui.
and  was  present  at  several  battles  till  the  occupa
tion  of  that  province.  He  was  afterward  promoted
rear-admiral,  and  in  1812  sent  in  a  secret  commis
sion  to  Buenos  Ayres.  In  1816  he  occupied  Mal-
donado.  and  in  1817  he  was  at  the  siege  of  Pernam-
buco,  where  a  revolution  had  begun.  From  1817
till  1822  he  served  in  the  conquest  of  the  province
of  Cisplatina,  Uruguay.  In  1822  he  was  appointed
secretary  of  the  navy,  from  which  office  he  retired
in  1823.  not  being  willing  to  sign  the  bill  for  the
dissolution  of  the  constituent  assembly.  In  1825
he  was  promoted  inspector  of  the  navy-yard,  and
in  1826  director  of  the  Academia  de  marinha  of
the  city  of  Rio  Janeiro.  In  1831  he  was  offered
the  presidency  of  the  province  of  Para,  but


declined.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  elevation
of  Pedro  II.  to  the  throne,  and  in  1844  aided  in
suppressing  the  revolution  of  Rio  Grande.  Until
his  death  he  took  an  active  part  in  politics,  affili
ating  with  the  most  advanced  party.  In  1849  he
was  made  Viscount  of  Cabo  Frio  and  promoted
admiral  of  the  navy.

MORELL.  George,  jurist,  b.  in  Lenox,  Mass.,
22  March.  1786;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich..  8  March,
1845.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1807,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1811,  and
settled  in  Cooperstown,  N.  Y.  He  was  the  first
judge  of  the  Otsego  county  court  in  1827,  re-
appointed  in  1832,  and  in  1829  was  a  member  of
the  assembly.  From  1832  till  1836  he  was  U.  S.
judge  of  Michigan  territory,  and  he  was  a  judge  of
the  Michigan  supreme  court  from  1836  till  1843,
and  its  chief  justice  from  18  July,  1843.  until  his
death.  He  married  a  daughter  of  Gen.  Samuel  B.
Webb.— Their  son.  (ieorge  Webb,  soldier,  b.  in
Cooperstown.  N.  Y.,  8  Jan.,  1815;  d.  in  Scar
borough,  N.  Y.,  12  Feb.,  1883.  He  was  graduated
first  in  his  class  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1835,  assigned  to  the  corps  of  engineers,  and  served
in  the  improvement  of  Lake  Erie  harbors.  He  was
made  2d  lieutenant  of  engineers.  31  Oct.,  1836,  and
was  engaged  in  the  Ohio  and  Michigan  boundary
surveys  and  in  the  construction  of  Fort  Adams,
Newport  harbor,  R.  I.,  in  1836-'7.  On  30  June,
1837,  he  resigned  his  commission  and  engaged  in
railroad  construction  in  North  and  South  Carolina
[  and  Michigan  until  1840,  when  he  removed  to  New
;  York,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
!  From  1854  till  1861  he  was  commissioner  of  the
U.  S.  circuit  court  for  the  southern  district  of  New
York.  In  1861  he  was  colonel  and  chief  of  staff  to
Gen.  Edward  S.  Sanford  in  organizing  regiments
and  forwarding  them  to  the  seat  of  war,  and  en
gaged  in  the  defences  of  Washington  and  in  opera
tions  around  Harper's  Ferry,  Va.  He  was  appoint
ed  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  9  Aug.,  1861,
and  assigned  to  a  brigade  in  Gen.  Fitz-John  Porter's
division  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  partici
pated  in  the  siege  of  Yorktown,  and  he  took  Gen.
Porter's  division  when  that  officer  was  promoted
to  the  command  of  the  fifth  army  corps.  18  May,

1862.  He  was  engaged  in  the  battles  of  Hanover
Court-House, Mechanicsville,  Gaines's  Mills,  and
Malvern  Hill,  and  was  promoted  major-general  of
volunteers  ;  but  his  name  was  not  sent  to  the  senate,
and  his  commission  expired  on  4  March,  1863. He
commanded the forces that guarded the  upper
Potomac  from  30  Oct.  till  16  Dec.,  1862,  and  the
draft  rendezvous  at  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  from  15  Dec.,

1863.  till  29  Aug.,  1864. He  was  mustered  out  of
service  on  15  Dec.,  1864,  and  subsequently  resided
on  a  farm  near  Tarrytown,  N.  Y.

MORELL,  William, clergyman. b.  in  England:
d.  there.  He  came  to  Massachusetts  in  1623  with
the  company  that  was  sent  out  by  the  Plymouth
council  under  the  command  of  Capt.  Robert  Gorges,
son  of  Sir  Ferdinando  Gorges  (q.  r.).  He  was  a
minister  of  the  established  church  and  bore  a  com
mission  from  the  ecclesiastical  court  to  exercise
superintendence  over  the  churches  that  were,  or
might  be.  established  in  the  colony.  The  attempt
by  this  company  to  form  a  settlement  at  Wessa-
gussett  (now  Weymouth)  was  unsuccessful.  After
Gorges's  departure  Morell  remained  a  year  at  Plym
outh,  and  then  followed  him  to  England,  where
he  soon  published  a  poem  entitled  ''Nova  Anglia"
,  (London)  in  Latin  hexameters,  which  was  afterward
translated  into  English  heroics  and  dedicated  to
!  Charles  I.  It  is  mainly  occupied  with  a  description
I  of  the  animal  inhabitants  of  New  England,  and  the


392


MORELL  DE SANTA CRUZ


MORELOS


aborigines.  The  entire  poem  is  reprinted  in  the
"  Collections  "  of  the  Massachusetts  historical  so
ciety  (first  series,  vol.  i.).

MORELL  DE  SANTA  CRUZ,  Pedro  Agus-
tin  (tno-rel'),  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Santiago  de  los
Caballeros,  Santo  Domingo,  in  1094:  d.  in  Havana,
Cuba,  30  Dec.,  1768.  He  studied  theology  in  the
University  of  Santo  Domingo,  and  was  ordained
priest  in  Havana  in  1718.  Soon  afterward  he  was
appointed  dean  of  the  cathedral  of  Santiago  de
Cuba,  and  in  1745  elected  bishop  of  Leon,  Nicara
gua.  Nine  years  later  he  was  appointed  bishop  of
the  dioceses  of  Cuba  and  Florida,  and  in  1754  lie
went  to  Havana  to  assume  his  office.  There  he
built  several  churches,  founded  some  charitable
institutions,  and  was  indefatigable  in  the  fulfilment
of  his  duties  and  in  his  efforts  to  better  the  condi
tion  of  the  poor.  When  England  took  possession
of  Havana  in  1702,  he  was  banished  by  Lord  Albe-
marle,  and  went  to  Florida,  where  he  did  much
missionary  work  among  the  Indians.  He  was  the
first  Roman  Catholic  bishop  to  enter  the  limits  of
the  British  colonies.  After  the  withdrawal  of  the
English,  Bishop  Morell  returned  to  Cuba.  He  left
two  historical  works,  "  Historia  de  la  Islay  Catedral
de  Cuba "  (Havana.  1760),  and  "  Relacion  de  las
tentativas  de  los  Ingleses  en  America"  (1767).

MORELOS,  Jos6  Maria  (mo-ray '-los),  Mexican
patriot,  b.  in  Valladolid  (now  Morelia),  30  Sept.,
1765;  d.  in  San  Cristobal  Ecatepec,  near  Mexico.
22  Dec.,  1815.  He  was  of  humble  parentage,  and
after  the  early  death  of  his  father,  his  mother,  un
able  to  give  him  an  education,  sent  him  to  a  rela
tive,  whom  he  assisted  for  many  years  as  a  mule
teer  between  Mexico  and  Acapulco.  At  the  age  of
thirty  he  had  saved  enough  to  enter  the  College  of
San  Nicolas  in  Valladolid,  of  which  at  that  time
Miguel  Hidalgo  (q.  i>.)  was  rector,  and  in  1800  he  was
ordained  to  the  priesthood.  He  obtained  by  com
petition  in  1801  the  parishes  of  Caracuaro  and
Nucupetaro,  where  he  constructed  a  church.  When
Miguel  Hidalgo  proclaimed  independence  in  1810,
Morelos  sympathized  with  him,  and  when,  after
the  capture  of  Guanajuato,  the  former  marched
upon  Valladolid,  Morelos  offered  his  services,  was
appointed  colonel,  and  commissioned  to  organize
the  revolution  in  the  southwest  of  Mexico.  Setting
out  with  25  men  from  his  parish,  he  displayed
great  activity,  and  soon  gathered  a  force  of  about
700  men.  with  which  he  invested  Acapulco  early
in  December,  defeated  the  governor  of  the  fortress,
and  captured  a  large  quantity  of  arms.  After  his
junction  with  the  brothers  Galiana  he  surprised  in
the  night  of  4  Jan.,  1811,  the  Spanish  chief  Paris,
who  had  marched  from  Oajaca  against  him,  and
captured  600  guns,  5  cannon,  and  much  ammu
nition.  But  in  the  same  month  he  lost  his  artil
lery  in  meeting  a  sally  from  the  fortress,  and  to
evade  superior  royalist  forces,  which  were  gather
ing  from  all  sides,  he  raised  the  siege,  and  by  quick
marches  soon  captured  every  place  on  the  Pacific
coast  and  the  provinces  of  Guerrero  and  Michoa-
can,  leaving  the  Spaniards  in  possession  only  of  the
fortress  of  Acapulco.  He  defeated  the  royalists  at
Chautla  de  la  Sal  and  Izucar,  and  on  16  Aug.,
1811,  entered  Tixtla,  after  gaining  twenty-two  vic
tories  within  nine  months,  and  carrying  dismay
into  the  Spanish  ranks.  By  the  end  of  the  year  all
the  southern  provinces  from  the  Pacific  coast  to
the  confines  of  the  valley  of  Mexico  were  freed
from  the  enemy.  On  22  Jan.,  1812,  he  captured
Tenancingo,  and,  preparing  to  attack  the  capital,
established  his  headquarters  in  the  town  of  Cuautla
Amilpas;  but  the  viceroy,  Venegas,  alarmed  at  the
proximity  of  the  enemy,  hurried  forward  the  army


of  the  centre  under  Gen.  Felix  Calleja  (q.  v.\  order
ing  the  Oajaca  division  to  join  him.  Morelos,  with
about  5,000  men  and  30  pieces  of  artillery,  fortified
Cuautla  as  well  as  he  could,  and  awaited  Calleja.
The  latter,  after  placing  his  batteries,  tried  to  take
the  place  by  assault  on  19  Feb.,  but  was  driven
back  with  the  loss  of  500  men,  and  laid  siege  to  the
city.  Morelos  withstood  daily  attacks  until,  after
seventy-two  days  of  defence,  the  ammunition  and
provisions  were  exhausted,  and  an  attempt  of
Mariano  Matamoros  to  relieve  the  place  having
failed,  Morelos  resolved  to  evacuate  it,  and  on  the
morning  of  2  May  made  a  bold  attack,  and  after
an  obstinate  fight  broke  through  the  lines  of  the
enemy,  whose  forces  numbered  more  than  double
his  own.  He  soon  gathered  his  men  at  Chiautla
and  began  the  campaign  anew,  capturing  Orizaba
in  October,  1812,  with  a  great  quantity  of  arms  and
ammunition.  Although  he  was  defeated  on  his
inarch  to  the  south  on  the  heights  of  Acultzingo,
he  soon  collected  5,000  men  in  Tehuacan  and
marched  on  Oajaca,  which  he  took  by  storm  on  25
Nov.  After  organizing  a  government  there,  he
marched  again  to  the  Pacific  coast,  invested  Aca
pulco.  and  occupied  the  city  on  15  Aug.,  1813.  and
after  he  had  captured  the  island  of  Roqueta,  in  a
night  attack,  the  fortress  surrendered  on  20  Aug.
Morelos  now  convoked  a  congress  from  the  south
western  provinces  that  had  submitted  to  the  inde
pendent  forces.  This  assembly  met  on  13  Sept.,
1813.  at  Chilpantzingo,  and  on  6  Nov.  the  solemn
declaration  of  independence  was  formally  signed
by  the  first  Mexican  congress.  Morelos  now  re
solved  to  establish  a  regular  government  in  Valla
dolid,  organized  his  forces  witli  those  of  the  other
patriots,  and  with  more  than  20,000  men  appeared
before  that  city  on  22  Dec.,  1813,  and  summoned
the  commander  to  surrender.  But  the  garrison
had  been  re-enforced,  and  in  the  night  of  24  Dec.
Agustin  de  Iturbide  made  a  daring  sally.  Mo-
relos's  army,  surprised  and  fighting  in  the  dark
ness,  was  totally  routed,  and  retired  to  Chupio.
After  the  second'  defeat  of  his  troops  at  Puruaran,
15  Jan.,  1814,  where  Matamoros  was  taken  prison
er,  Morelos  fled  toward  Acapulco.  With  what
forces  he  could  gather  he  joined  the  congress  at
Texrnacala,  and  that  body,  on  22  Oct.,  1814,  pro
claimed  at  Apatzingan  the  first  Mexican  constitu
tion,  and  appointed  Morelos  one  of  three  to  take
charge  of  the  executive.  Soon  there  were  dissen
sions  among  the  three,  and  congress,  not  feeling
secure  at  Uruapam  before  the  advancing  royalist
armies,  resolved  to  transfer  the  seat  of  government
to  Tehuacan,  and  ordered  Morelos  to  act  as  escort.
With  about  1,000  men  he  set  out  on  2!)  Sept.,  1815,
and,  although  pursued  by  several  bodies  of  Span
ish  troops,  he  was  able  to  conceal  his  movements
until  he  passed  Mescala  river,  but  at  Texmalaca  he
was  overtaken  by  Col.  Concha,  and  after  a  short
fight  was  totally  routed  on  5  Nov.  After  his  flight
he  was  recognized  by  a  Spanish  officer  who  for
merly  had  served  under  him,  and  delivered  to  Con
cha,  who  conducted  him  to  Mexico.  After  a  brief
trial  he  was  degraded  from  the  priesthood  and  con
demned  to  death.  While  in  prison  he  could  have
escaped  through  the  intervention  of  the  physician
of  the  prison,  Francisco  Montesdeoca,  but,  fearing
to  expose  the  latter  to  Spanish  vengeance,  he  re
fused  to  avail  himself  of  the  offer.  Fearing  a  popu
lar  commotion  if  the  execution  should  take  place
in  the  capital,  the  authorities  transported  him  early
on  22  Dec.  to  the  small  village  of  San  Cristobal
Ecatepec,  near  Guadeloupe,  and  there  he  was  shot
from  the  rear,  according  to  the  sentence,  as  a
traitor.  He  died  like  a  brave  man.  walking  with  a


MORENO


MOREY


393


firm  step  to  the  place  of  execution,  and,  when  the
order  was  given  that  he  should  be  blindfolded,  he
tied  the  handkerchief  himself.  As  a  military
leader,  Morelos  is  considered  one  of  the  best  of  his
time.  His  memory  and  name  are  greatly  revered
by  the  Mexicans,  and  his  remains,  which  were
buried  after  the  execution  in  the  church  of  San
Cristobal,  have  been  transferred  to  the  cathedral  of
Mexico,  and  are  there  preserved,  together  with
those  of  Miguel  Hidalgo  and  other  heroes  of  the
independence.  His  native  city  was  called  Morelia
in  his  honor,  and  the  state  that  has  been  formerl
from  a  part  of  the  former  state  of  the  Valley  of
Mexico,  containing  Cuautla,  where  he  distinguished
himself,  has  been  named  Morelos.  Several  districts
in  other  states  have  also  received  his  name.

MORENO,  Francisco  (mo-ray-no),  Argentine
explorer,  b.  in Buenos  Ayres,  7 Oct.,  1827. He
bugan his studies  in  the  University  of  Cordova  j
and  finished  at  Buenos  Ayres,  where  he  was  grad-  |
xiated  in  1854  as  doctor in natural  science. He  ;
taught  this  branch  in  the  latter  university,  but  his
favorite  study  was  anthropology,  and  in  1872  he
began  a  series  of  exploring  expeditions  that  have
made  him  well  known. In  January,  1876,  he  ex
plored  Lake  Xahuel-Huapi,  in  the  southern  Andes,  |
and  discovered,  on  14  Feb.,  1877,  Lake  San  Martin.
He  also  explored  numerous  rivers in  Patagonia,
and  on  4  March  of  the  same  year  discovered  the
volcano  Chalten. In  1880  he  went  on  a  second  ex
ploring  expedition  to  the  territory  of  Patagonia,
where  he  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  Pehuelche  In
dians  and  condemned  to  death,  but  escaped  on  11
March,  one  day  before  the  one  that  was  appointed
for the execution. In 1882-'3 he explored  the  !
Andes  from  Bolivia  southward,  and  in  1884-'o  he
made  new  explorations  of  the  territory  south  of  the  i
Rio  Negro  and  of  Patagonia. He  is  director  of  the
Anthropological  museum  of  Buenos  Ayres,  chief  of
the  Argentine  exploring  commission  of  the  south
ern  territories,  and  member  of  numerous  European  ;
scientific  societies. He  has  published  "  Description  !
des  cimetieres  et  parages  prehistoriques  de  Pata
gonia  "  (Paris,  1874);  "Noticias  sobre  algunas  an-
tigiiedades  descubiertas  en  la  Provincia  de  Buenos
Aires  "  (Buenos  Ayres, 1874) ;  "  Viage  a  la  Pata
gonia  Septentrional  "  (1876);  "Sur  des  restes  d'in-
dustrie  humaine  prehistorique  dans  la  republique  ,
Argentine  " (Stockholm,  1876) ; "  El  estudio del  ;
hombre Sud- Americano"  (Buenos  Ayres, 1878);  i
"  Descripcion  fisica  de  la  Patagonia  y  Tierra  del  i
Fuego:  Las  razas  estinguidas  de  la  Republica  Ar
gentina  "  (1881) ;  and  several  other  works.

MORENO.  Mariano,  Argentine  lawyer,  b.  in
Buenos  Ayres,  23  Sept.,  1778:  d.  at  sea,  4  March,
1811.  He  studied  law  in  the  University  of  Buenos
Ayres,  and  in  the  year  1800  finished  his  studies  at
Charcas  or  Chuquisaca,  where  he  was  graduated  as
doctor  in  law,  and  admitted  to  the.  bar.  In  1805  he
returned  to  Buenos  Ayres,  where  he  presented  a
noteworthy  memorial  to  the  viceroy  about  free
trade,  and  was  appointed  attorney  of  the  audiencia.
He  took  an  active  part  in  freeing  the  colony  from
Spanish  rule,  and  was  appointed  on  25  May.  1810,
secretary-general  of  the  first  governing  junta.  At
the  same  time  he  was  editor  of  "  La  Gaceta."  He
was  the  moving  spirit  of  the  junta,  but,  being  an
advocate  of  centralization,  he  was  soon  opposed  by
its  president,  Cornelio  Saavedra.  and,  as  he  pro
tested  in  vain  against  the  admission  of  deputies
from  the  interior  states  to  the  junta,  he  resigned
on  18  Dec.  In  January,  1811,  he  was  appointed  the
first  representative  of  the  new  nation  to  England,
but  died  on  his  way  thither. — His  brother.  Manu
el,  Argentine  diplomatist,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayres  in


1781 ;  d.  there  in  1857.  studied  law  in  his  native
city,  and  had  attained  reputation  at  the  bar  when,
in  1811,  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  legation  in
England,  but  did  not  serve  on  account  of  the  death
of  his  brother.  He  remained  two  years  in  England,
and  after  his  return  to  his  native  country  partici
pated  in  the  political  events  of  1815,  and  was  ban
ished  to  the  United  States,  where  he  resided  till
1821.  On  his  return  he  was  elected  deputy  to  the
junta  de  representantes,  which  place  he  occupied
till  1826.  when  he  became  representative  of  the
Provincia  Oriental,  or  Uruguay,  to  the  constituent
congress,  and  was  also  secretary  of  foreign  relations
of  the  province  of  Buenos  Ayres.  In  1828  he  was
appointed  minister  plenipotentiary  of  the  Argen
tine  Federation  to  England,  where  he  remained  for
more  than  eight  years.  On  his  return  he  was  ap
pointed  librarian  of  the  National  library  of  Buenos
Ayres,  which  post  he  held  till  his  death.  He  wrote
"  Vida  y  memorias  del  Dr.  Mariano  Moreno,  secre-
tario  de  la  junta  de  Buenos  Ayres.  con  una  idea
sobre  las  revoluciones  del  Rio  de  la  Plata.  Mejico,
Caracas,  etc."  (London,.  181 2;  enlarged  ed.,  1830),
which  was  translated  into  English.  He  was  also
the  author  of  pamphlets  on  diplomatic  questions.

MOREY,  Samuel,  inventor,  b.  in  Hebron,
Conn.,  23  Oct.,  1762 ;  d.  in  Fairlee,  Vt..  17  April,
1848.  He  was  a  son  of  Israel  Morey,  who  moved
with  his  family  from  Hebron  to  Orford,  N.  IL,  in
1766.  The  son  was  endowed  with  great  ingenuity
and  superior  mechanical  and  scientific  talents.  He
acquired  large  landed  estates  on  both  sides  of  Con
necticut  river,  at  Orford,  N.  H.,  and  Fairlee,  Vt.
The  last  seven  years  of  his  life  were  spent  on  his
Fairlee  estate,  where  for  many  years  he  had  been
extensively  engaged  in  lumbering.  There  his  en
gineering  skill  is  traceable  in  the  remains  of  chutes
built  on  West  mountains  to  slide  the  pine  logs
from  inaccessible  steeps  to  Fairlee  pond  years
before  Napoleon  procured  lumber  in  the  Alps  by
the  same  means.  When  an  attempt  was  made  to
open  the  Connecticut  to  navigation  from  Windsor,
Conn.,  to  Olcott's  Falls,  Lebanon,  N.  H.,  he  planned
and  built  the  locks  at  Bellows  Falls.  As  early  as
1780  he  began  to  devote  his  time  to  the  investiga
tion  of  steam,  heat,  and  light.  He  was  early  in
correspondence  with  Prof.  Benjamin  Silliman,  of
Yale  college,  and  contributed  articles  to  the"  Jour
nal  of  Science,"  in  which  he  described  a  revolving
steam-engine,  patented  by  him,  14  July,  1815.  As
early  as  1790  Capt.  Morey  turned  his  attention  to
the  matter  of  "  improving  the  steam-engine,  and
in  applying  it  to  the  purpose  of  propelling  boats,"
at  Orford.  N.  H..  on  the  Connecticut.  He  built  a
boat  and  placed  in  it  a  steam-engine  of  his  own
manufacture,  and  with  one  companion  navigated
the  river  at  a  speed  of  four  miles  an  hour.  The
boat  was  propelled  by  a  paddle-wheel  in  the  prow.
When  arrangements  'were  sufficiently  matured  for
exhibition,  he  went  to  New  York,  on  request,  built
a  boat,  and  spent  three  successive  summers  there
in  experimenting  with  it  and  propelling  it.  Family
sickness  called  him  home,  and  he  had  the  boat
taken  to  Hartford,  Conn.,  as  a  more  convenient
place,  and  ran  it  in  the  presence  of  many  persons.
The  next  season,  having  made  improvements  in
the  engine,  he  returned  to  New  York  and  applied
the  power  to  a  wheel  in  the  stern,  which  impelled
the  boat  at  a  speed  of  about  five  miles  an  hour.
With  this  steamboat  he  made  a  trial-trip  from  the
ferry  to  Greenwich  and  back,  accompanied  by
Chancellor  Robert  R.  Livingston  and  others,  who
expressed  great  satisfaction  at  the  boat's  perform
ance.  Chancellor  Livingston  had  visited  Morey  at
Orford,  where  he  had  seen  and  ridden  in  his  first


394


MORFIT


MORGAN


steamboat ;  and,  at  Livingston's  request  and  ex
pense,  Morey  visited  him  at  Clermont.  Morey  con
tinued  his  experiments  another  summer,  encour
aged  by  the  chancellor's  promises  that,  if  he
succeeded  in  running  the  boat  eight  miles  an  hour,
he  would  give  him  a  considerable  sum,  which  was
understood  to  be  $100,000.  For  what  had  been
accomplished  Livingston  offered  Morey  $7,000  for
a  patent  for  the  North  river  to  Amboy.  Morey
did  not  accept  this  offer.  On  25  March,  1795,  a
patent  was  issued  to  Samuel  Morey  for  a  steam-
engine,  the  power  to  be  applied  by  crank  motion
to  propel  boats  of  any  size.  This  patent  is  now  in
the  custody  of  the  New  Hampshire  historical  socie
ty,  in  Concord.  The  patent-office  records  show  that
on  27  March,  1799,  and  17  Nov.,  1800.  patents  were
issued  to  Morey  for  the  application  of  steam,  and
another  in  1803  for  a  steam-engine.  Morey  con
tinued  his  exertions,  and  in  June,  1797,  built
another  steamboat  at  Bordentown,  N.  J.,  on  the
Delaware,  which  he  propelled  by  means  of  two
paddle-wheels,  one  on  each  side.  These  wheels
were  more  effective  than  any  method  tried,  and  the
boat,  was  openly  exhibited  in  Philadelphia.  By
these  successes  Mr.  Morey  became  widely  known
in  New  England  and  the  middle  states.  From
1790  till  1820,  seven  or  eight  patents  were  issued
to  him  for  improvements  to  the  steam-engine  and
the  application  of  steam.  Every  obstacle  seemed
to  Capt.  Morey  to  be  overcome  in  the  construction
of  steamboats'on  a  large  scale,  and  arrangements
were  made  with  capitalists  to  put  steamboats  into
practical  operation,  but  a  series  of  misfortunes  to
him  and  others  deprived  them  of  the  means  of
prosecuting  their  design.

MORFIT,  Campbell,  chemist,  b.  in  Hercula-
neum,  Mo.,  19  Nov.,  1820.  He  was  educated  at
Columbian  university,  Georgetown,  D.  C.,  but  be
fore  graduation  took  up  the  study  of  chemistry  in
the  private  laboratory  of  James  C.  Booth,  in  Phila
delphia.  Subsequently  he  entered  a  laboratory
for  the  manufacture  of  commercial  chemicals,  and
in  time  became  its  owner,  receiving  for  his  prod
ucts  medals  from  the  American  and  Franklin
institutes.  Meanwhile  he  originated  the  chemical
department  of  the  Maryland  institute,  but  declined
to  take  charge  of  it,  and  in  1854  became  professor
of  applied  chemistry  in  the  University  of  Mary
land,  where  he  remained  for  four  years.  In  1858
he  went  to  New  York,  and  there  followed  his  pro
fession  until  1861,  when  he  removed  to  London,
England,  where  he  now  resides.  His  work  while
in  the  United  States  included  researches  in  guanos,
salts,  sugars,  the  analyses  of  coals,  gum  mesquite,
and  glycerine,  accounts  of  which  he  published  in
the  scientific  journals  of  the  time,  but  since  his
residence  abroad  he  has  devoted  more  attention  to
the  improvement  of  technical  processes,  notably  in
the  preparation  of  condensed  food  rations,  the
manufacture  of  paper,  the  refining  of  oils,  and
other  similar  work.  During  the  Native-American
riots  in  Philadelphia  he  held  the  office  of  major  of
the  2d  brigade,  and  he  received  the  honorary
degree  of  M.  D.  from  the  University  of  Maryland.
He  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  is  a  fel
low  of  the  Chemical  society  of  London,  and  of  the
Institute  of  chemistry.  Besides  writing  numerous
scientific  papers,  he  was  joint  author  with  James
C.  Booth  of  a  report  to  the  ordnance  department
on  "  Gun  Metal  "  in  1853,  from  investigations  by
him  in  a  laboratory  that  he  established  on  his  own
plan  at  Pikesville'  arsenal,  Md.  Dr.  Morfit  pub
lished  "  Chemistry  as  applied  to  the  Manufacture  of
Soaps  and  Candles  "  (Philadelphia,  1847) ;  "  Chemi
cal  and  Pharmaceutical  Manipulations  "  (1848) ;  a


revision  of  the  American  edition  of  Noad's  "  Chem
ical  Analysis"  (1849);  "Progress  of  Chemical
Arts,"  with  Dr.  James  C.  Booth  (Washington,
1851);  "The  Arts  of  Tanning  and  Currying"
(Philadelphia,  1852);  "Perfumery,  its  Use  and
Manufacture"  (1853);  "  Oleic  Soaps"  (London.
1871)  ;  and  "  Pure  Fertilizers  and  Phosphates  "
(1873).  He  was  also  co-editor  with  Dr.  Booth  of
the  "Encyclopaedia  of  Chemistry"  (1851). — His
brother,  Clarence,  chemist,  b.  in  Washington,
D.  C.,  16  May,  1828.  studied  chemistry  with  James
C.  Booth  (q.  v.)  in  Philadelphia,  with  whom  he  was
connected  in  the  U.  S.  mint.  Subsequently  ho
filled  the  office  of  assistant  melter  and  refiner  in
the  U.  S.  assay  office  in  New  York  city  for  seven
years.  Meanwhile  he  was  also  associated  with  his
brother  in  his  analytical  work  in  New  York  city,
and  was  joint  author  with  his  brother  of  the  sec
ond  edition  of  "  Chemical  and  Pharmaceutical  Ma
nipulations"  (Philadelphia,  1857).

MORFOR1),  Henry,  author,  b.  in  New  Mon-
mouth,  N.  J.,  10  March,  1823 ;  d.  in  New  York-
city,  5  May,  1881.  He  entered  mercantile  life  at
an  early  age,  kept  a  country  store,  and  was  post
master  in  his  native  town,  but  contributed  to  pe
riodicals  from  the  age  of  seventeen.  He  estab
lished  the  "  New  Jersey  Standard  "  at  Middlctown
Point  in  1852,  in  1856  removed  to  New  York,  and
from  that  date  until  1868  was  connected  with  the
editorial  management  of  several  papers.  He  trav
elled  in  Europe  in  1865,  publishing  afterward
"Over  Sea"  (New  York,  1867),  and  again  in  1867
when  he  wrote  "  Paris  in  '67"  (1867),  and  subse
quently  made  various  tours  in  connection  with  the
authorship  of  "  Morford's  Short-trip  Guide  to
Europe,"  which  was  published  every  year.  He  then
established  a  "  Short-trip  Guide  to  America  "  for
European  publication.  From  1861  till  1868  he  was
clerk  of  the  New  York  court  of  common  pleas.
Mr.  Morford  wrote  several  plays,  the  best  known  of
which  are  "  The  Merchant's  Honor,"  and  an  Irish
drama,  "  The  Bells  of  Shandon,"  and  was  editor
and  manager  of  the  "  Brooklyn  New  Monthly  Maga
zine"  from  its  first  number,  January,  1880,  until
his  death.  He  published  two  volumes  of  poems  en
titled  "  Rhymes  of  Twenty  Years "  (New  York,
1859),  and  "  Rhymes  of  an  Editor  "  (London,  1873) ;
humorous  sketches  entitled  "  Sprees  and  Splashes"
(New  York,  1863) ;  and  several  novels,  which  in
clude  "  Shoulder -Straps"  (Philadelphia,  1863);
"The  Coward"  (1864);  "The  Days  of  Shoddy'
(1864);  "Utterly  Wrecked"  (New  York,  18d6);
and  "Only  a  Commoner"  (London,  1871).

MORGAN,  Abel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Alltgoch,
Cardiganshire,  Wales,  in  1673;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  16  Dec.,  1722.  He  was  a  son  of  Morgan  ap
Rhydderch  ap  Dafydd  ap  Grufydd.  Morgan  ap
Rhydderch's  brother,  John  ap  Rhydderch,  was  a
famous  poet  and  flourished  from  1700  to  1730.
Their  grandfather,  Dafydd  ap  Grufydd,  also  wrote
many  books.  During  one  of  the  violent  persecu
tions  in  Wales,  Morgan  ap  Rhydderch  united  with
Uie  Rhydwilym  Baptist  church,  and  in  1668  was
chosen  a  deacon  and  next  year  was  ordained  as
such.  His  children,  as  was  the  custom  at  that
time,  took  as  their  surname  the  Christian  name  of
the  father.  Abel  early  gave  evidence  of  remarka
ble  talents.  He  began  to  preach  at  Llanwenarth,
in  1692,  when  only  nineteen.  In  1696  he  was
called  to  become  pastor  of  the  church  at  Blaeneg-
went,  in  Monmouthshire,  and  ordained  there.  He
seems  to  have  been  very  popular  in  the  princi
pality,  arid  in  the  various  associations  was  called
upon  to  preach  the  introductory  sermon,  and  to
answer  queries  on  questions  of  doctrine  or  disci-


MORGAN


MORGAN


395


pline.  Meanwhile  he  corresponded  with  his  broth
er  Enoch,  who  had  come  in  1701  to  this  country
with  a  colony  of  Welshmen,  and  who.  after  a  brief
residence  at  Pcnnepek,  settled  in  Pencader  Hun
dred.  Abel  was  led  to  regard  the  colonies  as  a
field  where  he  might  be  of  great  use  to  his  coun
trymen,  and,  following  his  brother,  he  reached
Philadelphia  in  February,  1712,  and  became  pastor
of  the  Pennepek  church,  and  also  of  the  Philadel
phia  church,  then  its  branch  or  mission.  He  or
ganized  new  churches  in  Chester  and  Montgomery
counties,  and  also  in  Xew  Jersey.  Mr.  Morgan
soon  saw  the  need  of  theological  books  for  young
ministers,  and  obtained  supplies  from  Thomas
Hollis  and  John  Taylor,  of  London.  In  addition
to  his  pastoral  duties  he  translated  into  Welsh  the
"  Baptist  Confession  of  Faith,"  but  it  was  never
printed.  The  greatest  work  of  his  life  was  the
preparation  of  the  "  Cyd  Gordiad,"  or  concordance
of  the  holy  Scriptures — a  work  that  caused  his
name  to  be  held  in  great  love  and  veneration,  espe
cially  by  his  countrymen.  It  was  completed  only
a  short  time  before  his  death,  but  was  not  printed
until  1730.  It  was  the  second  Welsh  book,  so  far
as  is  known,  that  was  printed  in  this  country.  It
was  revised  and  corrected  for  the  press  in  March,
1730,  by  a  Welsh  Quaker,  John  Cadwalader,  and  the
author's  brother  Enoch,  and  was  dedicated  to  "  The
Honorable  David  Lloyd,  Esquire,  Chief  Justice  of
Pennsylvania.''  It  was  printed  by  Samuel  Keimer
and  David  Harry  (Philadelphia,  1730).  Rev.  Mor
gan  Edwards,  author  of  •'  Materials  toward  a  His
tory  of  the  Baptists  in  Pennsylvania,"  says  of  Mr.
Morgan  :  "  He  was  a  great  and  good  man,  and  is
held  in  dear  remembrance  by  all  who  knew  him."
He  has  left  many  well-known  Baptists  among  his
descendants  in  Pennsylvania,  New  Jersey,  and  New
York. — His  brother,  Enoch,  clergyman,  b.  in  Allt-
goch,  Cardiganshire,  South  Wales,  in  1076 ;  d.  in
Delaware,  25  March,  1740.  emigrated  to  this  coun
try  in  1701,  first  settling  at  Pennepek,  near  Phila
delphia,  and  then  in  1703  going  to  Iron  Hill,  in
Pencader  Hundred,  Del.,  which  was  afterward
known  as  "  The  Welsh  Tract,"  from  the  large  num
ber  of  Welshmen  that  had  settled  there.  He  be
came  the  third  pastor  of  the  Welsh  Tract  Baptist
church,  and  so  remained  until  his  death. — Enoch's
son.  Abel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Welsh  Tract,  Del.,  18
April,  1713 ;  d.  in  Middletown,  N.  J.,  24  Nov.,  1785,
was  educated  at  Pencader  academy.  He  was  or
dained  in  1734  as  a  Baptist  minister,  and  in  1738
was  chosen  pastor  of  the  church  at  Middletown,
Monmoiiih  co.,  N.  J.,  where  he  was  when  the  bat
tle  of  Monmouth  occurred.  He  was  a  thorough
patriot,  and  his  sermons  are  full  of  devotion  to  the
cause  of  America.  He  was  a  diligent  student  and
a  skilful  disputant,  engaging  in  many  discussions
on  the  subject  of  baptism.  His  chief  opponent  was
Rev.  Samuel  Finley,  D.  D.,  president  of  Princeton,
who  wrote  a  work  called  "  A  Charitable  Plea  for
the  Speechless."  To  this  Mr.  Morgan  replied  in
"  Anti-Pa?do  Rantisin,  or  Mr.  Samuel  Finley's  •  Plea
for  the  Speechless'  examined  and  refuted"  (Phila
delphia,  1747).  Dr.  Finley  published  a  rejoinder,
and  this  was  answered  by  Mr.  Morgan  in  a  "  Re
ply  "  (1750).  Mr.  Morgan's  valuable  library  was
bequeathed  by  him  to  Middletown  Baptist  church,
where  it  still  remains.

MORGAN,  Charles,  merchant,  b.  in  Killing-
worth  (now  Clinton).  Conn.,  21  April,  1795:  d.  in
New  York  city,  8  May.  1878.  His  uncle.  John
Morgan,  of  Hartford,  was  the  owner  of  the  first
ship  that  carried  the  American  flag  to  China.
Charles  was  entirely  self-educated,  and  in  1809
went  to  New  York,  where  he  was  a  clerk,  and  after


ward  opened  a  shop  in  Peck  slip  for  the  sale  of
ship-stores  and  chandlery.  Subsequently  he  im
ported  goods  from  the  West  Indies  and  southern
ports,  and  became  sole  owner  of  a  line  of  sailing-
vessels  in  the  West  India  trade.  He  ran  the  first
steamer  between  New  York  and  Charleston,  S.  C.,
and  built,  with  other  merchants,  the  "  William
Gibbons/'  the  "  Columbia,"  and  the  "  New  York."
In  1836  he  sent  the  first  steamer  from  New  Orleans
to  Texas,  and  in  that  year  he  became  the  proprie
tor  of  a  large  foundry  and  machine-shop  in  New
York,  known  as  the  Morgan  iron-works,  which
manufactured  steam-engines,  boilers,  and  machin
ery  for  many  of  the  heaviest  marine  engines  in  the
American  merchant  and  naval  service.  During
the  civil  war  the  greater  part  of  his  fleet  was  char
tered  by  the  U.  S.  government.  Subsequently
he  established  the  Morgan  line  of  steamers  in
the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  soon  had  almost  a  mo
nopoly  of  the  trade  of  the  Gulf  ports.  He  was
also  sole  owner  and  director  of  the  old  Opelou-
sas,  afterward  known  as  Morgan's  Louisiana  and
Texas  railroad,  which  he  supplemented  by  build
ing  a  road  from  Indianola  to  Cuero,  Tex.,  and.
in  order  to  perfect  his  line  of  communication,  he
dredged  a  steamboat  channel  through  Atchafa-
laya  bay.  He  constructed  at  Indianola  the  finest
wharf  in  the  southern  states,  which  was  2,500  feet
in  length.  He  also  purchased  and  built  steamers
for  the  California  trade,  which  were  used  on  the
Panama  and  Nicaragua  routes.  His  enterprises
were  managed  entirely  by  himself.  Morgan  City,
La.,  was  named  in  his  honor.  Mr.  Morgan  gave
$50,000  for  the  endowment  of  the  Morgan  school
in  Clinton,  Conn.,  which  was  erected  at  a  cost  of
$60.000,  and  dedicated  on  7  Dec.,  1871.  His  sec
ond  wife  gathered  a  large  and  costly  collection  of
paintings  and  other  art  objects,  which,  after  her
death,  was  sold  in  New  York  city  in  1886.

MORGAN,  Charles  Hale,  soldier,  b.  in  Man-
lius,  N.  Y.,  6  Nov.,  1834;  d.  on  Alcatraz  island,
CaL,  20  Dec.,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1857,  assigned  to  the  4th
artillery,  and  took  part  in  the  Utah  expedition  of
1859.  He  became  1st  lieutenant  on  1  April,  1861,
and  was  engaged  in  the  western  Virginia  opera
tions  and  in  the  defences  of  Washington  from  De
cember  of  that  year  till  March.  1862.  He  served
in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  during  the  peninsu
lar  campaign,  was  promoted  captain  on  5  Aug.,
1862,  and  in  October  appointed  chief  of  artillery
of  the  2d  corps,  He  held  a  volunteer  commission
as  lieutenant -colonel  on  the  staff  from  1  Jan.,  1863,
till  21  May,  1865.  He  engaged  in  the  Rappahan-
nock  campaign,  and  was  brevetted  major  for  ser
vices  at  Gettysburg,  lieutenant-colonel  for  the  ac
tion  at  Bristoe  Station.  Va.,  colonel  for  Spottsyl-
vania,  colonel  of  volunteers,  1  Aug.,  1864,  for  the
Wilderness  campaign,  and  brigadier-general  of
volunteers.  2  Dec..  1864,  for  services  as  chief-of-
staff  of  the  2d  army  corps  during  the  campaign
before  Richmond,  Va.  He  assisted  in  organizing
an  army  corps  of  veterans  in  Washington,  D.  C..
in  1864-^5,  and  was  assistant  inspector-general  and
chief-of-staff  to  Gen.  Hancock,  commanding  the
middle  military  division  from  22  Feb.  till  22  June,
1865.  From  that  date  till  7  Aug..  1865,  he  was  a
member  of  the  board  to  examine  candidates  for
commissions  in  colored  regiments.  He  was  bre
vetted  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army.  13  March,
1865,  for  services  in  the  field  during  the  war,  and
made  full  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  21
May,  1865.  He  was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer
service,  15  Jan.,  1866.  and  from  10  March  to  26
June,  1866,  served  on  a  board  of  officers  to  make-


396


MORGAN


MORGAN


recommendations  for  brevet  promotions  in  the
army.  He  was  on  recruiting  service  from  9  Aug.,
1860,  till  15  April,  18(57,  and  became  major  of  the
4th  artillery  on  5  Feb.,  1807.  He  then  served  in
the  artillery-school  at  Fortress  Monroe  and  other
stations  on"  the  Atlantic  coast,  and  at  the  time  of
his  death  commanded  Alcatraz  island,  Cal.

MORGAN,  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in  New  Jersey
about  1736 ;  d.  in  Winchester,  Va.,  6  July,  1802.
He  was  of  Welsh  extraction,  but  little  or  nothing
is  known  of  his  parents  or  of  his  own  childhood.

Early  in  1754  he  re
moved  to  Charles-
town,  Jeff  erson  co.,
Va.,  and  next  year
he  began  his  mili
tary  career  as  a
teamster  in  Gen.
Braddock's  army.
In  the  rout  at  the
Monongahela  he
did  good  service
in  bringing  away
the  wounded,  and
about  this  time  he
became  acquaint
ed  with  Washing
ton.  Afterward
he  was  attached
to  the  quartermas
ter's  department,
and  his  duty  was
to  haul  supplies  io  the  military  posts  along  the
frontier.  In  1757,  having  knocked  down  a  Brit
ish  lieutenant  who  had  struck  him  with  the  tlat
of  his  sword,  he  was  punished,  it  is  said,  with
five  hundred  lashes.  Shortly  afterward,  at  the
head  of  a  few  backwoodsmen,  he  defeated  a  small
force  of  Frenchmen  and  Indians,  and  received
from  Gov.  Diuwiddie  an  ensign's  commission.
While  on  his  way  to  Winchester  with  despatches
he  became  engaged  in  a  fierce  woodland  fight
with  the  Indians,  in  which  nearly  all  his  com
rades  were  slain,  and  Morgan  himself  was  shot
through  the  neck  with  a  musket-ball.  Almost
fainting  with  the  wound,  which  at  the  moment
he  supposed  to  be  fatal,  he  was  resolved  never
theless  not  to  leave  his  scalp  in  the  hands  of  an
Indian,  and  falling  forward  with  his  arms  rightly
clasped  about  the  neck  of  his  stalwart  horse,  though
mists  were  gathering  before  his  eyes,  he  spurred
away  through  the  forest  paths,  until  his  foremost
Indian  pursuer,  unable  to  come  up  with  him.  hurled
his  tomahawk  after  him  with  a  yell  of  baffled  rage,
and  gave  up  the  chase.  This  was  the  only  wound
he  ever  received.

About  1702  Morgan  obtained  a  grant  of  land  a
few  miles  east  of  Winchester,  and  devoted  himself
to  farming  and  stock-raising.  He  married  Abigail
Bailey,  daughter  of  a  farmer  in  that  neighborhood,
a  woman  of  rare  beauty  and  lofty  character.  He
named  his  home  the  "Soldier's  Rest,"  but  was  soon
called  away  from  it  by  Pontiac's  war,  in  which  he
served  as  a  lieutenant.  From  1765  till  1775  he
prospered  as  a  farmer,  and  acquired  considerable
property.  In  1771  he  was  commissioned  captain  of
the  militia  of  Frederick  county,  and  in  1773  served
in  Lord  Dunmore's  war  on  the  frontier.  In  June,
1775,  congress  called  for  ten  companies  of  riflemen
from  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  and  Maryland,  to  join
the  Continental  army  besieging  Boston.  Morgan
was  chosen  captain  of  one  of  the  Virginia  com
panies,  consisting  of  ninety-six  men,  and  with  it
arrived  in  Cambridge  about  the  middle  of  July.  A
month  later  he  was  detached,  at  the  head  of  three


companies,  to  take  part  in  Arnold's  memorable
march  against  (Quebec  through  the  wilderness  of
Maine.  On  13  Nov.  he  and  his  men  were  the  first
to  cross  the  St.  Lawrence  and  reconnoitre  the
approaches  to  Quebec,  which  was  too  strongly  de
fended  to  be  attacked  with  any  hope  of  success.
In  the  great  assault  of  New- Year's  morning,  1770,
when  Montgomery  was  slain  and  Arnold  disabled,
Morgan  stormed  the  battery  opposed  to  him,  and
fought  his  way  far  into  the  town  ;  but,  as  his  charge
was  not  properly  supported,  its  success  only  isolated
him,  so  that  he  and  his  detachment  were  surrounded
and  captured.  Gen.  Carleton,  who  admired  his
bravery,  treated  him  kindly,  and  in  the  following
summer  released  him  on  parole.  Morgan  then  went
home  to  Virginia.  In  November,  at  Washington's
earnest  recommendation,  congress  gave  him  a
colonel's  commission.  About  the  beginning  of
1777,  having  been  duly  exchanged  and  released
from  parole,  lie  raised  a  regiment  of  rifles  and  joined
the  army  at  Morristown,  N.  J.,  late  in  March.  In
the  extremely  skilful  campaign  of  the  following
June,  in  which  Washington  prevented  Howe  from
crossing  New  Jersey.  Morgan's  services  in  reconnoi
tring  were  invaluable.  During  July  the  progress  of
Burgoyne,  in  his  descent  into  northern  New  York,
made  it  desirable  to  effect  as  strong  a  concentration
as  possible  to  oppose  him,  and  on  10  Aug.  Morgan
was  sent  with  his  regiment  to  join  the  army  near
Stillwater.  of  which  Gates  had  lately  taken  com
mand.  From  this  force  of  about  500  picked  rifle
men,  said  Washington  in  a  letter  to  Gov.  George
Clinton,  "  I  expect  the  most  eminent  services,"  and
he  was  not  disappointed.  In  the  bloody  battle  of
Freeman's  Farm,  19  Sept.,  in  which  Arnold  frus
trated  Burgoyne's  attempt  to  dislodge  the  American
left  wing  from  Bern  is  Heights,  Morgan  played  a
principal  part ;  and  in  the  final  conflict  of  7  Oct.,
in  which  the  British  army  was  wrecked,  his  services
were  equally  eminent.  It  is  said  that  when  Bur-
goyne  was  introduced  to  Morgan,  after  the  sur
render  at  Saratoga,  he  seized  him  by  the  hand  and
exclaimed,  "  My  dear  sir,  you  command  the  finest
regiment  in  the  world!"  In  the  great  work  of
overthrowing  Burgoyne,  the  highest  credit  is  due
to  Morgan,  along  with  Arnold,  Herkimer,  and
Stark.  After  the  victory,  Gates  was  unwilling  to
send  Morgan  and  his  regiment  back  to  Washington,
and  it  was  only  with  some  difficulty  and  by  send
ing  Col.  Hamilton  with  a  special  message  that  the
sorely  tried  commander-in-chief  succeeded  in  ob
taining  them.  At  length,  on  18  Nov.,  1777.  Morgan
joined  Washington  at  White.mar.sh,  near  Philadel
phia,  in  time  to  take  part  in  the  affair  of  Chestnut.
Hill,  8  Dec.  lie  served  in  the  Monmonth  campaign,
June,  1778,  though  he  was  not  present  in  the  battle
of  the  28th.  After  the  battle  he  joined  in  the  pur
suit  of  the  enemy,  and  took  many  prisoners.  A
year  later,  30  June,  1779,  sharing  in  the  dissatisfac
tion  with  which  many  of  the  officers  viewed  the
conduct  of  congress,  especially  with  regard  to  pro
motions,  and  finding  his  health  seriously  impaired.
Morgan  sent  in  his  resignation  and  went  home
to  Winchester.

When  Gates  took  command  of  the  southern
army  in  June,  1780,  Morgan  was  urged  to  enter
the  service  again,  but  he  refused  to  serve  as  a
colonel,  because  he  would  thus  be  outranked  by  so
many  commanders  of  state  militias  that  his  move
ments  would  be  seriously  hampered  and  his  useful
ness  impaired.  As  congress  declined  to  promote
him.  he  remained  at  home;  but,  after  the  great
disaster  at  Cainden,  he  declared  that  it  was  no  time
to  let  personal  considerations  have  any  weight,  and
he  forthwith  joined  Gates  at  Hillsborough  in  bep-


MORGAN


MORGAN


397


tember.  At  length,  13  Oct.,  he  was  promoted
brigadier-general,  and  it  was  not  long  before  con
gress  had  reason  to  congratulate  itself  upon  this
tardy  act  of  justice,  which  resulted  in  placing
Morgan  in  a  situation  where  his  great  powers  could
be  made  of  the  utmost  service  to  the  country.
When  Greene,  in  December,  took  command  of  the
southern  army,  he  sent  Morgan,  with  (JOO  men,  to
threaten  the  important  inland  posts  of  Augusta
and  Ninety-Six,  and  to  co-operate  with  the  moun
tain  militia.  In  order  to  protect  his  communica
tions  with  these  interior  posts,  C'ornwallis  sent  the
enterprising  Tarleton,  with  1.100  men,  to  dispose
of  Morgan.  On  the  approach  of  the  enemy  Morgan
retreated  to  a  grazing  ground  known  as  the  Cow-
pens,  where,  on  a  long  rising  slope,  he  awaited
Tarleton's  attack.  The  American  forces  were
drawn  up  in  two  lines,  the  militia,  under  Pickens,
in  front,  and  the  Continentals,  under  Howard,  150
yards  behind.  Some  distance  behind  these  waited
Col.  William  Washington,  with  his  admirable
cavalry.  When  the  British  attacked  Pickens's  line,
after  a  brief  resistance,  the  militia  broke  into  two
parts  and  retired  behind  Howard's  line  of  Conti
nentals.  As  the  British  advanced  to  attack  this
line  it  retreated  slowly,  so  as  to  give  Pickens  time
to  re-form  his  militia.  Presently  Pickens  swept
forward  in  a  great  semicircle  around  Howard's
right,  and  attacked  the  British  in  their  left  flank.
At  the  same  moment  Col.  Washington  swept  around
Howard's  left  and  charged  upon  the  enemy's  right
flank;  while  Howard's  line,  after  a  few  deadly
volleys  at  thirty  yards,  rushed  forward  with  levelled
bayonets.  Thus  terribly  entrapped,  most  of  the
British  threw  down  their  arms  and  surrendered,
while  the  remainder  were  scattered  in  flight.  They
lost  280  in  killed  and  wounded,  000  prisoners,  two
field-pieces,  and  1.000  stand  of  arms.  Their  loss
was  nearly  equal  l.o  the  American  force  engaged.
Only  270  escaped,  among  them  Tarleton,  who
barely  saved  himself  in  a  furious  single  combat
with  Col.  Washington.  The  American  loss  in
this  astonishing  action  was  twelve  killed  and  sixty-
one  wounded.  In  point  of  tactics  it  was  the  most
brilliant  battle  of  the  Revolutionary  war,  and  it
still  appears  brilliant  when  judged  by  the  standards
that  we  apply  to  the  work  of  the  greatest  masters
of  the  military  art.

This  was  a  crippling  blow  to  Cornwallis.  for  it
deprived  him  of  all  his  most  effective  light  infantry.
The  only  road  by  which  Morgan  could  rejoin
Greene  lay  northward  across  the  fords  of  the  Ca-
tawba.  and  Cornwallis  was  nearer  than  himself  to
these  fords ;  but  by  a  superb  march  Morgan  reached
the  river  first,  crossed  it,  and  kept  on  into  North
Carolina.  This  movement,  after  Greene's  arrival,
was  developed  into  that  masterly  series  of  ma
noeuvres  which  ended  in  the  battle  at  Guilford,  and
in  Cornwallis's  consequent  retreat  into  Virginia.
But,  before  the  campaign  was  completed,  Morgan
was  attacked  so  severely  by  rheumatism  that  he
was  obliged  to  quit  active  work  and  go  home,  10
Feb.,  1781.  By  June  he  had  sufficiently  recovered
to  command  the  troops  that  suppressed  Claypool's
loyalist  insurrection  in  the  Shenandoah  valley.  He
then  reported  to  Lafayette  at  his  headquarters  near
Jamestown,  and  was  put  in  command  of  all  the
light  troops  and  cavalry  in  the  marquis's  army  ;
but  in  August  a  return  of  his  malady  again  obliged
him  to  go  home.

For  the  next  thirteen  years  Morgan  led  a  quiet
life  upon  his  estate.  He  became  wealthy,  and
entertained  many  eminent  and  interesting  guests.
In  spite  of  the  defects  of  his  early  education,  his
native  qualities  of  mind  were  such  as  to  make  his


j  conversation  instructive  and  charming.  In  1795,
with  the  rank  of  major-general,  he  held  a  command
in  the  large  army  that,  by  its  mere  presence  in
western  Pennsylvania,  put  an  end  to  the  whiskey


insurrection.  In  the  following  year  he  was  elected
by  the  Federalists  to  congress,  where  he  zealously
supported  the  administration  of  President  Adams ;
but  failing  health  again  called  him  home  before
the  expiration  of  his  term,  and  from  this  time  until
his  death  he  seldom  left  his  fireside.  In  the  pro
cession  that  escorted  his  remains  to  the  tomb  were
seven  members  of  the  rifle  company  he  had  led  to
Boston  in  1775.  His  grave  is  in  the  Presbyterian
burying-ground  at  Winchester,  marked  by  a  hori
zontal  slab.  Gen.  Morgan  was  considerably  over
six  feet  in  height,  and  weighed  more  than  200
pounds.  His  strength  and  endurance  were  remark
able,  and  in  beauty  of  feature  and  expression  he
was  equalled  by  few  men  of  his  time.  His  manners
were  quiet  and  refined,  his  bearing  was  noble,  and
his  temper  sweet,  though  his  wrath  was  easily
aroused  by  the  sight  of  injustice.  He  was  noted
for  truthfulness  and  candor,  and  throughout  life
his  conduct  was  regulated  by  the  most  rigid  code
of  honor.  He  was  also  a  devout  Christian.  The
accompanying  illustration  represents  "Saratoga,"
the  residence  of  Gen.  Morgan,  near  Winchester,
Va.  His  life  has  been  written  by  James  Graham
(New  York,  1856),  and  Rebecca  McConkey, "  The
Hero  of  Cowpens  "  (1881). — His  nephew.  Charles
W.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1790;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C.,  3  Jan.,  1853,  entered  the  navy
as  midshipman.  1  Jan.,  1808.  He  was  commissioned
lieutenant,  3  March,  1813.  commander.  15  April,
1820.  and  captain.  21  Feb.,  1831.  While  he  was
lieutenant  he  served  on  the  "  Constitution"  during
her  cruise  in  1812  when  she  fought  the  '•  Guerriere  "
and  "Java."  For  his  gallantry  in  these  engage
ments  he  was  presented  with  a  sword  by  the  legis
lature  of  Virginia.  In  1841-'3  he  was  in  command
of  the  Mediterranean  squadron.

MORGAN.  David  Banister,  soldier,  b.  in  West
Springfield.  Mass.,  in  1773;  d.  in  Covington.  La.,
15  July.  1848.  He  removed  to  Louisiana  in  1803,
served  in  the  territorial  legislature,  was  a  member
of  the  Constitutional  convention,  and  after  the  ad
mission  of  Louisiana  to  the  LTnion  was  in  the  state
legislature.  He  was  surveyor-general  of  Louisiana
and  Mississippi,  and  commanded  the  militia  of
those  states  under  Gen.  Jackson  at  New  Orleans  in
1815,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.

MORGAN.  Edward  Barber,  philanthropist,  b.
in  Aurora,  Cayuga  co.,  N.  Y.,  2  May,  1806 :  d.
there,  13  Oct..  1881.  He  received  a  public-school
education  and  early  engaged  in  mercantile  pur
suits,  from  which  he  ultimately  retired  with  a  large
fortune.  He  was  an  original  share-holder  in  the
•'  New  York  Times,"  and  a  founder  of  the  Wells


398


MORGAN


MORGAN


and  Fargo  and  United  States  express  companies,
of  which  corporations  he  was  for  many  years  an
officer.  He  was  elected  and  twice  re-elected  to
congress  as  a  Republican,  serving  from  5  Dec.,

1853,  till  3  March,
1859.  With  Will
iam  E.  Dodge  lie
erected,  at  a  cost
of  $40.000.  the
Dodge-Morgan  li
brary  building  of
the  Au  burn,  N.  Y.,
theological  semi
nary,  of  which  in
stitution  he  was
long  a  trustee.
Subsequently  Mr.
Morgan  gave  to
the  seminary  a
dormitory  build
ing  that  is  now
called  "  Morgan
Hall."  He  was  a
charter  trustee  of
Wells  college,  Aurora,  to  which  he  not  only  de
voted  his  personal  supervision  for  a  long  period,
but  gave  over  a  quarter  of  a  million  dollars.  His
wife  built  for  the  college  the  new  "Morgan  Hall."
He  was  also  a  trustee  of  Cornell  university,  and
sent  Prof.  Charles  F.  Hartt,  of  that  institution,  on
a  scientific  journey  to  Brazil.  His  donations  to
individuals  and  to  other  institutions  besides  those
named  above  were  very  large.  He  helped  many
young  men  to  acquire  an  education  and  establish
themselves  in  business.  On  one  occasion,  when  a
gentleman  of  wealth  complained  that  he  found  it
difficult  to  employ  his  capital  profitably,  he  re
plied  :  "  Why  not  invest  in  some  worthy  charities?
I  have  found  them  the  best  investments." — His
brother,  Christopher,  lawyer,  b.  in  Aurora.  Ca-
yuga  co..  N.  Y.,  4  June,  1808 ;  d.  in  Auburn,  N.  Y.,
3  April,  1877,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1828.  stud
ied  law  with  William  H.  Seward,  and,  after  being
admitted  to  the  bar,  became  his  partner  at  Auburn,
N.  Y.  He  was  elected  and  re-elected  to  congress
as  a  Whig,  serving  from  2  Dec.,  1839,  till  3  March,
1843.  He  was  secretary  of  state  of  New  York  from
1848  till  1852,  and  many  years  a  trustee  of  the  State
lunatic  asylum  at  Utica.  He  was  at  one  time  en
gaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  in  Aurora,  N.  Y.

MORGAN,  Edwin  Dennison,  governor  of  New
York,  b.  in  Washington,  Berkshire  co.,  Mass.,  8

Feb.,  1811;  d.  in
New  York  city,  14
Feb.,  1883.  At  the
age  of  seventeen
he  removed  to
Hartford,  Conn.,
where  he  entered
the  store  of  his  un
cle,  Nathan  Mor
gan,  and  became
a  partner  in  1831.
He  was  a  member
of  the  city  coun
cil  there  in  1832.
Removing  to  New
York  in  1830,  he
established  him
self  in  business
and  became  a  suc
cessful  merchant.
During  the  chol
era  epidemic  he  remained  in  the  city  to  assist
the  poor.  From  1850  till  1803  he  was  a  mem-


ber  of  the  state  senate,  serving  at  one  time  as
president  pro  tempore.  He  was  vice-president  of
the  National  Republican  convention  that  met  in
Pittsburg,  22  Feb.,  1850,  and  from  1850  till  1804
was  chairman  of  the  Republican  national  com
mittee.  In  1858  he  was  elected  governor  of  New
York,  which  office  he  held  until  1802.  During
his  term  the  state  debt  was  reduced,  an  increase
in  canal  revenue  was  made,  223.000  troops  were
sent  from  New  York  to  the  army,  and  New  York
harbor  was  put  in  a  state  of  defence.  On  28
Sept.,  1801.  he  was  made  a  major-general  of  volun
teers,  the  state  of  New  York  being  created  a  mili
tary  department  under  his  command,  and  for  his
services  under  this  commission  lie  declined  com
pensation.  On  the  expiration  of  his  term  he  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Republican,  serving
from  4  March,  1803,  till  3  March,  1809.  lie  opened
the  proceedings  of  the  Baltimore  convention  of
1804.  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  loyal
ists'  convention  of  1800,  but  took  no  part  in  its  ac
tion.  In  1805  he  declined  the  office  of  secretary
of  the  U.  S.  treasury,  which  was  offered  him  by
President  Lincoln.  In  1872  he  was  chairman  of
the  National  Republican  committee,  and  conduct
ed  the  successful  campaign  that  resulted  in  the
second  election  of  Gen.  Grant.  He  was  a  Repub
lican  candidate  for  U.  S.  senator  in  1875,  and  in
1870  for  governor  of  New  York.  In  1881  Presi
dent  Arthur  offered  him  the  portfolio  of  secretary
of  the  treasury,  which  he  declined,  owing  to  his  ad
vanced  age.  Gov.  Morgan  gave  more  than  $200,000
to  the  New  York  union  theological  seminary  and
to  Williams  college  library  buildings,  and  $100,000
for  a  dormitory.  His  bequests  for  charitable  and
religious  purposes  amounted  to  $795,000.  In  1807
he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Williams.

MORGAN,  Edwin  Wright,  soldier,  b.  in  Penn
sylvania  in  1814;  d.  in  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  16  April,
1809.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1837  and  assigned  to  the  2d  artillery,
serving  in  the  Florida  war  of  1837-'8,  and  super
intending  the  removal  of  the  Cherokees  from
Georgia  to  the  west.  He  became  1st  lieutenant  on
7  July,  1838,  and  was  engaged  on  the  northern
frontier  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  in  1838-'9  during  the
Canada  border  disturbances.  He  resigned  on  31
May,  1839,  and  was  employed  as  principal  assist
ant  state  engineer  of  Pennsylvania  in  the  prosecu
tion  of  extended  public  works  until  the  close  of

1846.  On  9  April,  1847,  he  was  reappointed  in  the
U.  S.  army  as  major  of  the  llth  infantry,  and  he
served  in  the  Mexican  war  in  1847-'8,  being  made
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  13th  infantry,  13  Sept.,

1847.  He  was  mustered  out  on  31  July,  1848.  and
was  superintendent  of  Western  military  institute,
Blue  Licks,  Ky.,  from  1849  till  1851,  chief  engineer
of  Shelby  railroad,  Ky.,  in  1852-'4,  vice-president
of  Shelby  college,  Ky.,  in 1853-'4,  joint  superin
tendent  with  Thornton  Johnson  of  Kentucky  mili
tary  institute  at  Harrodsburg  in 1854-'G,  and  in
entire  charge  of  it  from  1850  till  1801. From  1800
till  his  death  he  was  professor  of  mathematics  in
Lehigh  university.

MORGAN,  George  Nelson,  b.  on  Messina  isl
and,  St.  Lawrence  river,  N.  F.,  7  Sept.,  1825;  d.  in
Minneapolis,  Minn.,  24  July,  1800.  He  removed
from  Canada  to  Minnesota  in  1856,  and,  settling  at
St.  Anthony,  assisted  in  erecting  the  first  foundry
and  machine-shop  at  the  falls.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  enlisted  in  the  1st  Minnesota
regiment,  was  elected  captain  of  a  company  in  1801,
was  promoted  major,  and  became  lieutenant-colo
nel  in  1862.  Immediately  after  the  battle  of  An-
tietam  he  succeeded  to  the  colonelcy  of  the  same


MORGAN


399


regiment,  and  held  that  command  until  May.  1863.
when,  his  health  failing  entirely,  he  was  trans
ferred  to  the  veteran  reserve  corps,  and  became
colonel  of  the  2<1  regiment  of  that  corps,  which
post  he  held  until  within  a  few  days  of  his  death.
He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,
13  March.  1805.  Gen.  Morgan  participated  with
the  1st  regiment  in  all  its  battles,  from  Bull  Run
to  Fredericksburg.  inclusive.  He  was  brave  and
cool  in  action  and  a  strict  disciplinarian.

MORGAN,  George  Wash  bourne,  organist,  b.
in  Gloucester,  England.  9  April.  1822.  At  the  age
of  eight  years  he  played  the  service  in  the  church
of  St.  Nicholas,  Gloucester,  and  he  was  subsequent
ly  organist  in  other  churches.  He  then  went  to
London,  where  he  remained  several  years  and  made
his  first  appearance  as  a  solo  organist.  In  1853  he
came  to  New  York,  where  he  has  since  resided.
He  has  been  organist  of  St.  Thomas's  and  Grace
Episcopal  churches,  and  St.  Ann's  and  St.  Stephen's
Roman  Catholic  churches,  and  of  the  Brooklyn
Tabernacle.  He  has  played  in  various  parts  of  the
United  States  with  much  success,  and  since  1880
has  given  annual  organ  recitals  at  Chickering  hall.
Mr.  Morgan  was  the  first  to  introduce  in  this
country  the  organ-works  of  Bach,  Hesse,  and  Men
delssohn,  and  music  written  for  the  organ  with
pedal  obligate.  He  has  published  an  Episcopal
service  in  F. — His  daughter,  Maud,  harpist,  b.  in
New  York  city,  22  Nov.,  1864,  studied  music  with
her  father  and  with  the  harpist  Alfred  Toulmin.
She  first  appeared  in  1875  in  a  concert  with  Ole
Bull.  She  possesses  good  technique,  and  has  been
well  received  in  New  York  and  elsewhere.

MORGAN,  George  Washington,  soldier,  b.  in
Washington  county,  Pa.,  20  Sept.,  1820. His  grand
father.  Col.  George  N.  Morgan,  was  the  first  to
give  Jefferson  information  regarding  Aaron  Burr's
conspiracy. In  1836  he  left  college,  and,  enlisting
in  a  company  that  was  commanded  by  his  brother,
went  to  assist  Texas  in  gaining  her  independence.
Upon  his  arrival  there  he  was  commissioned  a  lieu
tenant  in  the  regular  Texan  army,  but,  after  attain
ing  the  rank  of  captain,  he  retired  from  the  service,  j
In  1841  he  entered  the U.  S.  military  academy,  |
but  left  in  1843,  and,  removing  to  Mount  Vernon.  j
Ohio,  began  to  practise  law  there  in  1845. At  the
beginning  of  the  war  with  Mexico  he  was  made
colonel  of  the  2d  Ohio  volunteers,  and  he  was  sub
sequently  appointed  colonel  of  the  15th  U.  S.  in
fantry,  which  he  led  with  ability  under  Gen.  Scott,
receiving  for  his  gallantry  at  Contreras  and  Churu-
busco,  where  he  was  severely  wounded,  the  thanks
of  the  Ohio  legislature  and  the  brevet  of  brigadier-
general. He  afterward  practised  law  until  1856,  j
and  was  then  appointed  U.  S.  consul  to  Marseilles,
where  he  remained  until  he  was  made  minister  to
Portugal,  which  post  he  held  from  1858  till  1861.
He  returned  to  this  country,  and  on  21  Nov.,  1861,
was  made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  and  as
signed  to  duty  under  Gen.  Don  Carlos  Buell. In
March,  1862.  he  assumed  the  command  of  the  ?th
division  of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio,  with  which  he
was  ordered  to  occupy  Cumberland  gap,  in  south
east  Kentucky,  then  held  by  the  Confederates. He
forced  the  enemy  to  retire  on  18  June,  1862,  but  in
September  of  that  year  he  retreated  toward  the  I
Ohio,  being  harassed  by  constant  attacks  from  Col.
John  H.  Morgan's  guerillas,  and  in  November  he  j
was  with  Major-Gen.  Jacob  D.  C'ox  in  the  valley  of  I
t  he  Kanawha. He  was  with  Gen.  William  T.  Sher-  j
man  at  Yicksburg,  was  afterward  assigned  to  the  !
13th  army  corps,  and  commanded  at  the  capture
of  Fort  Hindman.  Ark. Owing  to  failing  health,
he  resigned  in  June,  1863. While  in  favor  of  main-  ,


taining  the  Union  at  any  cost.  Gen.  Morgan  was
opposed  to  interference  with  the  state  institution
of  the  south.  In  1865  he  was  the  unsuccessful
Democratic  candidate  for  governor  of  Ohio,  and
in  1866  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,
serving  on  the  committee  on  foreign  affairs.  His
seat  was  contested  by  Columbus  Delano,  who  sup
planted  him  on  3  June,  1868;  but  he  was  again
elected,  and  held  his  seat  from  4  March,  1869,  till
3  March,  1873,  serving  on  the  committees  on  for
eign  affairs,  military  affairs,  and  reconstruction.
He  was  a  delegate-at-large  to  the  National  Demo
cratic  convention  at  St.  Louis  in  1876.

MORGAN,  Helen  Clarissa,  educator,  b.  in  Ma-
sonville,  Delaware  co..  N.  Y..  25  Feb.,  1845.  When
she  was  twelve  years  old  her  parents  removed  to
Oberlin,  Ohio,  to  give  her  the  advantages  of  the
college  at  that  place,  where  she  was  graduated  in
1866.  In  1869.  when  the  American  missionary  as
sociation  decided  that  Fisk  school  should  be  de
veloped  into  a  university,  she  was  invited  to  be
the  pioneer  there  in  the  work  of  a  higher  education
for  the  colored  people.  She  began  by  giving  in
struction  in  Latin,  Greek,  and  mathematics,  and
when  the  institution  had  become  firmly  estab
lished  she  was  formally  given  the  professorship  of
Latin,  thus  being  the  first  woman  to  occupy  H
professor's  chair  in  an  American  co-educational
university.  To  Miss  Morgan  more  than  to  any  one
else  is  due  the  success  of  the  institution  in  keeping
its  advanced  classes  together  in  its  early  years.

MORGAN,  Sir  Henry,  buccaneer,  b.  in  Wales
in  1637;  d.  in  Jamaica  in  1690.  Although  the  son
of  a  wealthy  farmer,  he  shipped  as  a  common  sail
or  for  Barbadoes  and  afterward  went  to  Jamaica,
where  he  joined  the  crew  of  a  pirate  vessel.  The
expeditions  in  which  he  took  part  were  fortunate,
and.  aided  by  his  comrades,  he  purchased  a  ship,
was  elected  captain,  and.  becoming  famous  for  his
exploits  in  the  Bay  of  Campeche,  was  taken  into
favor  by  Mansfield,  an  old  buccaneer,  who  ap
pointed  him  vice-admiral.  On  the  death  of  Mans
field  in  1668,  the  buccaneers  made  Morgan  their
leader,  and  he  soon  became  one  of  the  most  for
midable  of  the  chiefs.  Having  made  some  valu
able  captures,  he  persuaded  his  followers  not  to
waste  their  money  foolishly,  but  to  reserve  it  for
great  enterprises.  Many  of  them  accepted  his  ad
vice,  and  in  a  few  months  he  had  a  fleet  of  twelve
vessels  manned  by  700  men.  He  first  attacked  a
Cuban  city,  which  he  forced  to  pay  a  heavy  ran
som,  and  then  took  Porto  Bello,  where  he  commit
ted  great  excesses.  The  freebooters,  having  re-
embarked  without  meeting  any  resistance,  trans
ported  their  treasures  to  Jamaica.  Their  booty
brought  them  new  companions,  and  Morgan,  by
the  favor  of  the  governor,  obtained  a  vessel  of
thirty-six  guns,  lie  sailed  to  the  coast  of  Santo
Domingo  and  gained  possession  of  a  large  French
ship  by  stratagem.  While  celebrating  his  victory
the  vessel  blew  up,  and  350  Englishmen  and  all
the  French  prisoners  were  thrown  into  the  sea.
Morgan  escaped  with  thirty  of  his  followers.  His
fleet  still  numbered  fifteen  vessels  and  960  men,
but  he  lost  seven  ships  and  400  men  in  a  tempest.
These  reverses  prevented  him  from  attacking  a
rich  Spanish  flotilla  which  was  expected  at  Sama-
na.  Instead  he  sailed  to  Maracaibo.  seized  the
fort,  which  he  destroyed,  carried  off  the  artillery,
forced  Gibraltar  and  Maracaibo  to  pay  ransoms,
burned  a  fleet  that  was  superior  to  his  own  in  the
bay,  and  then  safely  regained  the  ocean.  A  storm
forced  him  to  repair  to  Jamaica  in  order  to  refit  in
1669.  He  had  now  acquired  a  fortune  and  wished
to  live  quietly  for  the  rest  of  his  days ;  but  his


400


MORGAN


MORGAN


companions,  who  had  quickly  spent  their  booty,
pressed  him  so  eagerly  to  engage  in  new  enter
prises  that  he  set  out  on  24  Oct.,  1(570,  with  a  fleet
of  thirty-seven  sail,  the  largest  that  any  buccaneer
had  ever  commanded  in  these  seas.  Morgan,  who
had  assumed  the  title  of  admiral,  raised  the  royal
flag  of  England  on  his  main-mast.  Regulating  be
forehand  the  method  of  dividing  the  booty  and
the  measures  to  be  taken,  he  announced  his  inten
tion  of  attacking  Panama,  and,  in  order  to  pro
cure  guides  across  the  isthmus,  it  was  resolved  to
seize  the  island  of  Santa  Catalina,  on  the  coast  of
Nicaragua.  The  attempt  succeeded  without  the
loss  of  a  man.  Leaving  a  garrison  in  the  fort,  he
took  three  prisoners  for  guides  and  sent  forward
part  of  his  forces  to  carry  a  fort  at  the  mouth  of
the  Chagres.  He  began  the  march  on  Panama  on
18  Jan.,  1671,  with  1,300  picked  men.  After  en
during  great  hardship,  experiencing  all  the  horrors
of  famine,  and  engaging  in  several  battles,  the
buccaneers  carried  Panama  by  assault.  The  cap
ture  was  followed  by  a  general  pillage,  and  the
town  was  reduced  to  ashes  by  order  of  Morgan.
He  then  fitted  out  a  vessel  as  a  cruiser,  which
made  many  rich  captures,  and  sent  detachments  in
every  direction,  who  returned  with  many  prisoners
and  much  booty.  He  put  several  Spaniards  to  the
torture  in  order  to  make  them  declare  where  their
valuables  were  concealed,  and  his  cruelties  were  so
atrocious  as  to  excite  the  indignation  of  some  of
his  companions,  who  formed  a  plot  to  abandon
him,  but  it  was  rendered  ineffective  by  his  vigi
lance.  After  four  weeks  he  abandoned  the  ruins
of  Panama,  carrying  with  him  more  than  GOO  pris
oners  who  were  not  able  to  pay  the  ransom  that  he
demanded.  He  afterward  sent  them  to  Porto  Bel-
lo,  threatening  at  the  same  time  that  he  would  de
stroy  the  city  if  they  were  not  ransomed.  He  met
with  a  refusal  and  carried  out  his  threat.  In  the
division  of  the  booty,  which  exceeded  4,000,000
piastres  in  value,  Morgan  appropriated  a  great
quantity  of  precious  stones  and  thereby  excited
the  discontent  of  his  companions  to  such  a  point
that,  fearing  a  mutiny,  he  abandoned  them  secret
ly.  He  next  conceived  the  idea  of  taking  posses
sion  of  the  island  of  Santa  Catalina,  fortifying  it,
and  carrying  on  buccaneering  on  a  grand  scale.
On  the  eve  of  executing  the  plan  he  learned  that
there  was  peace  between  England  and  Spain,  and
that  the  king  of  England  forbade  any  buccaneer
to  leave  Jamaica  for  the  purpose  of  attacking  the
possessions  of  the  latter  power.  The  governor  of
the  colony  was  recalled  to  give  an  account  of  his
conduct  in  protecting  Morgan,  and  the  pirate  him
self  was  ordered.to  return  to  Europe  to  answer  the
complaints  of  the  Spanish  court.  He  found  no
trouble  in  exculpating  himself,  probably  by  a  judi
cious  use  of  his  ill-gotten  riches,  for  he  was  knight
ed  and  appointed  commissary  of  admiralty  for  Ja
maica,  whither  he  returned  soon  afterward.  lie
married  there  and  ended  his  days  in  peace.

MORGAN,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newtown.
Conn.,  7  March,  1823 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  2-3
March,  1884.  His  early  life  was  one  of  hardship
and  poverty,  and  he  enjoyed  few  educational  ad
vantages.  He  taught  a  district  school  for  several
years,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  the  Methodist
church,  and  after  a  wandering  life  of  missionary
labor  went  to  Boston  in  1851)  and  preached  to  an
independent  congregation  in  Music  hall.  He  or
ganized  the  Boston  union  mission,  and  was  active
in  philanthropic  work.  He  became  chaplain  of  the
state  senate  in  1867,  and  subsequently  purchased
and  became  pastor  of  the  Indiana  place  chapel.
He  was  a  popular  lecturer,  and  during  his  later


career  engaged  in  crusades  against  church  lotteries,
certain  amusements,  and  the  vices  of  city  life.  He
willed  his  church  to  the  poor  at  his  death.  One  of
his  last  public  acts  was  to  buy  100  pairs  of  scales
and  distribute  them  about  the  city  for  the  use  of
the  poor  who  were  obliged  to  purchase  their  sup
plies  in  small  quantities,  and  were  consequently  at
the  mercy  of  dishonest  dealers.  He  published
juvenile  books  and  popular  addresses.  Among  the
former  are  "Ned  Nevins,  the  Newsboy"  (Boston,
186!)),  and  "Boston  Within  and  Without"  (1880).

MORGAN,  Henry  James,  editor,  b.  in  Quebec.
Canada,  14  Nov.,  1842.  lie  received  his  education
at  Morrin  college,  Quebec,  and  entered  the  public
service  in  1853.  In  1860  he  was  a  sessional  clerk
in  the  legislative  assembly,  and  in  1864-'7  served
as  a  private  secretary.  On  the  confederation  of
1867  he  was  appointed  to  the  department  of  state,
and  promoted  first-class  clerk  in  October,  1873,
having  charge  of  the  state  records  of  Canada,
which  he  removed  from  the  old  government-house
in  Montreal  to  Ottawa.  In  the  same  year  he  was
called  to  the  bar.  On  22  Dec.,  1875,  he  was  given
a  chief  clerkship,  with  the  title  of  keeper  of  the
records,  and  on  7  June,  1883,  he  was  made  chief
clerk  in  the  department  of  the  secretary  of  state,
which  office  he  now  (1888)  holds.  In  1884  he  was
thanked  by  the  government  of  Victoria,  Australia,
for  special  services  in  connection  with  the  pro
posed  federal  union  of  the  Australian  colonies  and
presented  with  a  valuable  collection  of  works
on  Australia.  He  is  one  of  the  seven  honorary
fellows  of  the  Royal  colonial  institute  of  England
and  a  member  of  numerous  societies.  In  18(52  he
established  "  The  Canadian  Parliamentary  Com
panion,"  which  he  continued  to  edit  and  publish
until  1876,  and  in  1878  he  began  to  issue  "The  Do
minion  Annual  Register  and  Review,"  a  concise
record  of  the  political,  social,  and  general  events  of
each  year.  He  is  a  frequent  contributor  to  peri
odicals  and  newspapers,  and,  in  addition  to  a  lec
ture  entitled  "  The  Place  British  Americans  have
won  in  History"  (Ottawa,  1865),  he  is  the  author
of  "  The  Tour  of  His  Royal  Highness,  the  Prince
of  Wales,  through  British  America  and  the  United
States"  (Quebec,  1860);  "Sketches  of  Celebrated
Canadians  and  Persons  connected  with  Canada  "
(1860);  "  The  Bibliotheca  Canadensis,  or  a  Manual
of  Canadian  Literature  "  (Ottawa,  1867) ;  and  "  The
Canadian  Legal  Directory,  a  Guide  to  the  Bench
and  Bar  of  Canada"  (Toronto,  1878).

MORGAN,  James,  Appleton,  author,  b.  in
Portland,  Me.,  2  Oct.,  1850.  His  grandfather,
Abner,  was  the  first  lawyer  in  Brimfield,  Mass.,  and
as  major  of  a  Massachusetts  regiment  commanded
part  of  the  troops  in  the  long  retreat  from  Quebec
in  1776 ;  and  his  father,  Peyton  R.  Morgan,  en
gaged  in  the  fur-trade  in  the  west,  and  founded
the  city  of  Saginaw.  Mich.  The  son  was  gradu
ated  at  Racine  college,  Wis.,  and  at  Columbia  law-
school,  New  York  city,  in  1869,  and  began  the
practice  of  his  profession  in  New  York  in  1871,
but  gave  much  time  to  literary  pursuits.  In
1877,  through  the  columns  of  "Appletons"  Jour
nal,"  he  suggested  a  theory  of  the  authorship  of
the  plays  of  William  Shakespeare,  developing  his
proposition  that  these  plays  as  printed  in  1623  are
not  monographs,  but  the  product  of  the  growth —
through  a  generation  of  stage  performances — of
plays  that  were  originally  mounted  by  Shakespeare,
the  interpolations  and  localisms  of  actors,  and  the
hackings  of  stage  censors,  all  contributing  to  the
state  of  the  text  when  it  was  printed,  as  it  stood
in  the  acting  copies,  collected  from  particular  ac
tors  by  Heminge  and  Condell  in  1623.  Mr.  Mor-


MORGAN


MORGAN


gan's  peculiar  theories  as  to  Shakespeare  have  ex
cited  wide  comment  and  criticism.  He  founded,
in  1885,  the  Shakespeare  society  of  New  York,  for
the  purpose  of  free  discussion  of  any  and  all  Shake
speare  questions.  Of  this  society  Mr.  Morgan  was
the  first  president,  and  he  was  re-elected  in  1886,
1887,  and  1888.  Jn  the  development  of  his  theory
Mr.  Morgan  has  published  "  The  Shakespearean
Myth,  or  William  Shakespeare  and  Circumstantial
Evidence"  (Cincinnati,  1881):  "Some  Shake
spearean  Commentators"  (1882):  "Venus  and
Adonis,  a  Study  in  the  Warwickshire  Dialect "
(New  York,  1885) :  and  "  Shakespeare  in  Fact  and
in  Criticism  "  (1887).  He  has  also  published  "  Di-
gesta  Shakespeareana,"  an  exhaustive  classification
by  topics  of  all  Shakespearean  publications,  except
editions,  from  the  Elizabethan  and  Jacobean  dates
to  1  Jan.,  1887  (1887);  and  is  the  author  of  "Mac
aronic  Poetry  "  (1872).  and  several  legal  treatises,
including  notes  to"I)e  Colyar  on  Guaranty  and
Suretyship"  (1874);  "The  Law  of  Literature "  (2
vols.,  1875) ;  notes  to  Best's  "  Principles  of  Evi
dence"  (2  vols.,  1876);  and  notes  to  "  Addison  on
the  Law  of  Contract "  (3  vols.,  1876).

MORGAN,  James  Dady,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  1  Aug.,  1810.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  went
to  sea  in  the  ship  "  Beverley  "  for  a  three  years'
trading  voyage.  When  the  vessel  was  thirty  days
out  a  mutiny  occurred,  and  shortly  afterward  the
ship  was  burned.  Morgan  escaped  to  South  Ameri
ca,  and,  after  enduring  many  hardships,  returned
to  Boston.  In  1834  he  removed  to  Quincy,  111.,  and
engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits.  He  aided  in  rais
ing  the  "  Quincy  Grays,"  and  at  the  time  of  the
difficulties  with  the  Mormons  in  1844-'5  he  was
captain  of  the  "  Quincy  Riflemen,"  and  was  ordered
with  his  company  to  Hancock  county  to  preserve
order.  During  the  Mexican  war  he  served  as  cap
tain  in  the  1st  Illinois  volunteers.  In  1861  he  be
came  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  7th  Illinois  regi
ment,  and  for  meritorious  services  at  New  Madrid
and  Corinth  was  promoted  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  17  July,  1862.  In  November,  1862,  he
commanded  a  brigade  at  Nashville,  Tenn.,  and  for
gallantry  at  Bentonsville,  N.  C.,  he  was  brevetted
major-general  of  volunteers,  19  March,  1865.  He
was  mustered  out  of  the  army  on  24  Aug.,  1865.
He  is  now  (1888)  vice-president  of  a  bank  in  Quincy.
MORGAN.  John,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1725:  d.  there,  15  Oct.,  1789.  His  father,
Evan  Morgan,  emigrated  from  Wales  to  Philadel
phia,  and  engaged  in
mercantile  pursuits
until  his  death  in
1763.  His  son  was
graduated  at  the  Col
lege  of  Philadelphia
(now  University  of
Pennsylvania)  in  1757,
after  which  he  stud
ied  medicine  with  Dr.
John  Redman,  serv
ing  an  apprenticeship
of  six  years,  and  then
devoted  four  years
to  a  military  life  as
surgeon  and  lieuten
ant  of  Pennsylva-
nia  troops.  In  '1760
he  went  to  Europe,
where,  through  his
friend,  Benjamin  Franklin,  he  was  introduced  to
many  eminent  men.  While  in  London  he  attend
ed  the  lectures  and  dissections  of  Dr.  William
Hunter.  In  November,  1761,  he  went  to  Edin-
voi..  iv. — 26


burgh,  where  he  received  the  degree  of  M.  D.  in
1763.  He  spent  the  winter  of  1764  in  Paris,  study
ing  anatomy,  and  while  there  submitted  to  the
Royal  academy  of  surgery  memoirs  on  "Suppura
tion  "  and  "  The  Art  of  making  Anatomical  Prepa
rations  by  Corrosion,"  the  latter  of  which  procured
his  admission  into  that  society.  After  visiting
Italy  and  Holland  he  returned  to  London  and  be
came  a  licentiate  of  the  College  of  physicians.  In
1765  he  returned  to  Philadelphia,  and  assisted  in
establishing  a  medical  school  in  connection  with
the  College  of  Philadelphia,  in  which  he  was  ap
pointed  professor  of  the  theory  and  practice  of
medicine.  At  this  time  it  was  the  custom  for
physicians  to  prepare  and  furnish  their  remedies,
but  Dr.  Morgan  proposed  a  separation  of  pharmacy
and  surgery  from  the  regular  practice.  In  October,
1775,  he  was  appointed  by  congress  director-gen
eral  to  the  military  hospitals  and  physician-in-chief
to  the  American  army,  and  immediately  joined
Gen.  Washington  in  Cambridge.  He  found  the
hospital  and  army  without  medicines  and  appli
ances,  and  reorganized  the  general  hospital,  re.-
quiring  proofs  by  examination  of  the  qualifications
of  the  assistants  that  were  to  be  intrusted  with  the
sick  and  wounded.  Previous  to  this  many  unlet
tered  and  incompetent  medical  officers  had  found
their  way  into  the  army,  and  the  resulting  con
dition  of  things  was  said  by  Washington  to  be  "  a
disgrace  to  the  profession,  the  army,  and  to  society."
In  consequence  of  unjust  complaints,  Dr.  Morgan
was  dismissed  by  congress  without  reason  on  9  Jan.,
1777;  but  a  committee  of  that  body  afterward  in
vestigated  his  conduct  and  honorably  acquitted
him.  Washington,  in  a  letter  to  Dr.  Morgan,
dated  9  Jan..  1779,  says :  "  No  fault,  I  believe,  was
or  ever  could  be  found  with  the  economy  of  the
hospitals  during  your  directorship."  In  1773  he
visited  Jamaica,  W.  I.,  at  his  own  expense  to  solicit
donations  for  the  advancement  of  general  literature
in  the  College  of  Philadelphia.  He  continued  his
services  in  the  Pennsylvania  hospital  until  his
resignation  in  1783.  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush,  who  was
his  successor  in  the  medical  college,  says:  "His
memory  was  extensive  and  accurate  ;  he  was  inti
mately  acquainted  with  the  Latin  and  Greek  clas
sics,  had  read  much  in  medicine,  and  in  all  his
pursuits  he  was  persevering  and  indefatigable.  .  .
I  never  knew  a  person  who  had  been  attended  by
him  that  did  not  speak  of  his  sympathy  and  tender
ness  with  gratitude  and  respect."  His  paintings
and  engravings,  which  he  had  collected  in  Europe,
with  a  choice  library  of  books  and  original  manu
scripts,  were  either  destroyed  by  the  British  at
Bordentown,  N.  J.,  where  he  had  removed  them  for
safety,  or  consumed  by  fire  at  Danbury.  Conn.,  in
the  destruction  of  that  place  by  the  troops  under
Gov.  Tryon.  Dr.  Morgan  was  a  fellow  of  the
Royal  society  of  England,  and  a  member  of  the
Belles-lettres  society  of  Rome.  He  took  an  active
part  in  founding  the  American  philosophical  so
ciety  in  1769,  and  published  papers  in  its  trans
actions.  His  writings  include  "  A  Discourse  upon
the  Introduction  of  Medical  Schools  in  Philadel
phia"  (Philadelphia,  1765);  "Four  Dissertations
on  the  Reciprocal  Advantages  of  a  Perpetual  Union
between  Groat  Britain  and  her  American  Colonies."
for  which  he  received  a  gold  medal  from  John
Sargeant,  of  London  (1 766) :  "  A  Recommendation
of  Inoculation  according  to  Baron  Dimsdale's
Method  "  (1776) :  and  "A  Vindication  of  his  Public
Character  in  the  Station  of  Director-General  of  the
Military  Hospitals"  (1777).  See  "The  Early  His
tory  of  Medicine  in  Philadelphia,"  by  George  W.
Norris  (Philadelphia,  1886).


402


MORGAN


MORGAN


MORUAN,  John  Hunt,  soldier,  b.  in  Hunts-
ville,  Ala.,  1  June,  1820;  d.  near  Greenville,  Tenn.,
4  Sept.,  1864.  In  1830  he  settled  near  Lexington,
Ky.  He  served  in  the  war  with  Mexico  as  1st  lieu
tenant  in  a  cavalry  regiment.  At  the  opening  of
the  civil  war  he  was  engaged  in  the  manufacture
of  bagging.  He  entered  the  Confederate  army  as
captain  of  the  Kentucky  volunteers,  and  joined
Gen.  Simon  B.  Buckner  at  the  head  of  the  Lexing
ton  rifles.  During  the  winter  of  1862-'3  he  com
manded  a  cavalry  force  in  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg's
army,  and  greatly  annoyed  Gen.  William  S.  Rosen-
crans's  outposts  and  communications.  He  soon
began  a  series  of  raids  in  Kentucky,  in  which  he
destroyed  many  millions  of  dollars'  worth  of  mili
tary  stores,  captured  and  burned  railroad-trains
filled  with  supplies,  tore  up  railroad-tracks,  burned
bridges,  and  destroyed  culverts  in  the  rear  of  the
National  army,  and  made  it  necessary  to  garrison
every  important  town  in  the  state.  Moving  with
the  utmost  celerity,  and  taking  a  telegraph-opera
tor  with  him,  he  misled  his  foes  and  at  the  same
time  acquainted  himself  with  their  movements.
In  1862  he  was  appointed  major-general.  In  1863
he  headed  a  bold  and  extensive  raid  into  Kentucky,
Ohio,  and  Indiana,  but  with  nearly  all  of  his  com
pany  he  was  captured  and  imprisoned  in  the  Ohio
penitentiary.  He  escaped  by  digging  in  Novem
ber,  1863,  and  then  undertook  a  raid  in  Tennessee.
While  at  a  farm-house  near  Greenville,  Tenn.,  he
was  surrounded  in  the  night  by  National  troops
under  Gen.  Alvan  0.  Gillem,  and  in  attempting  to
escape  was  killed.

MORGAN,  John  Tyler,  senator,  b.  in  Athens,
Tenn.,  20  June,  1824.  In  1833  his  parents  removed
to  Calhoun  county,  Ala.,  and,  after  receiving  a
good  education,  he  studied  law  in  Talladega,  and
was  licensed  to  practise  in  1845.  In  1860  he  was  a
presidential  elector  on  the  Breckinridge  ticket,  and
obtained  in  the  canvass  of  that  year  a  reputation
for  eloquence.  In  1861  he  was  a  member  of  the
state  convention  that  passed  the  ordinance  of  seces
sion.  He  joined  the  Confederate  army  in  1861  as
a  private,  and  subsequently  became  major  and  lieu
tenant-colonel,  serving  in  Virginia.  He  was  after
ward  commissioned  as  colonel,  and,  returning  to
Alabama,  raised  the  51st  regiment,  which  he  liber
ally  aided  in  equipping.  He  went  to  the  front
in  Tennessee,  but  was  soon  assigned  to  the  head
of  the  conscript  bureau  in  Alabama,  at  the  request
of  the  state  delegation  in  the  Confederate  congress.
In  1863  he  was  appointed  brigadier-general  by
Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee,  but  declined  promotion.  He
was  again  commissioned  brigadier-general  in  No
vember,  1863,  and  commanded  a  division  in  the
winter  of  1863-'4,  operating  with  Gen.  James  Long-
street  in  eastern  Tennessee,  and  with  Gen.  Joseph
E.  Johnston  and  Gen.  John  B.  Hood.  After  the
war  he  resumed  his  law  practice  in  Selma.  In  1876
he  was  again  a  presidential  elector,  and  was  also
elected  to  the  United  States  senate  as  a  Demo
crat,  being  re-elected  in  1883.

MORdJAN,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Connecti
cut  in  1674;  d.  in  1740.  He  was  ordained  a  cler
gyman  of  the  Dutch  Reformed  church  in  1697,
and  after  settlements  in  East  Chester.  N.  Y.,  from
1699  till  1704,  and  Greenwich,  Conn.,  from  1704  till
1708,  he  held  charges  in  Freehold  and  Middletown,
N.  J.,  where  he  served  the  Dutch  and  Presbyterian
churches.  From  1732  till  1737  he  preached  in
Hopewell  and  Maidenhead,  N.  J.  One  of  his  Latin
letters  to  Cotton  Mather,  dated  1721,  is  still  pre
served  in  Worcester,  Mass.  In  1728  he  was  charged
with  having  "  practised  astrology,  countenanced
promiscuous  dancing,  and  transgressed  in  drink,"


which  charges  were  not  proved.  In  1736  he  was
suspended  from  the  ministry  for  intemperance,  but
was  restored  in  1738.  Subsequently  he  was  so
affected  by  Whitefleld's  preaching  that  he  travelled
along  the  sea-coast  of  New  Jersey  as  an  evangelist
and  died  in  this  work.  In  addition  to  sermons,  he
published  treatises  on  "Baptism,"  "Original  Sin,''
"Election,"  and  "Sin  its  own  Punishment."

MORGAN,  .1  ii  n  i  us  Spencer,  banker,  b.  in  West
Springfield  (now  HolyoKe),  Mass.,  14  April,  1813.
He  began  his  business  career  in  1829  by  entering
the  employ  of  Alfred  Welles,  of  Boston,  with  whom
he  continued  until
he  became  of  age.
In  July,  1834,  he
joined  the  bank
ing-house  of  Mor
gan,  Ketchum  and
Co.,  of  New  York,
but  he  returned
to  Hartford  about
eighteen  months
later.  He  then  be
came  junior  part
ner  in  the  dry-
goods  house  of
Howe,  Mather  and
Co.,  which  in  1850
became  Mather,
Morgan  and  Co.
A  year  later  he
was  invited  by
James  M.  Beebe  to  form  a  copartnership  in  Bos
ton,  which,  under  the  style  of  J.  M.  Beebe,  Mor
gan  and  Co.,  became  one  of  the  largest  dry-goods
establishments  in  the  United  States.  Mr.  Morgan
visited  England  in  1853,  and  was  offered  a  part
nership  in  the  firm  of  George  Peabody  and  Co.,
which  he  accepted  on  1  Oct.,  1854,  and  ten  years
later,  on  the  retirement  of  Mr.  Peabody,  the  firm
became  J.  S.  Morgan  and  Co.  Under  this  name
the  house  has  grown  in  strength  and  influence  un
til  at  present  it  ranks  among  the  great  banking-
houses  of  the  world.  During  his  residence  in  Hart
ford,  Mr.  Morgan  was  active  in  the  affairs  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church,  and  also  in  various
charitable  enterprises.  He  has  been  a  liberal  donor
to  Trinity  college,  and  in  1886  presented  to  the
Hartford  orphan  asylum  a  generous  contribution,
known  as  the  Sarah  Morgan  fund,  in  memory  of
his  mother,  Mrs.  Sarah  Spencer  Morgan.  In  1887
he  gave  a  large  and  valuable  painting,  by  Sir
Joshua  Reynolds,  which  he  had  purchased  for  that,

Purpose,  to  the  Metropolitan  museum  of  art  in  New
'ork  city.  He  married  in  1836  Juliet,  daughter  of
John  Pierpont,  the  poet  (q.  v.). — His  son,  John
Pierpont,  banker,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  17  April,
1837,  was  educated  at  the  English  high-school  in
Boston,  and  then  studied  at  the  University  of  Got-
tingcn,  Germany.  He  returned  to  the  United
States  in  1857,  and  entered  the  banking-firm  of
Duncan,  Sherman  and  Co.,  of  New  York.  In  1860
he  became  agent  and  attorney  in  the  United  States
for  George  Peabody  and  Co.,  of  London,  which
relation  he  has  since  held  with  that  firm  and  its
successor.  He  became  the  junior  partner  of  the
banking-firm  of  Dabney,  Morgan  and  Co.  in  1864,
and  that  of  Drexel,  Morgan  and  Co.  in  1871.  This
house  is  among  the  chief  negotiators  of  railroad
bonds,  and  was  active  in  the  reorganization  of  the
West  Shore  railroad  and  its  absorption  by  the  New
York  Central  railroad.  In  1887  it  was  conspicuous
in  the  reorganization  of  the  Philadelphia  and  Read
ing  railroad,  which  a  syndicate  of  capitalists  formed
by  Mr.  Morgan  placed  on  a  sound  basis.


MORGAN


MORGAN


403


MORGAN".  Lewis  Henry,  anthropologist,  b.  in  [
Aurora.  N. Y.,  21 Nov.. 1818; d.  in Rochester,  j
N.  Y..  1?  Dec.. 1881. He  was  graduated  at  Union
college  in  1840,  and  then  studied  law. After  ad-  j
mission  to  the  bar  he  followed  his  profession  in  '
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  where  he  acquired a  lucrative
practice,  principally  in  connection  with  railroads.  '
In  1861  he  was  sent  to  the  lower  house  of  the  legis-  '
lature  and  in  1868  chosen  to  the  state  senate. He  j
acquired  reputation  by  his  researches  in  anthro-  j
pology. especially in relation to the history of
American  Indians,  in  which  he  was  the  pioneer  in
vestigator. His acquaintance with this subject
begun  in  1844  by  his  relations  with  a  secret  organi
zation  known  as  the  Grand  Order  of  the  Iroquois,  I
which  was  formed  on  the  plan  of  the  ancient  con-  i
federacy  of  that  tribe. For  the  purpose  of  more  j
closely  studying  their  social  organization  and  gov-  j
eminent  Mr.  Morgan  visited  the  Indians  of  New
York,  and  was  adopted  by  a  tribe  of  Senecas. His
discoveries  were  of  such  importance  and  interest
that  he  continued  his  investigations,  obtaining  a
deep  insight  into  the  home  life  and  customs  of  the
Indians, As  early  as  184?  he  began  the  publica-  :
tion  of  a  series  of  "  Letters  on  the  Iroquois  "  in  the
"American  Review"  over  the  name  of  "Skenan-
tloah." This  he  followed  with  "  The  League  of  the
Iroquois"  (Rochester.  1851).  in  which  the  social  or
ganization and  government  of  that confederacy
were  thoroughly  explained. It  was  the  first  scien
tific  account  of  an  Indian  tribe  that  was  published,
and  in  after  years  gained  for  him  the  title  of  the
'•  Father  of  American  Anthropology." In 1858,  I
while  in  Marquette.  Mich.,  he  found  that  the  so
ciety  and  government  of  the  Ojibway  Indians  were
organized  upon  a  similar  plan. This  discovery  in
duced  him  to  continue  his  investigations  still  fur
ther  among  other  Indians. The  Smithsonian  insti
tution  caused  the  circulation  of  schedules, which
he  prepared,  among  its  correspondents  in  this  coun
try  and  throughout  the  world. The  department  of
state,  through  its  consuls  and  other  agents,  likewise
lent  aid  to  this  undertaking. From  the  informa
tion  that  Mr.  Morgan  acquired  during  his  travels
and  from  the  correspondence  that  was  begun  by  i
his  inquiries,  he  continued  his  work  until  the  kin
ship  systems  of  more  than  four  fifths  of  the  world
were  recorded, either  directly  by himself  or by
others  who  had  become  interested  in  the  under-  i
taking. The  materials  thus  collected  were  system-  j
atized  by  him  and  published  by  the  Smithsonian
institution  as  "Systems  of  Consanguinity  and  Af
finity  of  the  Human  Family''  (Washington.  1869).  :
This  book  was  essentially  a  volume  of  facts,  and  the
rich  material  on  tribal  society  that  he  had  gathered  ;
was condensed into one philosophic  treatise on
"Ancient  Society"  (New  York, 1877). In this
work  he  considered  his  subject  from  four  stand
points:  the  growth  of  intelligence  through  inven-  i
tions and discoveries, of the ideas of govern-  j
ment.  of  family,  and  of  property. "  Thus."  ac-  ;
cording  to  Dr.  John  W.  Powell.  "  was  laid  the  foun-  !
dation  for  the  science  of  government  as  it  is  finally  i
to  be  erected  by  the  philosophy  of  evolution." He  '
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Union  college  '
in  1873.  and  was  elected  a  member  of  the  National  |
academy  of  sciences  in  1875,  and  of  other  scientific
societies  at  home  and  abroad. In  1879  he  was  elected
president  of  the  American  association  for  the  ad
vancement  of  science. The  last  years  of  his  life
were  devoted  to  the  preparation  of  "  Houses  and
House-Life  of  the  American  Aborigines ''  (Wash
ington.  1881). Besides  papers  contributed  to  peri
odicals,  he  was  the  author  of  "  The  American  Beaver
and  his  Works"  (Philadelphia,  1868).


MORGAN,  Matthew  Somerville.  artist,  b.  in
Lambeth.  London.  England,  27  April,  1839.  His
father,  Matthew,  was  an  actor  and  music-teacher;
his  mother.  Mary  Somerville.  an  actress  and  singer.
The  son  studied  scene- painting  and  followed  his  pro
fession  at  Princess's  theatre,  but  became  artist  and
correspondent  for  the  "  Illustrated  London  News."
He  also  studied  in  Paris.  Italy,  and  Spain,  and  was
one  of  the  first  artists  to  penetrate  into  the  interior
of  Africa,  which  he  did  in  1858  by  way  of  French
Algeria.  In  1859  he  reported  for  the  "  News  "  the
Austro-Italian  war.  He  was  afterward  joint  editor
and  proprietor  of  the  "  Tomahawk."  a  comic  illus
trated  London  paper,  and  its  artist.  The  most
notable  of  his  cartoons  were  attacks  on  the  royal
family,  the  first  that  were  ever  made.  He  was  asso
ciated  with  Frank  C.  Burnand,  William  S.  Gilbert,
and  others,  in  the  establishment  of  the  London
"  Fun."  and  a  volume  of  his  cartoons  in  this  paper
has  been  published  under  the  title  "  American  Wai-
Cartoons  "  (London.  1874).  In  1867-'9  he  was  princi
pal  scene-painter  to  the  Royal  Italian  opera.
Covent  garden.  He  came  to  the  United  States  in
1870  under  an  engagement  with  Frank  Leslie,  and.
after  working  as  caricaturist  on  the  latter's  publica
tions,  acted  as  manager  of  several  New  York  thea
tres.  He  went  in  1880  to  Cincinnati,  where  he  was
manager  of  the  Strobridge  lithograph  company
till  1885.  and  did  much  to  improve  the  character  of
theatrical  lithography.  He  also  founded  there  in
1883  the  Matt  Morgan  art  pottery  company,  and
the  Cincinnati  art  students'  league.  His  studio
is  now  (1888)  in  New  York  city.  Mr.  Morgan  has
contributed  to  the  exhibitions  of  the  Water-color
society,  and  has  painted  a  series  of  large  panoramic-
pictures,  representing  battles  of  the  civil  war,  which
were  exhibited  in  Cincinnati  in  1886.

MORGAN.  Michael  Ryan,  soldier,  b.  in  Hali
fax,  Nova  Scotia.  18  Jan..  1833.  He  was  appointed
from  Louisiana  to  the  U.  S.  military  academy,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1854.  assigned  to  the
artillery,  and  served  in  garrison,  and  against  hos
tile  Indians  till  the  civil  war,  during  which  he  was
in  the  subsistence  department.  He  was  chief  of
commissariat  of  the  10th  army  corps  in  May  and
June.  1864.  and  of  the  armies  operating  against
Richmond  in  1864-"5.  receiving  all  the  brevets  to
brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army  for  his  ser
vices  in  the  campaigns  of  those  two  years.  On  17
Nov.,  1865,  he  became  commissary  of  subsistence
with  the  rank  of  major,  and  since  the  war  he  has
been  the  commissary-general  of  various  depart
ments.  He  is  now  (1888)  serving  in  that  capacity
in  San  Francisco.  Cal.

MORGAN.  Miles,  soldier,  b.  in  Bristol.  Eng
land,  in  1616;  d.  in  Llandaff.  Wales.  28  May.
1699.  Being  a  younger  son  and  of  venturesome
disposition  he  conceived  the  idea  of  joining  one  of
the  many  vessels  that  conveyed  emigrants  to
America  from  his  native  town.  He  arrived  on  one
of  these  at  Boston  in  April.  1636.  and  soon  after
ward  penetrated,  with  an  expedition  headed  by  a
Col.  Pyratreon.  into  the  wilderness,  and  settled  at
what  is  now  Springfield,  Mass.,  building  for  him
self  a  fortified  block-house  on  the  bank  of  Connecti
cut  river  on  the  site  that  is  now  occupied  by  the  car-
shops  of  the  Connecticut  River  railroad.  Soon  after
settling  in  Springfield  he  married  Prudence  Gilbert,
a  fellow-passenger  on  the  voyage  from  Bristol.  At
the  sack  of  Springfield.  Capt.  Morgan's  block-house
became  the  fortress  of  the  place,  and.  after  the
burning  of  the  settlement,  held  out  until  messen
gers  had  been  despatched  to  Hadley.  and  thirty-six
men  (the  standing  array  of  the  colony  of  Massachu
setts  bay),  under  command  of  Capt.  Samuel  Apple-


404


MORGAN


MORIAETY


ton,  marched  to  Springfield  and  raised  the  siege.
A  colossal  bronze  statue  of  Captain  Miles  Morgan,
which  stands  in  the  court-house  square  of  Spring
field,  shows  him  in  huntsman's  dress,  jack-boots,
and  cocked  hat,  with  a  rifle  over  his  shoulder.

MORGAN,  Philip  Hicky,  jurist,  b.  in  Baton
Rouge,  La.,  9  Nov.,  1825.  He  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  New  Orleans  in  1847,  and,
after  practising  seven  years,  was  elected  judge  of
the  New  Orleans  district  court  in  1855,  continuing
in  office  till  1861.  During  the  administrations  of
President  Johnson  and  President  Grant  he  was
U.  S.  district  attorney  for  the  eastern  district  of
Louisiana  until  he  resigned  and  was  appointed  in
1873  a  justice  of  the  state  supreme  court.  In  1877
he  was  appointed  U.  S.  representative  on  the  inter
national  tribunal  in  Egypt.  On  the  expiration  of
his  term  he  declined  re-appointment,  but  accepted
the  post  of  United  States  minister  to  Mexico.  His
commission  was  issued  on  26  Jan.,  1880,  and  he
served  till  his  successor  was  appointed  by  Presi
dent  Cleveland  on  23  March,  1885.

MORGAN,  William,  artist,  b.  in  London,  Eng
land,  in  1826.  After  studying  in  the  government
art-school  at  Havre,  France,  he  came  to  this  coun
try  in  early  life,  and  received  his  education  in  the
schools  of  the  National  academy,  to  which  he  sent
his  first  work  in  1851,  and  of  which  he  became  an
associate  in  1865.  He  is  a  member  of  the  American
art  union  and  the  Artists' fund  society.  His  works
include  "Emancipation"  (18(58);  "The  Legend"
(1875);  "Song  without  Words"  (1876);  "Mother
hood";  "Reverie";  "In  the  Hay-Loft"  (1882);
"Summer"  (1883);  "The  Sortie"  (1884):  "An
dante"  (1885);  "Blowing  Bubbles"  (1886):  and
"La  Mandolinata"  (1887).

MORGAN,  William,  Mason,  b.  in  Culpeper
county,  Va.,  about  1775.  He  served  under  Gen.
Andrew  Jackson  at  the  battle  of  New  Orleans.  He
removed  in  1821  to  York,  Upper  Canada,  where  he
became  a  brewer,  and  subsequently  to  Batavia,
N.  Y.  In  August,  1826,  it  was  reported  that  he  was
about  to  publish  a  volume  that  would  expose  the
secrets  of  the  order  of  Freemasons,  of  which  he  had
been  a  member,  and  shortly  afterward  he  suddenly
disappeared.  This  caused  great  excitement,  and
committees  of  safety  and  vigilance  were  formed
that  traced  him  westward  to  Fort  Niagara,  near
Lewiston,  N.  Y.,  where  he  had  been  imprisoned.  It
was  said  that  he  had  been  conveyed  in  a  carriage
from  Batavia  to  Fort  Niagara  by  Freemasons,  and
it  was  afterward  testified  that  he  was  drowned  in
Lake  Ontario  ;  but  this  story  was  denied,  and  it  was
affirmed  that  he  had  been  seen  alive  at  Smyrna,  in
Asia,  and  in  other  places.  A  body  was  produced,
said  to  have  been  found  near  the  mouth  of  Niagara
river,  but  it  was  denied  that  it  was  Morgan's,  and
Thurlow  Weed  was  said  to  have  remarked  that  it
was  "  a  good  enough  Morgan  till  after  election."
Prosecutions  were  in  due  time  instituted  against
those  whom  investigation  showed  to  have  been  in
any  way  concerned  in  the  abduction,  and  repeated
trials  resulted  in  the  conviction  of  some  of  them
on  minor  charges,  but  no  murder  was  ever  judi
cially  established.  It  was  supposed  to  be  shown  in
the  course  of  these  trials  that  the  Masonic  oath
disqualified  Masons  in  certain  of  the  higher  degrees
for  serving  as  jurors  in  any  case  where  a  Mason  of
like  degree  was  a  party  and  his  antagonist  was  not.
The  excitement  deepened,  and  resulted  in  the  or
ganization  of  an  Anti-masonic  party  in  western  New
York,  which  nominated  a  candidate  for  governor,
Solomon  Southwick,  in  1828.  In  1831  a  National
Anti-masonic  convention  was  held,  wherein  most
of  the  free  states  were  represented,  which  nominated


William  Wirt,  of  Maryland,  for  president  of  the
United  States.  Although  Anti-masonic  state  and
national  tickets  were  supported  in  many  free  states,
they  were  successful  only  in  Vermont,  which  re
mained  for  several  years  under  Anti-masonic  rule,
but  the  party  lost  its  distinctive  character,  gradu
ally  faded  out,  and  ceased  to  exist  after  1835.
Morgan's  book,  "  Illustrations  of  Freemasonry,  by
One  of  the  Fraternity  who  has  devoted  Thirty
Years  to  the  Subject,"  was  published  in  various
forms  (1826 ;  2d  ed.,  with  an  account  of  the  kidnap
ping  of  the  author,  1827 ;  reprinted  as  "  Free
masonry  Exposed  and  Explained,"  with  the  verdict
of  the  jury  in  relation  to  the  abduction  and  murder
of  the  author).  See  also  "  The  Broken  Seal,  or  the
Morgan  Abduction  and  Murder."  by  S.  D.  Greene
(New  York.  1870);  "History  of  the  Morgan  Affair."
by  Robert  Morris  (New  York,  1852);  and  "Ameri
can  Political  Anti-Masonry,"  by  Henry  O'Reilly
(printed  privately.  New  York,  1879).

MORGAN,  William  Ferdinand,  clergyman,  b.
in  Hartford,  Conn.,  21  Dec.,  1817;  d.  in  New  York
city,  19  May,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  col
lege  in  1837,  and  at  the  General  theological  semi
nary,  New  York  city,  in  1840.  He  was  made  deacon
in  1841,  and  was  assistant  in  Trinity  church,  New
Haven,  until  1842,  when  he  wasordained  priest.  In
1844  he  became  rector  of  Christ  church,  Norwich,
Conn.  In  1857  he  was  called  to  St.  Thomas's  church,
New  York  city,  which  was  removed  from  Broadway
and  Houston  street  to  Fifth  avenue  and  Fifty-third
street  in  1870.  In  1864  Dr.  Morgan  went  abroad  to
preach  the  sermon  at  the  consecration  of  the  Church
of  the  Holy  Trinity  in  Paris,  the  first  Protestant
Episcopal  church  on  the  continent.  This  sermon,
describing  the  historical  basis  of  the  American
church  and  the  struggles  of  reformation  in  France,
was  published  (Paris,  1864).  In  April,  1888,  he  re
signed  the  rectorship  of  St.  Thomas,  and  was  made
rector  emeritus  of  that  church  for  life.  In  1857
Columbia  gave  him  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.

MORIARTY,  James  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in
Dingle,  County  Kerry,  Ireland,  8  Jan.,  1843:  d.  in
Utica,  N.  Y.,  4  Dec.,  1887.  He  came  with  his  par
ents  to  the  United  States  in  1846,  was  graduated
at  the  College  of  St.  Francis  Xavier,  New  York  city,
in  1861,  and  finished  his  literary  studies  in  St.
John's  college,  Fordham,  where  he  took  the  degree
of  A.  M.  in  1862.  He  prepared  for  the  priesthood
in  the  Snlpitian  seminary,  Montreal,  and  in  St.  Jo
seph's,  Troy,  N.  Y.,  and  was  ordained,  11  Nov.,  1865.
After  holding  various  pastorates  and  building  sev
eral  churches,  he  was  transferred  on  13  Dec.,  1883,
to  Syracuse,  where  he  raised  the  debt  of  his  parish,
and  "founded  the  Holy  name  society,  a  branch  of
the  Catholic  benevolent  legion  and  the  Catholic
mutual  benefit  association.  He  was  known  as  an
eloquent  preacher,  and  also  appeared  on  the  lecture
platform.  In  1886  he  was  transferred  to  Utica.
Before  this  event  well-known  citizens  of  Syracuse,
both  Protestants  and  Roman  Catholics,  expressed
the  intention  of  waiting  on  the  bishop  in  a  body
and  asking  him  to  allow  Father  Moriarty  to  re
main.  The  latter,  however,  declined  their  inter
ference  and  at  once  obeyed  the  order  of  his  supe
rior.  Dr.  Moriarty  was  versed  in  ecclesiastical
doctrines,  and  learned  in  literature,  science,  and
arts.  His  works  have  a  large  circulation  among
his  co-religionists,  and  some  of  them  received  the
special  commendation  of  Pope  Leo  XIII.  The
principal  ones  are  "Wayside  Pcncillings"  (Albany,
1875);  "  Stumbling-Blocks  made  Stepping-Stones  "
(New  York,  1878);  "All  for  Love,  or  from  the
Manger  to  the  Cross"  (1881);  and  "Keys  of  the
Kingdom"  (1885).


MORI  ARTY


MORIN


405


MORIARTY,  Patrick  Eugene,  clergyman,  b.
in  Dublin.  Ireland.  4  July,  1804:  d.  at  Villanova,
Pa.,  10  July,  1875.  His  early  education  was  at  a
private  academy  that  his  father  had  founded  for
Roman  Catholic  youth.  In  1820  he  entered  the
novitiate  of  the  Augustinian  convent  at  Callan,
with  a  view  of  preparing  himself  for  the  priesthood,
and  he  afterward  studied  in  colleges  of  his  order  at
Lucca  and  Rome.  After  his  ordination  he  was
stationed  in  Dublin,  and  in  1835  was  sent  as  a  mis
sionary  to  India.  There  he  acted  for  several  years
as  secretary  of  the  vicar-apostolic  of  Goa  and  as
chaplain  to  the  British  troops  at  Madras,  being
the  first  Catholic  chaplain  that  was  recognized  by
the  English  government  since  the  Reformation.  On
his  return  to  Rome  from  the  East  he  was  the  bearer
of  an  address  to  the  pope  from  2.700  Roman  Catho-  !
lies  of  Madras.  In  1839  Dr.  Moriarty  joined  the  j
Augustinian  mission  in  the  United  States,  and  for
nearly  twenty  years,  with  brief  intervals,  he  was
stationed  at  the  Church  of  St.  Augustine  in  Phila
delphia.  He  was  soon  recognized  as  one  of  the
best  church  orators  in  the  United  States,  and  made
a  reputation  as  a  public  lecturer  on  religious  sub
jects.  He  was  given  the  post  of  father-superior
of  his  order  in  this  country,  and  in  thirty-five
years  he  saw  it  increase  from  one  house  and  three
priests  until  it  numbered  twenty-four  convents
and  churches.  He  was  for  many  years  president
of  Villanova  college.  Pa.  Dr.  Moriarty  published
numerous  essays  on  Irish  history  and  controversial
subjects  in  Roman  Catholic  periodicals,  fugitive
pieces  under  the  pen-names  of  "Ermite"  and
"  Hierophilos,"  and  in  book-form  "  The  Life  of  St.
Augustine"  (1873).

MORIBECHA, Melehior  Dias  (mo-ree-bay-
tchah).  Brazilian  miner,  b.  in  Sao  Paulo  about  IG^'.t :
d.  in  Bahia  in  1741. Very  little  is  known  of  hi-
life  except  that  he  was  a  half-breed  and  worked  as  !
a  miner,  also  earning  a living  as  a  hunter  or  a
vaquero. During  a  hunting expedition he  dis-  |
covered  rich  silver-  and  diamond-mines  in  the  dis
trict of  Jacobina,  and  also  a  silver-mine  in  the
Sierra  de  Borracia. The  Portuguese  authorities,  ''
having  heard  of  these  discoveries,  made  him  prop-  |
ositions  to  sell  his  secret,  but  he  obstinately  re
fused  to  locate  the  mines,  as  he  had  little  faith
in  the  generosity  of  the  government. The  author
ities  resolved  to  compel  him  to  tell  his  secret,  and
brought  him  to  Bahia.  where  he  was  imprisoned  in
a  dungeon  nearly  deprived  of  air,  light,  and  food.  !
He  lived  five  years  in  this  dungeon,  and  died  of  '
his  privations,  still  refusing  to  reveal  his  secret.  |
The  mines  that  were  seen  by  Moribecha  have  not  j
been  re-discovered,  but  their  existence  can  scarcely
be doubted. Moribecha  composed in  his prison  !
some  '•  Roteiros.''  in  which  he  deplores  his  misfor-  ]
tune,  and  which  are  inserted  in  Acciole's  •'  Memo-
rias  historicas  e  politicas  da  provincia  da  Bahia.''

MORILLO,  Pablo  (mo-reel'-yo).  Spanish  soldier.  :
b.  in  Fuente  de  Malva  in  1777;  d.  in  Rochefort,
France,  27  July,  1838. He  was  the  son  of  poor  '
laborers,  and  worked  in  his  youth  as  a  shepherd.  '
but  enlisted  in  1797  in  the  marines,  and  served  at  :
Trafalgar in 1805. When  the  French invaded  \
Spain  he  organized  bands  of  guerillas  in  the  prov
ince  of  Murcia,  and  after  the  fall  of  Vigo  in  1809
was  appointed  colonel  in  the  regular  army,  becom
ing  major-general  in  1814. In  the  following  year
he  was  sent  to  Venezuela  and  Colombia  with  an
army  of  10.000  men  against  the  revolutionists,  and  i
in  April  attacked  the  island  of  Margarita,  which  i
surrendered  after  a  short  resistance.  He  then  made  '
sail  for  Corralitos,  and  after  several  engagements  '
entered  Caracas  on  11  May.  imposed  a  heavy  con


tribution  on  the  city,  and  organized  a  government.
He  landed  with  the  main  army  on  20  Aug.  near
Carthagena.  which  he  besieged  for  nearly  three
months.  After  a  strenuous  resistance,  famine  com
pelled  the  garrison  to  abandon  the  place  during
the  night,  and  on  6  Dec.  Morillo  entered  the  city,
after  losing  3.000  men  during  the  siege.  Continu
ing  his  march  toward  Mompox,  he  entered  Santa
Fe  de  Bogota  on  26  May,  1816,  and  executed  125
prominent  citizens  alone,  including  several  women.
The  title  of  "  pacificator "  was  conferred  upon
Morillo  by  royal  order,  and  he  was  created  Count
of  Carthagena.  On  20  Nov.,  1816,  he  left  Bogota
for  Venezuela.  He  was  defeated  by  Paez  at  Mu-
curitas  on  28  Jan..  1817,  and.  seeing  that  the  inde
pendent  forces  were  gathering  strength,  retreated
to  the  north,  and  after  receiving  re-enforcements
in  Cumana  in  June,  sailed  with  3,000  men  for
Margarita.  He  landed  on  16  July,  and  after  a
campaign  of  a  month,  in  which  he  lost  many  men
without  gaining  any  advantage,  returned  on  17
Aug.  to  the  continent,  when  he  heard  of  the  con
tinuous  success  of  Bolivar  in  Guyana.  In  the  fol
lowing  November  he  occupied  Calabozo.  but  after
the  junction  of  Bolivar  and  Paez,  he  abandoned
that  city  in  February,  1818,  and  retired  toward
Caracas.  On  15  March  he  defeated  Bolivar  at  La
Puerta,  being  dangerously  wounded  during  the
action,  and  for  his  victory  was  created  Marquis  de
la  Puerta.  In  January,  1819,  he  marched  again  at
the  head  of  6,500  men  against  Paez,  but  tired  out
by  the  rapid  retreats  of  that  general,  who  cut  off
his  supplies.  Morillo  retired  across  Arauca  river,
and,  after  a  defeat  at  Queseras  del  Medio  on  2
April,  returned  with  his  army  to  Calabozo.  Mean
while  Bolivar  had  been  victorious  in  Colombia,  and
when  Morillo  received  news  in  March,  1820,  of  the
revolution  of  Cadix,  and  knew  that  he  could  not
count  on  re-enforcements,  he  opened  negotia
tions  with  Bolivar  and  other  independent  generals.
They  would  treat  only  on  the  condition  that  he
should  recognize  the  independence  of  the  country,
and  finally  the  armistice  of  Trujillo  was  signed  on
25  Nov.  Convinced  of  the  ultimate  triumph  of  the
cause  of  independence,  Morillo  had  long  before
asked  to  be  relieved,  and  on  receiving  a  favorable
answer  sailed  for  Spain  on  17  Dec.,  1820.  Being
appointed  to  the  command  of  the  garrison  of
Madrid,  he  defeated  the  rebels  at  La  Granja  in
1821,  became  captain-general  of  Galicia  in  1822,
and  t6ok  part  with  the  constitutionalists  against
the  royalists,  commanding  in  1823  the  fourth
army  corps  against  the  invading  French  army  that
was  sent  to  restore  the  authority  of  Ferdinand  VII.
After  the  defeat  of  the  eortes  in  August,  Morillo.
degraded  by  the  king,  retired  to  Rochefort  in
France.  He  published  "  Memorias  relativas  a  los
principales  acontecimientos  de  mis  campanas  en
America  "  (Rochefort,  182,6).

MORIN,  Alexandre  Etienne  (mo-rang).  West
Indian  historian,  b.  in  St.  Lucia  in  1776 ;  d.  in  New
Orleans.  La.,  in  1831.  He  received  his  early  edu
cation  in  Martinique,  but  finished  his  studies  in
Paris,  and  obtained  the  commission  of  lieutenant
in  the  garrison  of  Santo  Domingo  in  1791.  During
the  ensuing  troubles  in  the  colony  he  sided  with
the  Democrats,  and  was  the  first  to  incite  the
soldiers  to  disregard  the  orders  of  Col.  Mauduit
du  Plessis  (q.  v.).  He  was  arrested  for  his  bold
language,  but  liberated  a  few  days  later,  when
Mauduit  was  murdered  by  the  insurgents.  Morin
soon  became  disgusted  with  his  former  associates,
and,  joining  the  regular  army  again,  was  a  formi
dable  foe  to  the  bands  of  negroes  that  pillaged  the
country.  He  held  various  important  commands


406


MO  KIN


MORPHY


till  1798,  when  he  was  made  a  prisoner  by  the
English  invaders  and  transported  to  Jamaica,
whence  he  escaped  to  New  Orleans  in  1799.  In
1803,  when  the  French  took  possession  again  of
Louisiana,  he  was  appointed  major  of  the  garrison
of  New  Orleans,  but  after  the  cession  to  the  United
States  he  resigned  his  command,  preferring  to
remain  in  the  country.  As  he  had  no  fortune  he
became  a  teacher,  and  founded  in  1807  an  academy
of  languages.  He  prospered,  and  was  elected  to
the  common  council  of  the  city  in  1828,  and  re-
elected  several  times.  He  wrote  "  Histoire  de  la
decouverte,  de  la  conquete,  et  de  la  colonisation  de
Porto  Rico  "  (2  vols.,  New  Orleans,  1812) ;  "  Histoire
de  la  domination  Espagnole  a  la  Louisiane  "  (3  vols.,
1818) ;  and  "  Materiaux  d'une  histoire  generale  des
bouccaniers"  (4  vols.,  1821).

MOKIN,  Augnstin  Norbert,  Canadian  jurist,
b.  in  St.  Michel,  district  of  Quebec,  12  July.  180:3  ;
d.  in  St.  Hyacinthe,  27  July,  18G5.  He  was  edu
cated  at  the  Seminary  of  Quebec,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Montreal  in  1828.  He
was  elected  to  parliament  in  1830,  and  in  1834  sent
by  that  body  to  carry  a  statement  relative  to  the
condition  of  the  province  to  David  B.  Vigor,  and
to  aid  him  in  his  representations  before  the  British
ministry.  In  October,  1842,  Mr.  Morin  became
commissioner  of  crown  lands  in  the  Lafontaino-
Baldwin  ministry,  which  portfolio  he  retained  till
December,  1843.  In  1844  he  was  elected  for  the
counties  of  Saguenay  and  Bellechasse,  chose  to
represent  the  latter,  and  was  re-elected  for  the
same  constituency  in  1848.  At  this  date  he  was
made  speaker  of  the  house  and  remained  in  that
post  till  1851,  when  he  and  Francis  Ilincks  formed
the  administration  that  bears  their  names,  Mr.
Hincks  being  premier.  lie  accepted  the  office  of
provincial  secretary  of  Lower  Canada,  and  was
elected  for  the  county  of  Terrebonne.  From
August,  1853,  to  January,  1855,  he  was  commis
sioner  of  crown  lands,  and  in  the  latter  year  he  was
appointed  judge  of  the  superior  court  of  Lower
Canada.  In  1859  he  was  made  a  commissioner  for
codifying  the  laws  of  Lower  Canada.

MORISON,  John  Hopkins,  author,  b.  in  Peter
borough,  N.  II.,  25  July,  1808.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1831,  became  a  Unitarian  clergyman,
and  has  held  pastorates  in  New  Bedford  and  Mil
ton,  Mass.  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1858.  He  has  been  editor  of  the  "  Monthly
Religious  Magazine,"  and  a  frequent  contributor
to  current  denominational  literature,  and  has  pub
lished  "  Life  of  Jeremiah  Smith  "  (Boston,  1845),
and  "  Disquisition  on  the  Gospel  of  Matthew "
(1859). — His  brother,  Nathaniel  Holmes,  educa
tor,  b.  in  Peterborough,  N.  H.,  14  Dec.,  1815,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1839,  went  to  Baltimore,
Md.,  and  became  an  assistant  in  a  school  for  young
ladies.  After  holding  this  post  for  two  years,  he
opened  a  similar  school  of  his  own,  which  he  con
ducted  with  success  for  twenty-five  years.  In  1867
he  accepted  the  provostship  of  Peabody  insti
tute,  Baltimore,  the  duties  of  which,  although
light,  are  important.  The  Peabody  library  now
numbers  80,000  volumes,  representing  every  depart
ment  of  literature  except  current  fiction.  In  1871
he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  St.  John's
college,  Annapolis,  Md.,  of  which  he  has  long  been
one  of  the  governors  and  visitors.

MORISON,  Robert  Brown,  physician,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  13  March,  1851.  fie  entered  Har
vard  in  1869,  but  in  1871  went  to  Germany,  where
he  studied  medicine  in  Gottingen  and  in  Berlin.
He  took  his  degree  at  the  University  of  Maryland
in  1874,  and  returned  to  Europe  in"  1883  to  make  |


a  special  study  of  dermatology  in  Vienna  and
Prague.  In  January,  1884,  he  began  the  practice
of  dermatology  in  Baltimore,  being  the  first  physi
cian  in  that  city  to  take  up  that  specialty  exclu
sively.  He  is  a  member  of  the  American  derma-
tological  association  and  was  its  vice-president  in
1880-'7.  Dr.  Morison  has  contributed  several  arti
cles  to  •'  Buck's  Reference  Handbook  of  the  Medi
cal  Sciences"  and  to  various  medical  journals  in
this  country  and  in  Germany,  and  he  has  also  made
original  histological  investigations.  Since  the  in
corporation  of  the  Baltimore  polyclinic  and  post
graduate  medical  school  in  1883  he  has  held  there
the  professorship  of  dermatology.

MORLEY,  Edward  Williams,  chemist,  b.  in
Newark,  N.  J.,  29  Jan.,  1838.  He  was  graduated
at  Williams  in  1860,  and  subsequently  taught
chemistry.  In  1869  he  was  appointed  professor  of
chemistry  and  geology  in  Western  Reserve  (now
Adelbert)  college,  and  in  1873  was  called  to  fill  a
similar  chair  in  Cleveland  medical  college,  both  of
which  places  he  now  (1888)  fills.  His  original  work
includes  a  series  of  measurements  of  the  fineness  of
striation  of  all  the  diatoms  on  ten  of  Moller's  dia-
tomacean  test-plates  (1876),  followed  by  a  series  of
measurements  prepared  for  the  purpose  of  showing
precision  in  the  micrometric  readings  of  gradua
tions.  In  1877-'8  he  began  the  study  of  the  cause
of  the  variation  of  the  amount  of  oxygen  in  tin;
atmosphere,  designing  an  apparatus  for  this,  with
which  he  made  frequent  analyses  of  air.  The
publication  of  similar  results  by  foreign  scientists
led  to  his  devising  improved  apparatus  for  gas
analysis.  His  results  showed  that  Jolly's  theory  of
the  causes  of  variation  of  the  amount  of  oxygen  in
the  air  was  untenable,  and  indicated  that  air  at  an
elevation  above  the  earth's  surface  is  poor  in
oxygen,  and  that  when  such  air  is  brought  down  by
currents,  deficiency  of  oxygen  is  noted.  During
1884  he  was  engaged  with  Albert  A.  Michelson
((].  v.)  in  repeating  the  experiment  of  Fizeau  on  the
effect  of  the  motion  of  a  transparent  medium  on
the  velocity  of  light,  and  more  recently  they  have
experimented  with  a  view  of  testing  Fresnel's  ex
planation  of  astronomical  aberration.  Their  most
recent  work  in  this  direction  has  been  the  deter
mining  of  a  practical  method  of  comparing  the
wave-lengths  of  sodium  light  with  the  meter  more
accurately  than  has  hitherto  been  done;  also  a
method  of  laying  down  on  a  bar  of  metal  a  desired
number  of  such  wave-lengths  with  an  accuracy
greater  than  that  of  a  micrometric  comparison  of
standards  of  lengths,  so  that  the  sodium  wave
length  may  be  made  a  natural  standard  of  length.
At  present  he  is  engaged  in  redetermining  the
atomic  weight  of  oxygen.  In  1877  he  received
the  degree  of  M.  D.  from  the  Cleveland  medical
college,  and  in  1878  Ph.  D.  from  the  University
of  Wooster.  Prof.  Morley  has  collected  a  unique
chemical  library,  and  has  the  most  complete  files
of  chemical  journals  in  the  United  States.  He  is
a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  in  1883  was
vice-president  of  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science,  for  the  chemical  section.

MORPHY,  Paul  Charles,  chess-player,  b.  in
New  Orleans,  La.,  22  June,  1837;  d.  there,  10  July,
1884.  His  grandfather,  a  native  of  Madrid,  Spain,
emigrated  to  the  United  States  and  settled  in
Charleston,  S.  C.  His  father  removed  to  New
Orleans  at  an  early  age,  studied  law  under  Edward
Livingston,  was  twice  a  member  of  the  legislature,
became  attorney-general  of  Louisiana,  and  after
ward  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  that  state,
dying  in  1850.  Paul  was  graduated  at  St.  Joseph's
college,  Spring  Hill,  Ala.,  in  1824,  studied  law,


MORPIIY


MORRELL


407


and  was  admitted  to  the  New  Orleans  bar  in  1858.
He  early  exhibited  a  fondness  for  the  game  of
chess,  and  at  the  age  of  ten  was  taught  the  moves
by  his  father.  When  twelve  years  of  age  he  had

encountered  suc
cessfully  the  best
amateurs  of  his
native  city.  Dur
ing  his  collegiate
course  he  contin
ued  to  take  an  in
terest  in  the  game
and  in  turn  defeat
ed  Eugene  Rous
seau,  his  uncle,  Er
nest  Morphy,  and
John  J.  Lowen-
thal,  the  Hunga
rian  player,  win
ning  a  majority  of
the  games.  In  the
jutumn  of  1857
he  was  present  at
the  first  American
chess  congress  in  New  York  city,  where  he  met  and
vanquished  the  best  players  on  the  continent.  On
returning  home  he  issued,  in  January,  1858,  a  chal
lenge  to  the  chess  amateurs  and  professionals  of
America,  offering  the  odds  of  pawn  and  move,  but
this  was  not  accepted.  During  the  following  sea
son  he  first  exhibited  his  ability  to  play  without
seeing  the  board,  sometimes  carrying  on  seven

fames  at  once.  In  June,  1858,  Morphy  sailed  for
In  rope  for  the  purpose  of  meeting  Staunton,  the
chess  champion.  In  London  he  again  defeated
Lowenthal,  winning  nine  games  out  of  fourteen,
two  being  drawn.  Mi1.  Staunton,  who  had  fre
quently  promised  to  meet  Morphy,  postponed  the
conflict  from  day  to  day,  and,  except  in  consulta
tion  games,  they  never  met.  On  20  Aug.,  Morphy
attended  the  annual  meeting  of  the  British  chess
association  at  Birmingham,  where  '  he  played
eight  games  simultaneously  without  seeing  the
boards,  winning  six,  losing  one,  and  drawing  one.
In  September  he  went  to  Paris,  where  he  first
played  eight  games  with  Herr  Harrwitz,  winning
five,  losing  two.  and  drawing  one,  whereupon
Harrwitz  resigned  the  match  on  the  plea  of  indis
position.  After  defeating  the  best  French  players
at  the  Cafe  de  la  Regence,  Morphy  encountered  the
German  chess  champion,  Adolph  Anderssen,  and
won  seven  out  of  eleven  games,  two  being  drawn.
He  subsequently  played  six  off-hand  games  with  his
German  competitor,  winning  five  and  losing  one.
Morphy  also  played  blindfolded  simultaneously
against  eight  of  the  strongest  Parisian  players.  Of
these  he  won  six  games  and  drew  two,  the  play  gen
erally  being  of  a  more  brilliant  character  than  that
at  Birmingham.  This  feat  he  repeated  on  several
occasions,  both  in  London  and  in  this  country.  In
November,  1858,  he  offered  to  give  any  French
player  the  odds  of  pawn  and  move  in  a  match
game,  the  challenge  including  Ilarrwitz  and  being
especially  intended  for  him,  but  the  latter  took  no
notice  of  it.  On  leaving  Paris  in  April,  Morphy  was
given  a  farewell  banquet,  at  which  his  bust  was
crowned  with  laurel  by  the  French  players.  After
sojourning  for  a  time  in  London,  where  he  repeated
his  previous  triumphs,  he  sailed  for  home.  Soon
after  his  return  to  New  Orleans  he  gave  up  chess-
playing  in  order  to  devote  himself  more  entirely
to  his  profession.  Several  years  later  he  was  at
tacked  by  a  mental  disease  that  finally  incapaci
tated  him  from  all  intellectual  exertion  and  from
which  he  never  recovered.


MORRELL,  Benjamin,  navigator,  b.  in  Wor
cester  county,  Mass.,  in  1795;  d.  in  1889.  lie  be
came  captain  of  a  whaling  ship,  and  published
"  A  Narrative  of  Four  Voyages  to  the  South  Sea,
North  and  South  Pacific  Ocean.  Chinese  Sea,  Ethi-
opic  and  Southern  Atlantic  Ocean,  Indian  and
Antarctic  Ocean  "  (New  York,  1832).  "  These,"  says
Chancellor  Kent  in  his  "  Course  of  English  Read
ing,"  '•  were  private  trading  -  voyages,  but  per
formed  with  admirable  skill  and  with  enthusiastic
spirit  and  enterprise."

MORRELL,  Imogene  Robinson,  artist,  b.  in
Attleboro,  Bristol  co.,  Mass.  Her  maiden  name
was  Robinson,  and  in  1809  she  married  Abrain
Morrell.  She  began  her  art  education  at  the  age  of
sixteen,  at  Newark,  N.  J.,  and  subsequently  con
tinued  it  in  New  York  city.  After  teaching  art  at
Charlestown  and  Auburndale,  Mass.,  she  went  in
185G  to  Dusseldorf,  Germany,  where  she  was  a  pupil
of  Adolf  Schroedter  and  of  Camphausen,  the  court
painter.  In  1864  she  visited  Paris  and  studied  un
der  Francois  Louis  Franeais  and  Thomas  Couture.
Her  principal  productions  during  her  sojourn  in
the  French  capital,  where  she  resided  for  over  ten
years,  were  "  The  First  Battle  of  the  Puritans'"
and  "  Washington  Welcoming  the  Provision  Trains
at  Newburg,  N.  Y.,  in  1778"  (1874).  She  has  also
painted  a  "Historical  Portrait  of  Gen.  John  A.
Dix,"  which  was  afterward  purchased  for  the  capi-
tol  at  Washington  (1882) ;  and  portraits  of  Ilowell
Cobb  and  John  C.  Spencer,  ex-secretaries  of  the
U.  S.  treasury.  She  resides  at  present  (1888)  in
Washington,  D.  C.,  where  she  devotes  herself  to
portrait-painting,  and  where  she  teaches  in  the
"  National  academy  of  fine  arts,"  which  was  estab
lished  by  her  in  1879.  Her  two  large  historical
pictures,  "Washington"  and  the  "Battle  of  the
Puritans."  have  been  highly  praised  both  in  this
country  and  in  France.

MORRELL,  Thomas,  clergvman,  b.  in  New
York  city,  22  Nov.,  1747 ;  d.  in  Elizabethtown,
N.  J.,  9  Aug.,  1838.  In  1792  the  family  removed
to  Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,  and  Thomas  engaged  in
business  with  his  father  until  the  beginning  of  the
Revolutionary  war.  On  receiving  the  news  of  the
battle  of  Lexington  a  militia  company  was  raised,
of  which  lie  was  chosen  captain.  His  first  military
exploit  was  the  capture,  about  forty  miles  from
Sandy  Hook,  of  the  "  Green  Mountain  Valley,"  of
twelve  guns,  laden  with  provisions  for  the  British
army.  This  he  accomplished  without  the  loss  of  a
man.  His  second  achievement  was  the  safe  con
veyance  of  a  large  quantity  of  powder  through  a
hostile  section  of  New  Jersey  for  Gen.  Washington
in  Boston.  In  June,  1776,  he  was  made  captain  in
the  Continental  army,  and  ordered  to  raise  a  com
pany  of  seventy-five  effective  men.  Capt.  Morrell
was  severely  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Flatbush,  and
only  escaped  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy
by  feigning  death.  In  1777  he  was  promoted  ma
jor  of  the  4th  New  Jersey  regiment,  and  was  pres
ent  at  Brandywine  and  Germantown.  After  this
he  was  compelled  to  resign  on  account  of  ill  health.
Returning  to  business  in  Elizabethtown,  he  be
came  a  member  of  the  Methodist  church  in  1786.
and  at  once  began  to  preach.  From  1787  till  1803
he  labored  successively  in  New  York  city,  Philadel
phia,  and  Baltimore.  He  then  returned  to  Eliza
bethtown,  where  he  discharged  all  the  duties  of
his  pastorate  until  1822.  Subsequently  he  confined
himself  to  preaching  once  a  day  on  the  Sabbath
until  he  had  reached  the  advanced  age  of  eighty-
one.  Father  Morrell  at  his  death  had  been  fifty-
three  years  a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  and  was  one
of  the  pioneers  of  American  Methodism.


408


MORREY


MORRILL


MORREY,  or  MURREY,  Humphrey,  first
mayor  of  Philadelphia,  b.  in  England  about  1650 ;
(1.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1716.  He  was  a  Quaker,
and  probably  settled  first  in  New  York,  removing
to  Philadelphia  before  1685,  as  Robert  Turner,  in  a
letter  to  William  Penn,  dated  at  Philadelphia,  3
Aug.,  1685,  says  of  him  :  "  Humphrey  Murray  from
New  York  has  built  a  large  timber  house  with  brick
chimnies."  During  this  year  he  was  commissioned
a  "justice  of  the  peace  and  of  the  courts  of  the
county  of  Philadelphia,"  in  which  office  he  served
many  years.  In  1687,  and  again  in  1690,  he  was
chosen"  to  the  assembly,  and  in  the  charter  of  20
March,  1691,  by  which  Philadelphia  was  for  the
first  time  incorporated  into  a  city,  Murray  is  ap
pointed  to  be  mayor,  so  that  he  was  the  first  mayor
of  Philadelphia/  This  honor  was  given  to  Ed
ward  Shippen  until  1887,  when  Boies  Pen  rose  and
Edward  P.  Allinson,  in  their  researches  incident  to
the  writing  of  "  Philadelphia,  a  History  of  Munici
pal  Government,"  discovered  the  original  charter
signed  by  Thomas  Lloyd.  In  1693  Murray  was  one
of  the  judges  that  became  involved  in  the  contro
versy  with  George  Keith,  Thomas  Budd,  and
others,  and  before  whom  these,  with  William  Brad
ford,  the  printer,  were  tried.  In  1700  he  was  se
lected  by  Penn  to  be  a  member  of  his  council,  but
he  does  not  appear  to  have  served  after  1701.

MORRICE,  David,  Canadian  merchant,  b.  in
St.  Martin,  Perthshire,  Scotland,  11  Aug.,  1829.
He  was  educated  in  his  native  town,  afterward
gained  a  knowledge  of  mercantile  affairs,  and  in
1855  emigrated  to  Canada.  He  was  subsequently
engaged  in  business  in  Toronto  for  several  years,
and  in  1863  settled  permanently  in  Montreal,  and
established  a  firm  that  has  attained  wide  reputa
tion.  It  has  wholesale  warehouses  in  Montreal
and  Toronto,  and  controls  about  forty  cotton-  and
woollen-mills  indifferent  parts  of  the  country.  Mr
Morrice  is  chairman  of  the  board  of  management  of
the  Presbyterian  college  at  Montreal,  and,  in  addi
tion  to  contributing  freely  to  its  support  and  en
dowment,  he  erected  for  the  college  in  1882,  at  a
cost  of  f80,000,  a  convocation  hall,  library,  dining-
hall,  and  additional  dormitories  for  students.  In
1876-'7  he  also  contributed  liberally  to  the  erection
of  the  Crescent  street  Presbyterian  church,  one  of
the  costliest  religious  edifices  in  the  city.  He  has
also  given  liberally  to  the  Young  men's  Christian
association,  the  General  hospital,  the  Sailors'  insti
tute,  House  of  refuge,  and  similar  institutions.

MORRIL,  David  Lawrence,  senator,  b.  in
Epping,  liockingham  co.,  N.  H.,  10  June,  1772 ;  d.
in  Concord,  N.  H.,  28  Jan.,  1849.  After  receiving
an  academical  and  medical  education,  he  began  to
practise  at  Epsom,  Merrimack  co.,  N.  H.,  in  1793,
but  in  1800  turned  his  attention  to  the  study  of
theology,  was  licensed  to  preach,  and  served  as
pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  at  Goffston,
N.  H.,  from  1802  till  1811.  From  1807  till  1830
he  again  practised  medicine,  and  he  sat  as  a  repre
sentative  in  the  general  court  from  1808  till  1817,
being  elected  speaker  in  1816.  He  was  chosen  U.  S.
senator  as  an  Adams  Democrat,  and  served  from
1  Dec.,  1817,  till  3  March,  1823,  when  he  was  sent
to  the  state  senate  and  elected  its  president.  In
1824  he  was  a  candidate  for  governor,  and,  there
being  no  choice  by  the  people,  he  was  elected  by
the  convention.  In  the  two  following  years  he
was  chosen  by  the  people.  In  1831  he  removed  to
Concord,  where  he  edited  the  "New  Hampshire
Observer,"  a  religious  journal.  He  received  the
honorary  degree  of  M.  D.  from  Dartmouth  college
in  1821.  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  the  University  of
Vermont  in  1825.  He  was  connected  with  m'anv


charitable,  medical,  and  agricultural  associations,
and  published  several  sermons,  orations,  and  con
troversial  pamphlets.

MORRILL,  Anson  Peaslee,  statesman,  b.  in
Belgrade,  Kennebec  co.,  Me.,  10  June,  1803  ;  d.  in
Augusta,  Me.,  4  July,  1887.  He  received  a  com
mon-school  education  and  devoted  himself  to  mer
cantile  pursuits  in  his  native  town.  Pie  soon
bought  an  interest  in  a  woollen-mill,  and  subse
quently  became  connected  with  several  extensive
manufactories.  In  1833  he  was  elected  as  a  Demo
crat  to  the  legislature,  in  1839  he  was  made  sher
iff  of  Somerset  county,  and  in  1850  he  became
land-agent.  In  1853,  when  the  Democratic  con
vention  decided  to  oppose  prohibition,  he  cut  loose
from  that  party,  and  was  a  candidate  for  governor
on  the  Free-soil  and  Prohibition  tickets,  but  was
defeated.  The  following  year  he  was  again  a  can
didate,  and.  although  there  was  no  choice  by  the
people,  he  was  elected  by  the  legislature,  being  the
first  Republican  governor  of  Maine.  He  was  an
unsuccessful  candidate  for  re-election,  being  de
feated  in  the  legislature  through  a  coalition  be
tween  the  Wrhigs  and  Democrats.  The  party  that
Gov.  Morrill  had  formed  served  as  the  nucleus  for
the  movement  in  1856  when  the  National  Republi
can  party  first  took  the  field,  and  he  was  a  delegate
to  the  convention  that  nominated  John  C.  Fremont
for  president.  He  was  elected  to  congress  in  1860,
and  served  from  4  July,  1861,  till  3  March,  1863.
Declining  a  re-election,  he  became  largely  interested
in  railroads  in  his  native  state,  and  remained  out
of  politics  until  1881,  when  lie  was  sent  to  the
legislature.  He  removed  to  Augusta  in  1876. —
His  brother,  Lot  Myrick,  secretary  of  the  treasury,
b.  in  Belgrade,  Kennebec  co.,  Me.,'  3  May,  1813;  d.
in  Augusta,  Me.,  10  Jan.,  1883,  entered  Waterville
college  (now  Colby  university)  in  1835,  but  did
not  remain  through
the  year.  He  then
studied  law  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar
in  1839.  He  removed
to  Augusta,  estab  -
lished  himself  in  prac
tice,  and  was  an  ac
tive  member  of  the
Democratic  party  in
Maine.  In  1854  he
was  elected  to  the
legislature,  and  on
his  re-election  in  1856
he  was  chosen  presi
dent  of  the  senate.
Subsequently  Mr.
Morrill  denounced
the  course  of  his  par
ty  on  the  question  of  slavery  in  Kansas,  severed  his
connection  with  his  former  associates,  was  nomi
nated  in  1857  by  the  Republicans  for  governor,  and
elected  by  over  15,000  majority.  He  was  twice  re-
elected.  In  1860  Gov.  Morrill  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.
senate  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  Hannibal  Ham-
lin's  election  to  the  vice-presidency.  He  entered  the
senate,  17  Jan.,  1861,  was  placed  on  important  com
mittees,  and  attended  the  Peace  conference  of  that
year.  During  the  two  that  followed  he  took  an
active  part  in  public  affairs,  and  in  1863  was  elected
senator  for  the  term  that  ended  in  1869.  In  the
Republican  caucus  for  a  successor,  Mr.  Morrill
was  defeated  by  a  single  vote  ;  but,  as  William  P.
Fessenden  died  in  1869,  Morrill  was  appointed  to
serve  out  the  remainder  of  Fessenden's  term.  In
1871  he  was  again  elected  senator,  and  in  the  dis
charge  of  his  duties  devoted  much  attention  to


MORRILL


MORRIS


409


financial  questions.  He  opposed  the  bill  for  inflat
ing  the  currency,  which  was  vetoed  by  President
Grant,  and  was  in  favor  of  the  resumption  act
of  1875.  He  was  noted  as  being  a  hard  worker
in  committee-rooms,  and  was  especially  familiar
with  naval  and  Indian  affairs.  On  Sec.  William
W.  Belknap's  resignation,  President  Grant  asked
Senator  Merrill  to  take  a  seat  in  the  cabinet,  but
he  declined.  In  June.  1870,  he  was  made  secretary
of  the  treasury.  In  November,  1870,  he  made  an
address  to  the  moneyed  men  of  New  York  from
the  steps  of  the  sub-treasury  department,  and  in
his  annual  report  in  December  he  urged  immediate
and  yet  gradual  contraction  of  the  currency,  and
declared  that  specie  payments  could  be  resumed  in
1879.  When  Mr.  Hayes  became  president  in  1877
he  offered  Mr.  Morrill  a  foreign  mission,  but  it
was  declined.  He  was  appointed  in  March  col
lector  of  customs  for  Portland  district,  Me.,  which
post  he  held  at  the  time  of  his  death.

MORRILL,  Justin  Smith,  senator,  b.  in  Straf-
ford,  Orange  co.,  Vt.,  14  April,  1810.  He  received
a  common-school  education,  and  engaged  in  mer
cantile  pursuits  until  1848,  when  he  turned  his
attention  to  agriculture.  He  was  elected  to  con
gress  as  a  Republican,  and  five  times  re-elected,
serving  from  3  Dec.,  1855,  until  3  March,  1807.  He
was  the  author  of  the  "  Morrill  "  tariff  of  1801,  and
acted  as  chairman  of  the  committee  of  ways  and
means  in  1804-'5.  He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator
from  Vermont  in  1807,  and  re-elected  in  1873,
1879,  and  1880.  His  present  term  will  expire  in
1891.  He  is  the  author  of  •'  Self-Consciousness  of
Noted  Persons  "  (Boston,  1880).

MORRIN,  Joseph,  Canadian  benefactor,  b.  in
Dumfriesshire,  Scotland,  about  1792;  d.  in  Quebec,
29  Aug.,  1801. He  came  to  Canada  with  his  par
ents at an early  age,  was  educated in Quebec,
studied medicine, and completed his  course in
Edinburgh  and  London. He began  practice  at
Quebec,  and  rose  to eminence in  his profession.
I  )r.  Morrin  was  one  of  the  three  founders  of  Beau-
port  asylum,  served  as  a  magistrate,  and  twice  as  I
mayor  of  Quebec,  and  was  employed  by  the  city  [
corporation  to  urge  before  the  British  government  !
the  claims  of  Quebec  to  be  the  capital  of  Lower
Canada. A  short  time  before  his  death  he  gave  a
large  sum  of  money  for  the  erection  of  a  Presbyte
rian  college  in  Quebec,  known  as  Morrin  college.  I
As  a  physician  he  was  regarded  as  without  a  su-  !
perior  in  Lower  Canada,  and  he  was  the  first  presi-  j
dent  of  the  medical  board  of  that  province.

MORRIS.  Anthony,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  in
Stepney.  London.  England.  23  Aug.,  1054:  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa..  24  Oct.,  1721.  Re  was  the  son
of  Anthony  Morris,  of  London,  and  on  emigrating
to  this  country  first  settled  in  New  Jersey,  but  in
1083  removed  to  Philadelphia.  In  the  charter  of
that  city,  bearing  date  20  March.  1091,  he  is  men
tioned  as  an  alderman.  In  1092  he  was  appointed
a  judge  of  the  courts  of  common  pleas  and  quar
ter  sessions,  and  of  the  orphans'  court,  of  which,
in  the  following  year,  he  became  the  president
judge.  In  1094  he  was  made  a  judge  of  the  su
preme  court,  and  he  retained  his  several  judicial
offices  until  1098.  He  was  one  of  the  judges  that
in  1093  sat  in  the  noted  trial  of  George  Keith.  John
Budd,  and  others.  Of  his  judicial  career  William
Penn  wrote  to  the  Lords  of  Trade  in  London :
"  Morris  is  one  of  the  most  sufficient  as  well  as
diligent  magistrates  there."  In  1095-'7  he  was  a
member  of  the  provincial  council,  and  he  served
for  several  years  as  a  member  of  the  assembly.  In
1704  he  served  as  mayor  of  the  city.  He  began  lo
preach  in  1701,  and  thereafter  devoted  nearly  all


his  time  to  ministerial  labor  among  the  Society  of
Friends,  travelling  through  most  of  the  North
American  provinces,  and  visiting  Great  Britain  in
1715. — His  son.  Anthony,  merchant,  b.  in  London,
England,  in  March,  1082 :  d.  in  Philadelphia,  23
Sept..  1703,  was  for  nearly  forty  years  one  of  the
most  influential  members  of  the  Society  of  Friends
in  Philadelphia,  taking  an  active  part  in  all  the
movements  that  were  originated  at  their  monthly
meetings.  In  1737,  and  for  several  years  afterward,
he  was  an  associate  justice  of  the'city  court.  He
sat  for  several  sessions  as  a  member  of  the  assem
bly,  and  in  1738  was  chosen  mayor  of  Philadelphia.
On  being  re-elected,  he  refused  to  serve. — His
daughter,  Sarah,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  in  Phila
delphia  in  1704:  d.  there.  24  Oct..  1775,  became  a
minister  of  her  denomination.  She  labored  among
the  Friends  in  New  Jersey,  Maryland,  and  Long
Island,  visited  Rhode  Island  in  1704,  and  travelled
through  Great  Britain  in  1772-'3. — The  second
Anthony's  son,  Samuel,  merchant,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,^!  Nov.,  1711 ;  d.  there  in  April,  1782,  took
an  active  part  in  the  affairs  of  the  province.  In
1750  he  was  commissioned  by  Gov.  Robert  Hunter
Morris  an  auditor  to  settle  the  accounts  of  the  ill-
fated  Bcaddock  expedition.  He  was  a  zealous  ad
vocate  of  independence,  and  during  the  Revolution
was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  safety  and  the
board  of  war.  In  1777  he  was  appointed  register
of  wills  of  Philadelphia,  which  office  he  held  until
1782.  From  1779  till  his  death  he  was  a  trustee  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania. — The  second  An
thony's  grandson.  Samuel,  son  of  a  third  of  that
name,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  24  June,  1734;  d.  there,
7  July,  1812,  often  served  in  the  legislature.  He
was  elected  "governor"  in  1770  of  the  club  known
as  "  The  State  in  Schuylkill."  and  re-elected  annu
ally  until  his  death.  He  was  also  president  for
many  years  of  the  ''  Gloucester  fox-hunting  club."
When  the  first  troop  of  Philadelphia  city  cavalry
was  organized,  not  less  than  twenty-two  members
of  the  last-named  association  were  enrolled  in  its
ranks.  Samuel  Morris  was  elected  its  captain.
The  troop  served  through  the  campaign  of  1770-'7
as  Washington's  body-guard,  and  took  an  active
part  in  the  battles  of  Trenton  and  Princeton,  in
which  latter  engagement  Samuel's  brother,  An
thony,  ensign  of  the  troop,  was  killed.  On  tempo
rarily  relieving  the  command  from  duty  in  Janu
ary,  1777,  Washington  returned  his  "  most  sincere
thanks  to  the  captain,"  and  added  that,  although
the  troop  was  '*  composed  of  gentlemen  of  for
tune,"  its  members  had  "shown  a  noble  example  of
discipline  and  subordination."  For  thus  taking
part  in  the  Revolution,  Capt.  Morris  was  disowned
by  the  Society  of  Friends,  but  he  continued  until
his  death  to  wear  the  dress  and  use  the  language
of  that  sect,  worshipping  with  them  regularly. —
The  first  Samuel's  son,  t'adwalader.  merchant,  b.
in  Philadelphia.  19  April,  1741;  d.  there,  25  Jan.,
1795,  was  a  member  of  the  city  troop  of  horse  that
was  commanded  by  his  cousin,  Capt.  Samuel  Morris.
In  1783-'4  he  was 'a  delegate  from  Pennsylvania  to
the  Continental  congress.  He  served  at  one  time
as  an  inspector  of  the  Bank  of  Pennsylvania,
whose  establishment  in  1780  he  assisted  by  sub
scribing  £2,500  to  its  capital,  his  father,  Samuel,
having  given  £3.000.  The  object  of  this  institu
tion  was  declared  to  be  "the  supplying  of  the  Army
of  the  United  States  for  two  months."  In  1781  he
was  a  founder  and  also  a  member  of  the  first  board
of  directors  of  the  Bank  of  America.  After  the
war  he  had  an  iron-furnace  for  several  years  at
Birdsborough,  Berks  co.,  Pa.,  after  which  he  re
turned  to  mercantile  pursuits  in  Philadelphia. —


410


MORRIS


Another  son  of  the  first  Samuel,  Samuel  Cad-
walader,  patriot,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  29  May,  1743;
d.  there  in  February,  1820,  was  a  merchant,  took  an
active  part  in  perfecting  the  military  organization
of  the  state,  and  served  as  an  officer  during  the
Revolution.  When  bills  of  credit  were  issued  by
Pennsylvania  in  1775,  he  was  among  those  that  were
directed  by  the  assembly  to  sign  them.  He  was  a
member  of  the  council  of  safety  in  1776,  and  of  the
board  of  war  at  its  organization.  lie  assisted  in
equipping  the  state  navy,  and  was  appointed  by
congress  to  have  the  care  of  the  prisoners  of  war
within  the  limits  of  the  state.  He  was  in  com
mand  of  a  company  of  militia  at  Princeton  and
Trenton.  In  a  letter  dated  24  Dec.,  1776,  addressed
to  the  council  of  safety,  he  says:  "Be  not  afraid.
ye  Tories  shall  not  triumph  over  us  yet.  We  will
yet  have  our  Day,  and  make  them  Tremble.'' — An
other  son  of  the  first  Samuel,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in
Philadelphia  about  1739;  d.  there,  9  March,  1785,
was  graduated  in  1759  at  the  College  of  Philadel
phia  (now  University  of  Pennsylvania),  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  became  eminent
in  his  profession.  In  1776  he  was  commissioned  a
justice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,  and  in  the
same  year,  having  ardently  espoused  the  cause  of
the  colonies,  he  was  appointed  quartermaster  of  the
Pennsylvania  troops,  with  the  rank  and  pay  of  a
lieutenant-colonel.  The  year  following  an  emer
gency  arose  that  compelled  him  to  discharge  the
duties  of  attorney-general.  Andrew  Allen,  who
had  held  the  office  since  1766,  and  who,  in  the
early  part  of  the  Revolutionary  struggle,  had  taken
sides  with  the  colonies,  terrified  at  the  success
of  the  British  in  New  York,  and  at  their  ap
proach  to  Philadelphia,  became  a  Tory,  and  went
over  to  the  enemy.  Important  state  cases,  many
of  them  growing  out  of  the  war,  were  then  coming
on  for  trial  in  the  several  counties.  In  this  crisis
Morris  was  appealed  to  by  the  supreme  executive
council  to  accept  the  attorney-generalship,  which
he  did,  although  he  had  no  taste  for  the  work  of
his  profession  in  connection  with  criminal  law.
His  services  at  this  time  were  valuable,  and  added
to  the  esteem  in  which  he  was  held  by  the  au
thorities.  In  1777  he  became  master  of  the  rolls
and  recorder  for  the  city  and  county  of  Philadel
phia,  which  offices  he  held  until  his  death.  He  was
a  member  of  the  American  philosophical  society. —
The  second  Anthony's  grandson,  Anthony  James,
soldier,  son  of  James  Morris,  b.  in  Philadelphia  in
1739;  d.  there,  20  May,  1831,  aided  in  organizing
the  first  Pennsylvania  battalion,  and  was  appoint
ed  its  major  by  congress,  25  Nov.,  1775.  He  soon
afterward  accompanied  his  command  to  Canada,
where  he  rendered  important  service.  On  25  Oct.,
1776,  he  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  2d
Pennsylvania  regiment  of  the  Continental  line,  and
on  12  March,  1777,  was  made  colonel  of  the  9th  regi
ment. — Capt.  Samuel's  son,  Anthony,  merchant,  b.
in  Philadelphia  in  1766 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,
6  Nov.,  1860,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1783,  studied  law,  and  was  admit
ted  to  the  bar  in  1787.  He  subsequently  became  a
merchant,  and  was  extensively  engaged  in  the  East
India  trade.  In  1793  he  was  speaker  of  the  Penn
sylvania  senate,  and  because  as  such  he  signed  the
bill  providing  for  troops  to  suppress  the  Whiskey
rebellion,  he  was  disowned  by  the  Quaker  meeting,
of  which  he  was  a  member.  'During  the  adminis
tration  of  President  Madison  he  was  sent  by  the
latter  on  a  special  mission  to  Spain,  where  he  re
mained  nearly  two  years.  In  1800-'6  he  was  a  di
rector  of  the  Bank  of  North  America,  and  from
1806  till  1817  a  trustee  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl


vania. — Capt.  Samuel's  grandson,  Samuel  Wells,
lawyer,  son  of  Benjamin  Wistar  Morris,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  1  Sept.,  1786;  d.  in  Wellsborough,  Tioga
co.,  Pa.,  25  May,  1847,  received  an  academic  educa
tion,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  be
gan  to  practise  at  Wellsborough.  He  was  appoint
ed  judge  of  the  district  court,  and  subsequently
elected  and  re-elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,
serving  from  4  Sept.,  1837,  till  3  March,  1841.—
Another  grandson  of  Capt.  Samuel.  Caspar,  phy
sician,  son  of  Israel  W.,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..' 2
May,  1805;  d.  there,  16  March,  1884,  was  gradu
ated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1826,
and  after  serving  as  resident  physician  to  the  Penn
sylvania  hospital  and  making  a  voyage  to  India  as
snip's  surgeon,  began  practice  in  Philadelphia,
where  he  continued  to  reside  until  his  retirement
from  professional  pursuits  in  1871.  He  took  high
rank  as  a  practitioner,  and  was  lecturer  successive
ly  on  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine  in  t he-
Philadelphia  summer-school  of  medicine,  on  chil
dren's  diseases  at  the  Blockley  almshouse  hospital.
and  on  the  practice  of  medicine  in  the  Philadel
phia  medical  institute.  lie  was  a  founder  and
manager,  and  from  1860  till  1890  vice-president  of
the  Institution  for  the  blind  and  a  manager  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  hospital.  He  published  "A
Life  of  William  Wilborforce  "  (Philadelphia.  1841) :
"  Memoir  of  Miss  Margaret  Mercer  "  (1848) ;  "  Let
ter  to  Bishop  Alonzo  Potter  on  Hospital  Needs"
(1851);  "Lectures  on  Scarlet  Fever "  (1858);  "Es
say  on  Hospital  Construction  and  Management "
(Baltimore,  1875):  "Rilliet  and  Barthel  on  Dis
eases  of  Children"  and  "Heart  Voices  and  Home
Songs,"  for  private  distribution. — Capt.  Samuel'*
great-grandson,  1'hincas  Pemberton,  lawyer,  son
of  James  Pemberton.  b.  in  Bucks  county.  Pa.,  2
May,  1817,  was  graduated  at  Georgetown  college,
D.  C.,  in  1836,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1840.  In  1802  he  was  given  the  chair
of  practice,  pleading,  and  evidence  at  law  and  in
equity,  in  the  law  department  of  the  University
of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1884  he  became  professor
emeritus/  In  1840  he  was  president  of  the  Law
academy  of  Philadelphia,  and  in  1863-'4  was  a
vice-provost  of  that  institution.  He  received  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the  University  of  Pennsyl
vania  in  1884.  Prof.  Morris  is  the  author  of  "  A
Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Replevin  "  (Philadelphia,
1849)  and  "  Mining  Rights  in  Pennsylvania  "  (1860).
and  edited  John  W.  Smith's  "  Landlord  and  Ten
ant"  (1856).  —  Samuel  Wells's  son,  Benjamin
Wistar,  P.  E.  bishop, 'b.  in  Wellsborough.  Tioga
co.,  Pa.,  30  May,  1819,  was  graduated  at  the  Gen
eral  theological  seminary  in  1846,  made  deacon  the
same  year,  and  ordained  priest,  27  April,  1847.
He  was  rector  of  St.  Matthew's,  Sunbury,  Pa.,  for
four  years,  and  of  St.  David's,  Manayuhk,  Phila
delphia,  for  six  years,  when  he  became"  assistant  at
St.  Luke's,  Germantown,  Pa.,  remaining  there  un
til  his  elevation  to  the  episcopate.  He  was  conse
crated  missionary  bishop  of  Oregon  and  Washing
ton  territory,  3  Dec,,  1868.  In  1880  his  jurisdic
tion  was  divided,  Washington  territory  being  set
apart  as  a  separate  see,  while  Bishop  Morris  re
mained  in  charge  of  the  diocese  of  Oregon.  He
received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Columbia  in
1868,  and  also  from  the  University  of  Pennsylva
nia  the  same  year. — Caspar's  son,  James  Chestori,
physician,  b.'in  Philadelphia,  28  May,  1831,  was
graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1854,  and  began  to
practise  in  Philadelphia,  making  a  specialty  of
uterine  and  nervous  diseases.  He  was  physician
to  the  Foster  home  for  children  from  1856  till


MORRIS


MORRIS


411


1860,  from  1855  till  1859  to  the  Moyamensing
house  of  industry,  and  from  185?  till  1872  to  the
Episcopal  hospital.  From  October,  1862,  till  Au
gust,  1863,  he  served  as  contract  surgeon  in  the
army.  From  1855  till  1863,  inclusive,  he  examined,
in  connection  with  lectures  on  practice,  materia
niedica,  chemistry,  and  the  institutes  of  medicine,
in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  also  lec
tured  there  on  microscopic  anatomy.  He  has  re
ceived  several  patents  for  various  inventions.  His
most  important  literary  work  has  been  his  transla
tion  from  the  German  of  Prof.  C.  G.  Lehmann's
"Manual  of  Chemical  Physiology "  (Philadelphia,
1856).  He  has  also  contributed  largely  to  pro
fessional  journals,  and  is  the  author  of  "  The  Milk-
Supply  of  Large  Cities"  (Philadelphia,  1884);
"The  Water-Supply  of  Philadelphia";  "Annals
of  Hygiene";  and  "Report  of  Philadelphia  Wa
ter  Department"  (1886).

MORRIS,  Charles,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Wood
stock,  Conn.,  26  July,  1784 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C.,  27  Jan.,  1856.  He  entered  the  navy,  being
made  midshipman,  1  July,  1799,  and,  during  the  war

with  Tripoli  in
1801-'5,  served
in  the  squad
ron  under  Com.
Edward  Pre-
ble.  He  took
part  in  the  ex-

6?dition  under
ecatur  that  de
stroyed  the  frig
ate  "  "  Philadel
phia  "  in  the
harbor  of  Trip
oli  on  the  night
of  15  Feb.,  1804,
and  subsequent
ly  captured  a
French  priva
teer.  In  Janu
ary,  1807.  he
was  promoted  to
a  lieutenancy,
and  he  was  ex
ecutive  officer  of  the  "Constitution"  in  July.  1812.
when  she  was  chased  for  sixty  hours  by  a  British
fleet.  In  the  following  month,  in  the  engagement
between  that  vessel  and  the  •'  Guerriere,"  he  was
severely  wounded.  On  5  March,  1813.  he  was  pro
moted  captain,  passing  the  intermediate  grade,
and  in  1814  was  appointed  to  the  command  of  the
"John  Adams,"  twenty-eight  guns,  in  which  ves
sel  he  cruised  off  the  coasts  of  the  United  States
and  Ireland,  greatly  injuring  British  commerce.
In  August  of  the  same  year,  when  Capt.  Morris
had  run  up  the  Penobscot  river,  Maine,  for  repairs,
a  strong  British  force  followed  him  with  the  design
of  effecting  his  capture.  A  detachment  of  militia
that  was  sent  to  his  relief  having  abandoned  him,
he  was  compelled  to  scuttle  the  vessel,  while  the
crew  made  the  best  of  its  way  in  small  parties  over
200  miles  of  thinly  settled  country  to  Portland.
In  1816-r17  he  commanded  the  naval  forces  in  the
Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  in  1819-'20  a  squadron  on  the
coast  of  Buenos  Ayres.  From  1823  till  1827.  and
again  from  1832  till  1841,  he  was  navy  commis
sioner,  as  such  having  a  vote  upon  every  important
question  of  naval  administration.  In'  September
and  October,  1825,  he  was  in  command  of  the
'•  Brandywine,"  in  which  Lafayette  returned  to
France.  He  was  afterward  employed  in  inspecting
the  dock-yards  of  England  and  France.  He  had
for  many  years  supervision  of  the  Xaval  academy


at  Annapolis,  Md.,  and  from  1851  until  his  death
he  was  chief  of  the  bureau  of  ordnance  and  hy
drography.  Entering  the  navy  at  the  most  trying
period  of  its  history,  when  it  had  little  support  or
encouragement  from  the  government,  when  it  was
almost  unknown  to  the  country  at  large,  and  when
its  internal  organization  was  loose  and  imperfect,
Capt.  Morris  lived  to  see  it  in  the  height  of  its
prosperity.  For  more  than  fifty  years  all  his  time,
his  thoughts,  and  his  energies  were  devoted  to  pro
moting  the  growth  and  well-being  of  the  service.
As  remarkable  for  judgment  and  self-control  as  he
was  for  courage  and  zeal,  he  is  regarded  by  many
as  the  foremost  man  of  the  navy  as  it  existed  prior
to  the  civil  war.  See  his  "Autobiography,"  pub
lished  by  the  U.  S.  naval  institute  (Annapolis,  1880).
MORRIS,  Charles  DTrfoan.  educator,  b.  in
C'harmouth.  Dorset.  England,  17  Feb.,  1827:  d.  in
Baltimore.  Md..  7  Feb.,  1886.  He  was  graduated
at  Oxford  in  1849,  and  three  years  later  became  a
fellow  of  Oriel  college.  He  came  to  the  United
States  in  1853.  was  for  a  time  rector  of  Trinity
school  in  New  York  city,  and  subsequently  master
of  a  private  school  for  boys  at  Lake  Mohegan,
near  Peekskill,  X.  Y.  He  was  then  made  a  pro
fessor  in  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York,
and  thence  was  called  in  1876  to  the  chair  of  Latin
and  Greek  in  the  Johns  Hopkins  university,  which
he  held  until  his  death.  In  his  Latin  and  Attic
Greek  grammars  Prof.  Morris  presented  some  origi
nal  views  of  the  proper  methods  of  teaching  the
elements  of  those  languages.  He  wrote  various
articles  on  philological  topics,  most  of  them  con
tributed  to  the  "  American  Journal  of  Philology  "
and  to  the  American  philological  association,  and
!  published  "  Principia  Latina"  (New  York,  1860);
a  revision  of  Bullions's  "  Principles  of  Latin  Gram
mar  "(1867);  "A  Compendious  Grammar  of  Attic
Greek"  (1869;  4th  ed.,  1876);  "A  Compendious
Grammar  of  the  Latin  Language  "  (1870 ;  4th  ed.,
1876);  "Probatio  Latina"  (1871):  "Latin  Read
ing-Book"  (1873);  and  "Parsing  and  Reading-
Lessons."  adapted  to  Morris's  Latin-Greek  gram
mars  (1870-'3).  He  left  an  edition  of  the  first
book  of  Thucydides  (Boston,  1887)  and  several
translations,  which  remain  unpublished.

MORRIS,  Clara,  actress,  b.  in  Cleveland.  Ohio,
about  1846.  At  the  age  of  fifteen,  to  assist  her
mother  after  her  father's  death,  she  became  a  mem
ber  of  the  ballet  corps  at  the  Academy  of  music  in
Cleveland.  Under  the  instruction  of  the  manager
she  advanced  rapidly,  was  promoted  to  leading
juvenile  lady,  and  in  1869  became  leading  lady  at
Wood's  theatre,  Cincinnati.  In  1870  she  went  to
New  York  and  entered  into  an  engagement  at  Daly's
Fifth  avenue  theatre.  She  was  there  employed  in
comedy  and  smaller  parts  until,  almost  at  the  be
ginning  of  the  season,  a  chance  substituted  her  for
the  actress  that  was  cast  for  Annie  Sylvester  in
"  Man  and  Wife."  In  this  character  her  dramatic
abilities  were  brilliantly  displayed.  She  afterward
appeared  in  "  Divorce,"  and  her  reputation  was  in
creased  by  her  representation  of  Cora  in  "Article
47,"  Camille,  Miss  Multon.  Alixe.  in  a  translation
of  the  "  Comtesse  de  Sommerive."  and  Mercy  Mer-
rick  in  the  stage  version  of  Wilkie  Collins's  "New
Magdalen."  She  excels  in  depicting  grief  and  in
the  portrayal  of  death- bed  scenes.  When  the  thea
tre  was  burned,  1  Jan.,  1873,  she  made  a  tour
through  the  west  with  the  rest  of  the  company.
She  next  appeared  at  the  Union  square  theatre
in  "  The  Geneva  Cross,"  and  afterward  from
time  to  time  at  Daly's  new  theatre.  In  the  win
ter  of  1880  she  filled  an  engagement  in  San  Fran
cisco.  During  the  past  ten  or  twelve  years  she


412


MORRIS


MORRIS


has  suffered  constantly  from  impaired  health,  sel
dom  being  able  to  play  throughout  an  entire  sea
son,  and  frequently  being  compelled  to  retire  tem
porarily  from  the  stage.  The  only  new  parts  she
has  recently  undertaken  are  the  leading  roles  in
the  "Denise"  of  Alexandra  Dumas,  dramatized
for  her  by  Augustin  Daly ;  Auguste  R.  Cazauran's
adaptation  of  Hardy's  "  Far  from  the  Madding
Crowd,"  and  "  Renee,"  a  version  of  Adolph  d'En-
nery's  "  Martyre."  Her  repertoire  is  now  virtually
limited  to  "  Camille,"  "  Miss  Multon,"  "  The  New
Magdalen,"  "Article  47,"  and  "Renee."  In  1874
she  married  Frederick  C.  Harriott,  of  New  York.

MORRIS,  Edmund,  journalist,  b.  in  Burling
ton,  N.  J.,  28  Aug.,  1804;  d.  there,  4  May,  1874.
He  received  a  good  English  education,  learned  the
trade  of  a  printer,  and  at  twenty  years  of  age  was  edi
tor  and  publisher  of  the  "  Bucks  County  Intelli
gencer"  at  Doylestown,  Pa.  He  subsequently  con
ducted  the  "  Ariel"  and  the  "Saturday  Evening  Bul
letin  "  of  Philadelphia,  where  he  introduced  the
custom  of  selling  newspapers  on  the  streets.  After
editing  and  publishing  for  several  years  the  Bur
lington,  N.  J.,  "  Gazette,"  he  removed  in  1855  to
Trenton,  N.  J.,  and  took  charge  for  two  years  of
the  "  New  Jersey  State  Gazette."  In  1857  he  re
turned  to  Burlington  and  resided  there  until  his
death.  During  and  after  the  war  he  wrote  regu
larly  for  the  "New  York  Tribune,"  and  was  other
wise  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  press.  He  de
voted  much  attention  to  the  subject  of  farming,
publishing  •'  Ten  Acres  Enough,"  an  attempt  to
teach  the  advantages  of  intensive  cultivation,  and
"  How  to  Get  a  Farm  and  Where  to  Find  One"
(New  York,  18(34),  and  "  Farming  for  Boys  "  (Bos
ton,  1868).  He  also  edited  "  Derrick  and  Drill "
(New  York.  1865),  a  compilation  of  information  re
garding  the  oil-fields  of  Pennsylvania.  He  wrote
several  pamphlets  on  silk-cultiire  and  other  prac
tical  subjects,  and  made  numerous  inventions.
He  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  in  this  country  to
print  in  more  than  one  color.  Mr.  Morris  was  a
member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  and  for  years
an  earnest  Abolitionist.

MORRIS,  Edward  Dafydd,  educator,  b.  in
Utica,  N.  Y.,  31  Oct.,  1825.  'He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1849  and  at  Auburn  theological  seminary
in  1852,  and  ordained  pastor  of  a  Presbyterian
church  in  Auburn,  N.  Y.  In  1855  he  was  called
to  Columbus,  Ohio,  and,  after  laboring  there  till
1867,  he  was  elected  professor  of  church  history
and  polity  in  Lane  theological  seminary,  Cincin
nati.  In  1874  he  was  transferred  to  the  chair  of
systematic  theology.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Hamilton  college  in  1863,  and  that  of
LL.  D.  from  Maryville  college,  Tenn.,  in  1885.
Bes'des  contributing  to  the  periodicals  of  his  de
nomination,  Prof.  Morris  has  published  "  Outlines
of  Theology  "  (Cincinnati,  1880) ;  "  Ecclisiology  "
(New  York,  1885);  "Scripture  Readings"  (Cin
cinnati,  1886) ;  and  "  Salvation  after  Death  "  (New
York,  1887).— His  eldest  son,  Edward  Parmelee,
is  professor  of  Latin  in  Williams  college.

MORRIS,  Edward  Joy,  author,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa..  16  July,  1815;  d.  there,  31  Dec.,
1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1836  and
admitted  to  the  Philadelphia  bar  in  1842.  While
pursuing  his  studies  in  the  law  he  was  chosen
to  the  assembly  of  Pennsylvania,  in  which  he
served  in  1841-'3.  He  was'  then  elected  to  con
gress  as  a  Whig,  serving  in  1843-'5,  and  in  1850  he
was  sent  as  charge  d'affaires  to  Naples,  which  office
he  filled  four  years.  In  1856  and  1858  he  was  again
elected  to  congress,  and  in  the  latter  year  he  was
appointed  by  President  Lincoln  U.  S. "minister  to


Turkey,  which  office  he  held  until  1870.  Besides
frequent  contributions  to  various  journals,  he  was
the  author  of  "  Notes  of  a  Tour  through  Turkey,
Greece,  Egypt,  Arabia  Petra^a,  to  the  Holy  Land""
(2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1842) ;  and  translated  from
the  German  Alfred  De  Besse's  "  The  Turkish  Em
pire,  Social  and  Political,"  with  additions  (1854) ;
"  Afraja,  or  Life  and  Love  in  Norway,"  by  Theodore
Mugge  (1854);  and  "Corsica,  Picturesque,  Histori
cal,  and  Social,"  by  Ferdinand  Gregorovius  (1856).
MORRIS,  dteorge  P.,  journalist,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa,,  10  Oct.,  1802 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
6  July,  1864.  In  early  life  he  removed  to  New
York  city,  and  at  fifteen  years  of  age  wrote  for
the  "  New  York
Gazette  "  and  the
"American."  In
conjunction  with
Samuel  Wood-
worth  he  estab
lished  in  1823  the
"  New  York  Mir
ror,"  in  which  Na
thaniel  P.  Willis
and  Theodore  S.
Fay  were  after
ward  associated,
but  which  was  dis
continued  in  1842.
In  1843  Morris
and  Willis  began
the  publication  of
the  "  New  Mirror,"
which  extended  to  three  volumes,  and  the  next  year
they  established  the  "  Evening  Mirror,"  a  daily  pa
per.  At  the  close  of  1845  Morris  founded  the  "  Na
tional  Press,"  changing  it  in  November  of  the  fol
lowing  year  to  the  "  Home  Journal,"  which  he  edited
with  Mr.  Willis  until  a  short  time  before  his  death.
He  resided  for  many  years  at  "  Undercliff,"  a  beau
tifully  situated  country-seat  in  the  Hudson  river
highlands.  He  was  usually  addressed  as  Gen.  Mor
ris,  deriving  the  title  from  his  commission  as  briga
dier-general  of  the  New  York  militia.  He  was  a
versatile  and  graceful  writer,  and  published  "  Bri-
arcliff,"  founded  on  the  events  of  the  American
Revolution  (New  York,  1825) ;  a  volume  of  prose
sketches  called  "  The  Little  Frenchman  and  his
Water-Lots  "  (Philadelphia,  1839);  the  libretto  of
Charles  E.  Horn's  "  Maid  of  Saxony  "  (New  York,
1842) ;  and  a  variety  of  miscellanies  in  prose  and
verse.  The  last  complete  edition  of  his  poems  ap
peared  in  1860.  He  also  edited  a  volume  of
"  American  Melodies,"  and  with  Nathaniel  P.  Wil
lis  "  The  Prose  and  Poetry  of  America  "  (1845).
But  it  is  as  a  song-writer  that  he  will  be  best  re
membered.  It  is  related  that  for  more  than  twenty
years  he  could  any  day  exchange  one  of  his  songs
unread  for  a  $50  check  when  none  of  the  other
poets  of  New  York  could  sell  one  for  the  fifth  part
of  that  sum.  Of  these  the  most  popular  are  the
lyrics  "  Near  the  Lake  where  drooped  the  Willow,"
"  We  were  Boys  together,"  "  Land  ho  ! "  "  Long
Time  Ago,"  "  My  Mother's  Bible,"  "  Whip-poor-
Will,"  and  "  Woodman,  spare  that  Tree."  The  last
was  founded  on  the  fact  that  on  one  occasion  a
friend  took  him  into  the  woods  not  far  from
Bloomingdale,  N.  Y.,  and  pointed  out  an  old  elm
under  which  he  had  played  in  his  youth.  While
they  were  examining  the  tree  a  man  approached
and  was  about  to  cut  it  down  when  Morris's  friend
offered  the  workman  ten  dollars  to  spare  it.  The
three  then  went  into  the  woodman's  cottage,  and
Morris  drew  up  a  bond  to  the  effect  that  the  tree
should  be  preserved  during  his  friend's  lifetime.


MORRIS


MORRIS


413


So  strong  was  the  impression  that  the  incident
made  on  Morris's  mind  that  he  commemorated  it
in  verse.  A  compliment  that  greatly  delighted  the
author  was  paid  this  poem  by  a  member  of  the
British  house  of  commons,  who  concluded  a  long
speech  in  favor  of  protection  by  quoting  it,  the
tree,  according  to  the  speaker,  being  the  constitu
tion,  and  Sir  Robert  Peel  the  woodman  about  to
cut  it  down.  See  "  Bryant  and  his  Friends,"  by
James  Grant  Wilson  (New  York,  1886). — His  son,
William  Hopkins,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York,  22
April,  1826,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1851,  but  resigned  from  the  army  in
1854,  and  engaged  in  literary  pursuits  in  1855-'61.
He  was  commissioned  as  staff  captain  and  assist
ant  adjutant-general  of  the  U.  S.  volunteers  in

1861,  served  in  the  peninsular  campaign  of  1862,
on  1  Sept.  of  that  year  resigned,  and  became  colo
nel  of  the  135th  New  York  regiment  of  infantry,
which  was  changed  into  the  6th  New  York  artil
lery. He  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  vol
unteers,  29  Nov.,  1862,  served  in  the  Pennsylvania
and  Rapidan  and  Richmond  campaigns,  and  was
wounded  near  Spottsylvania. In  March,  1865,  he
was  brevetted  major-general  of  volunteers  for  gal
lant  and  meritorious  services  in  the  battle  of  the
Wilderness.  May,  1864. He  invented  a  repeating
carbine  in  1869.  and  is  the  author  of  "A  System
of  Infantry  Tactics"  (New  York,  1865)  and  "Tac
tics  for  Infantry,  armed  with  Breech-loading  or
Magazine  Rifles'"  (1882).

MORRIS,  George  Sylvester,  educator,  b.  in
Norwich,  Vt.,  15  Nov.,  1840.  He  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  in  1861,  served  a  year  in  the  army,
returned  to  Dartmouth  as  tutor  in  1863-'4,  and
studied  at  Union  theological  seminary,  in  New
York  city,  and  at  the  universities  of  Halle  and
Berlin,  Germany,  in  1866-'8,  devoting  himself
chiefly  to  philosophical  investigations.  On  his  re
turn  to  the  United  States  he  became  in  1870  pro
fessor  of  modern  languages  and  literature  in  the
University  of  Michigan,  which  chair  he  occupied
until  1880.  The  following  year  he  was  appointed
to  that  of  philosophy  in  the  same  institution,
which  he  still  (1888)' retains.  From  1878  till  1885
he  was  lecturer  on  ethics  and  the  history  of  philoso
phy  in  Johns  Hopkins  university.  Besides  writing
on  philosophical  topics  in  various  reviews  and  in
the  "  Transactions  "  of  the  Victoria  institute,  Lon
don,  he  has  published  Ueberweg's  "  History  of
Philosophy,"  a  translation  from  the  German  (2
vols..  New' York,  1872-'4) ;  "British  Thought  and
Thinkers"  (Chicago,  1880):  "Kant's  Critique  of
Pure  Reason:  A  Critical  Exposition"  (1882);
"  Philosophy  and  Christianity,"  being  the  "  Ely
Lectures"  for  1883  (New  York,  1883);  and  "  He~-
gel's  Philosophy  of  the  State  and  of  History  :  An
Exposition  "  (Chicago,  1887).

MORRIS.  George  Upham,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Massachusetts,  3  June,  1830 ;  d.  in  Jordan  Alum
Springs,  Va.,  15  Aug.,  1875.  He  entered  the  navy
and  was  commissioned  midshipman,  14  Aug.,  1846,
lieutenant,  16  Sept.,  1855.  and  commander,  25  July.
1866.  He  distinguished  himself  by  his  defence  of
the  "  Cumberland,"  of  which  he  was  in  temporary
command,  when  attacked  by  the  iron-clad  ram
"  Merrimack  "  in  Hampton  Roads,  Va.,  8  March.

1862.  "  As her guns approached the water's
edge."  said  the  secretary  of  the  navy  in  his  report
for  that year, "  her young commander, Lieut.
Morris,  and  the  gallant  crew  stood  firm  at  their
posts  and  delivered  a  parting  fire,  and  the  good
ship  went  down  heroically  with  her  colors  flying."
Many  of  the  officers  and  men.  Lieut.  Morris  among
them,  were  able  to reach  the  shore,  but  a  large


number  perished  with  the  vessel.  In  the  following
May,  while  in  command  of  the  steam  gun-boat
"  Port  Royal,"  he  took  part  in  an  engagement
with  a  nine-gun  battery  on  James  river,  and  he
was  subsequently  wounded  at  Fort  Darling.  He
also  participated  in  the  attack  on  Fort  Powell,  at
Grant's  Pass,  in  February,  1864.  He  was  retired
from  active  service,  21  Oct..  1874.

MORRIS,  Herbert  William,  author,  b.  in
Wales,  21  July,  1818.  He  began  a  theological
course  of  study  in  London,  England,  but  was  com
pelled  to  desist,  owing  to  an  affection  of  the  eyes.
He  came  to  the  LTnited  States  in  1842,  and,  having
recovered,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1846  by  the
presbytery  of  Utica,  N.  Y.  After  holding  pastor
ates  in  Martinsburg,  Little  Falls,  and  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  and  in  Indiana,  he  gave  up  ministerial  work
in  1877  to  devote  himself  to  literature.  He  had
already  published  in  1870  "Science  and  the  Bible"
(Philadelphia),  which  soon  reached  a  sale  of  50,000
copies.  This  was  followed  in  1875  by  "  Present
Conflict  of  Science  with  Religion."  In  1880  ap
peared  his  "  Testimony  of  the  Ages  to  the  Truth  of
Scripture."  a  work  that  involved  great  labor.  His
latest  books  are  entitled  "  The  Celestial  Symbol,  or
the  Natural  Wonders  and  Spiritual  Teachings  of
the  Sun  "  (1883) ;  and  "  Natural  Laws  and  Gospel
Teachings  "  (New  York,  1887).  The  University  of
Rochester  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1876.

MORRIS,  John  Gottlieb,  clergyman,  b.  in
York,  Pa.,  14  Nov.,  1803.  He  was  graduated  at
Dickinson  college  in  1823,  studied  theology  at
Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1823-'6,  and  at
Gettysburg  seminary  in  1827,  being  a  member  of
the  first  class  in  the  latter  institution,  and  was
licensed  to  preach  in  1827.  He  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  in  1839,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1873,  both
from  Pennsylvania  college.  Gettysburg.  Dr.  Mor
ris  was  the  founder  of  Trinity  English  Lutheran
church,  Baltimore,  Md.,  and  its  pastor  in  1827-'60.
librarian  of  Peabody  institute,  Baltimore,  in
1860-'5,  pastor  of  the  3d  English  Lutheran  church.
Baltimore,  in  1864-'73,  and  since  1874  of  a  con
gregation  at  Lutherville,  Md.  He  has  been  lecturer
on  natural  history  in  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettys
burg,  since  1834,  on  pulpit  eloquence  and  the
relation  of  science  and  revelation  in  the  theological
seminary  there  since  1874,  and  has  delivered  lec
tures  in  Smithsonian  institution,  Washington,  D.
C.  He  was  secretary  of  the  general  synod  in  1839r
president  of  the  same  body  in  1843  and  1883,
and  president  of  the  first  Lutheran  church  diet  in
Philadelphia  in  1877.  He  has  been  a  trustee  of
Pennsylvania  college  and  director  of  the  theologi
cal  seminary  at  Gettysburg  for  many  years.  With
his  brother  he  founded  Lutherville  ladies'  seminary.
In  science  he  has  devoted  himself  specially  to
entomology  and  microscopy.  He  has  been  elected  to
membership  in  many  scientific  societies  in  this  coun
try  and  abroad,  and  has  been  chairman  of  the  ento
mological  section  of  the  American  association  for
the  advancement  of  science.  He  is  president  of  the
Maryland  Bible  society  and  the  Maryland  histori
cal  society.  During  the  year  1846  he  travelled
extensively  in  Europe,  and  in  the  same  year  he
aided  in  establishing  the  Evangelical  alliance  at
London.  He  founded  the  "  Lutheran  Observer  "
in  1831,  was  its  editor  until  1833,  and  since  then
has  been  one  of  its  contributors.  He  is  the  leader
of  the  conservative  party  in  the  general  synod,  and
its  ablest  representative.  Besides  many  transla
tions  of  works,  addresses,  review  and  magazine
articles,  tracts,  and  scientific  papers,  he  has  pub
lished  "  Catechumen's  and  Communicant's  Com
panion  "  (Baltimore,  1831) ;  "  Henry  and  Antonio  "


414


MORRIS


MORRIS


of  Brettschneider,  translated  from  the  German
(Philadelphia,  1831 ;  altered  ed.,  entitled  "  To  Rome
and  Back  Again,"  1853) ;  "  Catechetical  Exercises
on  Luther's  Catechism,"  altered  from  the  German
(Baltimore,  1832) ;  Von  Leonard's  "  Lectures  on  Ge
ology,"  translated  from  the  German  (1839) ;  "  Popu
lar  Exposition  of  the  Gospels "  (2  vols.,  1840) ;
"  Life  of  John  Arndt  "  (1853) ;  "  Life  of  Martin
Behaim,  the  German  Cosmographer  "  (1856) ;  "  Life
of  Catherine  de  Bora  "  (1856) ;  "  The  Blind  Girl  of
Wittenberg"  (Philadelphia,  1856);  "Quaint  Say
ings  and  Doings  concerning  Luther"  (1859);
"  Catalogue  of  the  Lepidoptera  of  North  America  "
(1860) ;  "  Synopsis  of  the  Diurnal  Lepidoptera  of  the
United  States  "  (Washington,  1862) ;  "  The  Lords
Baltimore  "  (Baltimore,  1874) ;  "  Bibliotheca  Luther-
ana  "  (Philadelphia,  1876) ;  "  Fifty  Years  in  the
Lutheran  Ministry "  (1878) ;  "  A  Day  in  Caper
naum."  translated"  from  Franz  Delitzsch  (1879);
"  The  Diet  of  Augsburg  "  (1879) ;  "  Augsburg  Con
fession  and  the  Thirty-nine  Articles "  (1879) :
"  Journeys  of  Luther  "  (1880) ;  "  Luther  at  Wart-
burg  and  Coburg  "  (1882) ;  "  Life  of  Luther,"  trans
lated  from  Kostlin  (1883);  "Lutheran  Doctrine
of  the  Lord's  Supper "  (1884) ;  and  "Memoirs  of
the  Stork  Family  "  (1886).

MORRIS,  Lewis,  statesman,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  1671 ;  d.  in  Kingsbury,  N.  J.,  21  May,
1746.  He  was  the  son  of  Richard,  an  officer  of
Cromwell's  army,  who  emigrated  from  England
to  the.  West  Indies,  and  afterward  came  to  New
York  and  purchased  from  the  Indians  about  1650
a  tract  of  3.000  acres  near  Harlem.  He  died  in
1673.  The  son  studied  law,  was  made  judge  of
the  New  Jersey  superior  court  in  1692,  and  became
a  member  of  the  council.  He  was  subsequently  an
active  member  of  the  assembly,  and  an  opponent
of  Gov.  Cornbury,  against  whom  he  drew  up  the
complaint  that  was  formulated  by  that  body,  and
presented  it  in  person  to  Queen  Anne.  He  was
chief  justice  of  New  York  and  New  Jersey  for  sev
eral  years,  state  councillor  from  1710  till  1738,  act
ing  governor  in  1731,  and  governor  of  New  Jersey
from  1738  till  his  death.  He  took  an  active  part
in  the  latter  year  in  bringing  about  the  separation
of  New  York  and  New  Jersey. — His  son,  Robert
Hunter,  jurist,  b.  in  Morrisania,  N.  Y.,  about  1700;
d,  in  Shrewsbury,  N.  J.,  27  Jan.,  1764,  was  chief  jus
tice  of  New  Jersey  in  1738-'64,  member  of  the  coun
cil  of  New  Jersey  in  1738,  and  governor  of  Pennsyl
vania  from  3  Oct.,  1754,  to  20  Aug.,  1756.  In  1757,
through  some  misunderstanding,  a  new  chief  jus
tice  for  New  Jersey  was  appointed,  but  when  refer
ence  was  made  to  the  supreme  court  of  that  col
ony,  Mr.  Justice  Nevill  decided  that  Morris's
commission  "  conferred  a  freehold  in  the  office,
and  nothing  had  been  shown  to  divest  him  there
of,"  in  consequence  of  which  he  retained  the  office
till  his  death.  As  chief  justice  he  "  reduced  the
pleadings  to  precision  and  method,  and  possessed
the  great  perfection  of  his  office,  knowledge  and
integrity  in  more  perfection  than  had  often  been
known  before  in  the  colonies."  "  He  was  comely
in  appearance,  graceful  in  manners,  and  of  a  most
imposing  presence."  Benjamin  Franklin  said  he
was  "eloquent,  an  acute  sophister,  and  therefore
generally  successful  in  argumentative  conversa
tion." —  Robert  Hunter's  son,  Robert,  jurist,
b.  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  in  1745;  d.  there,  2
May,  1815,  was  the  first  chief  justice  that  took
his  seat  on  the  bench  of  the  supreme  court  of  New
Jersey  under  the  constitution  of  1776.  Richard
Stockton  was  the  first  that  was  chosen,  but  he  de
clined  the  appointment.  Morris's  commission  was
dated  5  Feb.,  1777,  and  he  resigned  in  1779.  He


was  subsequently  appointed  by  Gen.  Washington

judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court  of  New  Jersey  in

1789,  and  held  that  office  until  his  death. During

the  latter  part  of  his  life  his  health  failed,  but  the

business  of  his  court  was  unimportant,  and  his  non-

attendance  occasioned  no  inconvenience.  —  Lewis's

grandson,  Lewis,  a  signer  of  the  Declaration  of

Independence,  b.  in  Morrisania,  N.  Y.,  in  1726;  d.

there,  22  Jan..  1798,  was  the  son  of  Lewis  Morris,

chief  justice  of  the  vice-admiralty  court,  who  was

born  in  1698  and

died  in  1762. He

was  graduated  at

Yale  in  1746,  and

at first devoted

himself  to  the  care

of his extensive

estate, but soon

began  to  take  an

active  part  in  pub

lic  affairs. When

the  authorities  at

tempted  to  enforce

the act that re

quired  that addi

tional  supplies  be

given  to  the  king's


nounce  it  tyran-
nical  and  unconstitutional.  This  bold  defiance
was  so  entirely  in  keeping  with  the  popular  tem
per  that,  just  after  the  battle  of  Lexington,  he
was  chosen  as  a  delegate  to  the  congress  of  1775,
and  took  his  seat  on  15  May.  Subsequently  he  was
placed  on  a  committee,  of  which  Gen.  Washington
was  chairman,  to  devise  ways  and  means  to  sup
ply  the  colonies  with  ammunition  and  military
stores.  At  the  close  of  the  session  he  was  sent  to
the  western  country  to  assist  in  the  difficult  opera
tion  of  detaching  the  Indians  from  their  British
allies,  and  inducing  them  to  make  common  cause
with  the  colonists.  He  remained  at  Pittsbnrg  until
the  following  winter,  and  maintained  a  constant
correspondence  with  congress  on  the  subject  of  In
dian  affairs.  He  resumed  his  seat  at  the  beginning
of  1776,  and  was  placed  on  several  important  com
mittees.  Returning  to  New  York,  Morris  found
that  the  people  of  the  province,  and  especially
those  of  the  city,  did  not  sympathize  with  him  in
his  desire  for  independence,  and  that  Gov.  Tryon,
although  he  had  been  compelled  to  take  refuge
on  board  the  British  fleet  in  the  harbor,  still
managed,  by  the  use  of  letters,  proclamations,  and
conciliatory  addresses,  to  keep  the  minds  of  the
citizens  in  a  state  of  hesitancy.  Morris,  with  other
patriotic  gentlemen,  exerted  himself  to  create  a
better  feeling,  and  induced  the  committee  of  safety,
on  18  April,  1776,  to  prohibit,  under  severe  penal
ties,  any  intercourse  with  the  royal  fleet.  When,
in  the  following  July,  Morris  signed  the  Declara
tion  of  Independence,  he  knew  that  a  large  British
army  had  landed  within  a  few  miles  of  his  estate,
that  their  armed  ships  were  lying  within  cannon-
shot  of  his  homestead,  and  that  his  extensive  pos
sessions  would  probably  be  given  to  pillage.  Nor
was  he  mistaken.  More  than  a  thousand  acres  of
woodland,  all  located  on  navigable  water,  were
burned,  his  house  was  spoiled  and  injured,  his
family  driven  away,  his  stock  captured,  his  domes
tics  and  tenants  dispersed,  and  the  entire  property
laid  waste  and  ruined.  For  the  next  six  years,
until  the  evacuation  of  New  York  city,  he  and  his
family  suffered  many  privations.  Early  in  1777  he
relinquished  his  seat  in  congress  to  his  half-


MORRIS


MORRIS


415


"brother,  Gouverneur,  on  which  occasion  that  body
passed  a  resolution  complimenting  him  and  his  col
leagues  "for  their  long  and  faithful  services/'  He
afterward  served  as  a  member  of  the  New  York
legislature,  and  major-general  of  the  state  militia.
After  peace  had  been  declared  he  returned  to  agri
cultural  pursuits. — His  eldest  son,  Lewis,  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1774,  entered  the  army,
and  served  as  aide  to  Gen.  John  Sullivan,  with  the
rank  of  major,  throughout  the  latter's  Indian  cam
paign.  He  afterward  accepted  Gen.  Nathanael
Greene's  invitation  to  enter  his  military  family,
and  took  part  in  that  officer's  brilliant  operations  in
the  Carolinas.  At  their  close  he  received  the  thanks
of  congress  and  a  colonel's  commission. — Another
son.  Richard  Valentine,  was  appointed  captain
in  the  navy  in  June.  1798,  and  was  in  command  of
the  Mediterranean  squadron  in  1802-'3.  He  was
dismissed  from  the  service,  14  May,  1804,  and  died
in  New  York  city  in  May,  1815. — Lewis  the  sign
er's  brother,  Staats  Long,  soldier,  b.  in  Morris-
ania,  N.  Y.,  27  Aug.,  1728 ;  d.  in  1800.  entered  the
British  army  and  became  captain  of  the  36th  foot,
31  May,  1756.  He  was  soon  afterward  promoted
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  89th  Highlanders,  served
at  the  siege  of  the  French  colony  of  Pondicherry,
India,  in  1761,  was  made  brigadier-general.  7  July,
1763,  major-general  in  1777,  and  general  in  1796.
He  married  the  Duchess  of  Gordon,  and  sat  in
parliament.  In  1797  he  was  appointed  gover
nor  of  Quebec. — Lewis  the  signer's  half-brother,
(irouveriieur,  senator,  b.  in  Morrisania,  N.  Y.,  31
Jan.,  1752 ;  d.  there,  6  Xov.,  1816,  was  graduated
at  King's  (now  Columbia)  college  in  1768,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1771.  At
the  age  of  eighteen  he
published  a  series  of
anonymous  newspaper
articles  against  a  pro
ject,  then  before  the
New  York  assembly,  for
raising  money  by  issu
ing  bills  of  credit.  He
was  a  delegate  to  the
1st  Provincial  congress
in  1775,  and  early  at
tracted  attention  by  a
report  and  speech  on
the  mode  of  issuing  a
paper  currency  by  the
Continental  congress,
the  chief  suggestions  of
which  that  body  subse
quently  adopted.  He
served  on  the  committee  that  drafted  the  state  con
stitution  in  1776,  and  the  following  year  took  the
seat  of  his  half-brother.  Lewis,  in  the  Continental
congress,  which  he  held  until  1780.  When  the  army
was  in  winter-quarters  at  Valley  Forge,  Mr.  Morris
spent  some  time  there  as  one  of  a  committee  that
had  been  appointed  to  examine,  with  Gen.  Washing
ton,  into  the  condition  of  the  troops.  He  was  also
chairman  of  a  committee  of  five  in  1779  whose
duty  was  to  consider  despatches  fro  in  the  American
commissioners  in  Europe,  and  whose  report  formed
the  basis  of  the  treaty  of  peace.  In  the  early  part
of  1780  he  published  a  series  of  essays  signed  "  An
American."  in  the  "  Pennsylvania  Packet,"  on  the
state  of  the  national  finances,  which  were  then
at  their  lowest  ebb.  In  May  of  the  same  year
he  was  thrown  from  his  carriage  in  Philadel
phia,  where  he  was  then  residing,  and  his
leg  was  so  severely  injured  that  it  had  to  be
amputated.  To  a  friend  who  called  the  next
day  to  offer  consolation,  and  who  pointed  out  the


good  effects  that  such  a  trial  might  produce  on  his
character  by  preventing  him  from  indulging  in  the
pleasures  and  dissipations  of  life,  he  replied :  "  My
good  sir,  you  argue  the  matter  so  handsomely,  and
point  out  so  clearly  the  advantages  of  being  with
out  legs,  that  I  am  almost  tempted  to  part  with  the


other."  During  the  remainder  of  his  life  he  wore
a  wooden  leg.  which  once  proved  valuable  to  him.
Being  assailed  by  the  Paris  mob  with  cries  of
li  Aristocrat  "  during  the  French  revolution,  while
he  was  driving  through  the  streets  of  that  city,
he  turned  the  taunts  into  cheers  by  thrusting
his  wooden  leg  out  of  the  carriage-window  and
shouting:  "An  aristocrat!  Yes,  one  who  lost  his
limb  in  the  cause  of  American  liberty."  In  1781
Robert  Morris  (q.  v.)  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the
finances  of  the  nation,  which  hitherto  had  been
managed  by  a  committee  of  congress.  His  first  act
was  to  appoint  Gouverneur  Morris  his  assistant.
The  latter  accepted  the  office,  and  fulfilled  its
duties  three  years  and  a  half.  In  1786,  on  the
death  of  his  mother,  he  purchased  from  his  brother,
Staats  Long,  the  Morrisania  estate,  which  he
henceforth  made  his  home.  (See  illustration.)  In
1787  he  took  his  seat  as  a  delegate  in  the  con
vention  that  framed  the  V.  S.  constitution,  the
draft  of  that  instrument  being  placed  in  his  hands
for  final  revision.  On  18  Dec.,  1788.  Morris  sailed
for  France,  and  reached  Paris  on  3  Feb.  following,
where  he  was  engaged  in  the  transaction  of  private
business  for  the  next  two  years.  In  January.  1791,
he  went  to  England,  having  been  appointed  by
President  Washington  a  confidential  agent  to
negotiate  with  the  British  government  regarding
certain  unfulfilled  articles  of  the  treaty  of  peace.
Conferences  were  prolonged  till  September  without
result.  During  his  stay  in  London  he  was  made
U.  S.  minister  to  France.  Being  succeeded  in  that
office  by  James  Monroe  in  August.  1794,  he  made
an  extensive  tour  throughout  Europe,  and  while
at  Vienna  used  strenuous  efforts  to  obtain  the
release  of  Lafayette  from  confinement  in  the  fort
ress  of  Olmiitz.  He  returned  to  this  country
toward  the  close  of  1798,  and  the  following  spring
was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  from  New  York,  to
fill  a  vacancy,  and  served  from  3  May,  1800.  till  3
March.  1803.  During  this  period "  he  actively
opposed  the  abolition  of  the  judiciary  system  and
the  discontinuance  of  direct  taxation,  but  favored
the  purchase  of  Louisiana.  He  was  an  active  advo
cate  of  New  York's  great  canal  project,  and  acted
as  chairman  of  the  canal  commissioners  from  their
first  appointment  in  1810  until  his  death.  Morris,
like  many  energetic  men,  was  in  the  habit  of  ex
pressing  his  opinions  with  a  freedom  that  often
involved  him  in  difficulties,  which  his  gift  of  sar
casm  tended  to  increase.  His  openness  and  sin
cerity  of  character,  however,  were  held  by  his
friends  to  atone  for  these  defects.  Of  his  abilities
as  a  public  speaker  James  Renwick  says  in  his


416


MORRIS


MORRIS


"  Life  of  Clinton" :  "  Morris  was  endowed  by  nature
with  all  the  attributes  necessary  to  the  accomplished
orator,  a  fine  and  commanding  person,  a  most
graceful  demeanor,  which  was  rather  heightened
than  impaired  by  the  loss  of  one  of  his  legs,  and  a
voice  of  much  compass,  strength,  and  richness."
In  person  he  so  closely  resembled  Washington  that
he  stood  as  a  model  of  his  figure  to  Iloudon,  the
sculptor.  When  on  his  death-bed  he  said :  "  Sixty-
five  years  ago  it  pleased  the  Almighty  to  call  me
into  existence  here,  on  this  spot,  in  this  very  room  ;
and  how  shall  I  complain  that  He  is  pleased  to  call
me  hence?"  On  the  day  of  his  death  he  asked
about  the  weather.  Being  told  it  was  fine,  he  re
plied  (his  mind,  like  Daniel  Webster's,  recurring  to
Gray's  "  Elegy  ") :  "  A  beautiful  day ;  yes,  but
'  Who,  to  dumb  forgetfulness  a  prey,

This  pleasing,  anxious  being  ere  resigned,
Left  the  warm  precincts  of  the  cheerful  day,

Nor  cast  one  longing,  lingering  look  behind  ? '  "
He  was  the  author  of  "  Observations  on  the
American  Revolution"  (1779);  "An  Address  to
the  Assembly  of  Pennsylvania  on  the  Abolition  of
the  Bank  of  North  America  "  (1785) ;  "  An  Address
in  Celebration  of  the  Deliverance  of  Europe  from
the  Yoke  of  Military  Despotism  "  (1814) ;  an  "In
augural  Discourse  "  before  the  New  York  historical
society  on  his  appointment  as  its  president,  and
funeral  orations  on  Washington,  Hamilton,  and
Gov.  George  Clinton.  He  also  contributed,  toward
the  close  of  his  life,  political  satires  in  prose  and
verse  to  the  newspaper  press.  See  "  Memoirs  of
Gouverneur  Morris,  with  Selections  from  his  Papers
and  Correspondence,''  by  Jared  Sparks  (3  vols.,
Boston,  1832),  and  "  Gouverneur  Morris,"  by  Theo
dore  Roosevelt,  in  the  "American  Statesman
Series  "  (1888).  His  granddaughter,  ANXIE  GARY,
is  now  (1888)  preparing  for  publication  the  "Jour
nals  and  Letters  "  of  her  grandfather. — Lewis  the
signer's  son,  Jacob,  soldier,  b.  in  Morrisania,  28
Dec.,  1755;  d.  in  Butternuts.  Otsego  co.,  N.  Y.,  10
June,  1844,  was  educated  for  a  merchant's  career,
but,  yielding  to  patriotic  impulses,  offered  his  ser
vices  to  congress,  and  was  appointed  aide-de-camp
to  Gen.  Charles  Lee,  with  whom  he  went  to  the
south  and  served  with  credit  at  Fort  Moultrie  and
in  many  other  engagements.  He  also  was  attached
to  the  staff  of  Gen.  Nathanael  Greene.  On  the  dec
laration  of  peace  he  returned  to  New  York  city,
and  was  subsequently  elected  to  both  the  lower  and
upper  branches  of  the  legislature.  In  1787  he  re
moved  to  Butternuts,  Otsego  co.,  N.  Y. — Jacob's
nephew,  Lewis  Nelson,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y..  in
1800 :  d.  at  Monterey,  Mexico,  21  Sept.,  1846,  was
the  son  of  Staats  Lewis,  who  served  on  the  staff  of
Gen^.  Anthony  Wayne.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy,  and  made  2d  lieutenant  in
the  artillery  corps,  1  July,  1820.  He  was  promoted
1st  lieutenant,  3d  infantry,  on  31  Dec.,  1825,  and
captain,  31  Oct.,  1833.  After  being  engaged  for
more  than  twenty  years  on  frontier  duty,  he  served
in  Texas  in  1845-'6  during  its  occupation  by  U.  S.
troops,  and  in  the  campaign  in  Mexico  in  1840,
taking  part  in  the  battles  of  Palo  Alto,  Resaca  de
la  Palma,  and  Monterey,  in  which  latter  engage
ment  he  was  killed  while  gallantly  leading  his
regiment  in  an  assault  on  the  enemy's  works.  He
was  brevetted  major  for  meritorious  conduct  at
Palo  Alto  and  Resaca  de  la  Palma. — Lewis  N.'s  son,
Lewis  Owen,  soldier,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  14  Aug.,
1824 ;  d.  in  Cold  Harbor,  Va.,  3  June,  1864,  received
a  commission  as  2d  lieutenant  in  the  U.  S.  army,
8  March,  1847,  and  took  part  in  the  siege  of  Vera
Cruz,  and  the  subsequent  advance  on  the  city  of
Mexico.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  had


attained  the  rank  of  captain  in  the  1st  artillery.
During  the  winter  of  I860-'!  he  was  stationed  in
Texas,  and  his  battery  was  the  only  one  that  did
not  surrender  to  the  Confederates.  In  the  winter
of  1861-'2  he  was  designated  to  direct  the  opera
tions  against  Port  Macon,  N.  C.,  which  he  captured
and  afterward  commanded.  The  following  sum
mer  he  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  113th  New
York  volunteers,  which,  reaching  Washington
when  the  city  was  menaced  by  Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee.
was  converted  into  a  heavy  artillery  regiment.  It
was  stationed  at  Fort  Reno,"one  of  the  works  defend
ing  the  National  capital,  but  the  inactive  life  did
not  suit  Col.  Morris,  and  he  pleaded  repeatedly  to  be
sent  to  the  field.  At  the  beginning  of  the  campaign
of  1864  his  wish  was  gratified,  and  during  all  the
engagements  from  Spottsylvania  till  his  death  he
commanded  a  brigade.  He  fell  in  the  battle  of
Cold  Harbor  when,  like  his  father,  he  was  cheering
his  men  in  an  assault.  He  was  greatly  beloved  and
admired  as  an  officer.

MORRIS,  Robert,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  b.  in  Liverpool,  England,  20  Jan..
1734;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  8  May,  1800.  When  he
was  about  thirteen  years  of  age  he  came  to  this
country  with  his
father,  and  soon
after  his  arrival  he
was  placed  in  the
counting-house  of
Charles  Willing,
a  wealthy  Phila
delphia  merchant.
By  his  diligence
and  activity  he
grew  in  favor  and
commanded  confi
dence.  After  the
death  of  Mr.  Will
ing  he  was  taken
into  partnership
by  the  latter's  son,
Thomas,  in  1734,
and  this  connec
tion  was  maintained  until  1793.  At  the  beginning
of  the  Revolution  the  firm  of  Willing  and  Morris  was
one  of  the  largest  and  most  prosperous  among  the
commercial  houses  of  Philadelphia.  Although  he
was  warmly  attached  to  the  mother-country,  Morris
opposed  the  stamp-act;  and, .although  it  was  con
trary  to  his  business  interests,  he  signed  the  non
importation  agreement  of  1705.  In  1775  he  was
sent  as  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress,  and
while  serving  in  that  capacity  he  voted,  1  July.
1776,  against  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  and
on  4  July  declined  to  vote.  But  when  the  Declara
tion  was  adopted  he  appended  his  name.  He  was
re-elected  to  congress  in  1777,  and  again  in  1778.
When  hostilities  began,  his  services  became  more
and  more  valuable.  As  member  of  the  committee
of  ways  and  means  he  worked  hard,  and  gave  to
the  government  the  full  benefit  of  his  credit.
Without  Morris's  help  the  campaigns  of  1780
would  have  been  impossible.  In  the  former  year
he  supplied  Gen.  Nathanael  Green  with  munitions
of  war.  and  in  the  latter  year  he  raised  f  1,400,000
to  assist  Washington  in  the  movement  that  resulted
in  the  capture  of  Yorktown.  In  February,  1781,
he  was  unanimously  elected  superintendent  of
finance.  In  December  of  the  same  year,  when  the
financial  situation  had  become  desperate,  the  gov
ernment  being  $2,500,000  in  debt,  he  organized  the
Bank  of  North  America,  subscribing  $10,000.  The
bank  was  incorporated  by  congress,  31  Dec.,  1781,
and  went  into  operation,  7  Jan.,  1782,  with  a  capital


MORRIS


417


of  $400,000.  Morris  resigned  his  post  as  superin
tendent  of  finance  in  January,  1783.  tired  of  the
continual  worry  and  excitement,  but  lie  was  in
duced  to  continue  until  November,  1784,  when  he
retired.  The  bank  charter  was  annulled  by  the
Pennsylvania  legislature  in  the  last-named  year,
but  Morris  was  successful  in  having  it  renewed  in
1786.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  elected  a  member
of  the  Pennsylvania  legislature,  and  in  1787  he
was  a  member  of  the  convention  that  framed  the
U.  S.  constitution.  On  1  Oct.,  1788.  he  was  elected
a  member  of  the  first  U.  S.  senate,  which  post  he
retained  till  1705.  When  the  new  government  was
organized,  he  was  offered  the  post  of  secretary  of  the
treasury,  but  declined,  recommending  Alexander
Hamilton.  In  partnership  with  Gouverneur  Morris,
he  went  largely  into  the  East  India  and  China  trade.
His  speculations  ultimately  failed,  and  he  spent  sev
eral  years  in  a  debtor's  cell.  As  a  speaker  and  writer
Morris  was  fluent  and  ready.  See  "  Life  of  Morris."
by  Daniel  Gould  (Boston,  1834);  and  "Financial
Administration  of  Robert  Morris,"  by  A.  S.  Bolles
(1878).  His  letters  are  printed  in  Jared  Sparks's
"  Diplomatical  Correspondence  of  the  American
Revolution  "  (12  vols..  1829-'30).— His  wife.  Mary,
was  the  daughter  of  Thomas  White,  who  came  to
this  country  from  London  in  early  life  and  settled
on  the  eastern  shore  of  Maryland.  After  the  death
of  White's  first  wife  he  removed  to  Philadelphia,
and  married  a  widow  named  Xewman,  who  resided
in  Burlington,  X.  J.  By  her  he  had  a  son  and  a
daughter.  The  former  was  named  William,  and  be
came  the  second  bishop  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church  in  the  United  States.  Mary,  the  elder  of  the
two  children,  married  Robert  Morris,  2  March,  1769,
when  she  was  a  little  over  twenty  years  of  age.
She  has  been  described  as  "elegant,  accomplished,
and  rich,  and  well  qualified  to  carry  the  felicity  of
connubial  life  to  its  highest  perfection."  Xot  only
did  she  preside  gracefully  over  her  husband's  lux
urious  home  during  his  days  of  prosperity,  but,
when  misfortune  had  overtaken  him,  she  showed
herself  a  true  wife.  Through  certain  interests  in
the  Holland  land  company,  bequeathed  to  her  by
Gouverneur  Morris,  she  obtained  from  that  corpo
ration  a  life  an
nuity  of  §2,000
before  she  would
sign  certain  pa
pers  to  which
her  signature
was  indispen
sable.  Robert
Morris  was  con
fined  in  the
Prune  street  pris
on.  Philadelphia,
from  February,
1798,  until  liber
ated  by  the  pas
sage  of  the  na
tional  bankrupt
law  in  1802.
During  her  hus-
band's  imprison-

ment  MF!*  Mor.

ris  received  an
autograph  letter  signed  by  both  President  and  Mar
tha  Washington,  addressed  to  her  while  residing
temporarily  at  Winchester,  Va.,  urging  her  to  pay
them  a  visit  at  Mount  Yernon,  and  to  make  as  long
a  stay  under  "  our  roof  as  you  shall  find  convenient ;
for  be  assured  we  ever  have,  and  still  do  retain,
the  most  affectionate  regard  for  you,  Mr.  Morris,
and  the  family."  Mrs.  Morris  continued  to  reside
VOL.  iv. — 27


j  in  Philadelphia,  and  on  her  husband's  release  he
found  shelter  in  the  home  that  her  decision  and
;  forethought  had  secured  for  him. — His  grandson,
Henry  W.,  naval  officer,  b.  in Xew  York  city
!  in  1806:  d.  there,  14  Aug.,  1863,  was  the  son  of
Thomas,  a  member  of  the  Xew  York  bar,  and  at
one  time  U.  S.  marshal  for  the  southern  district
of  the  state  of  Xew  York. He  entered  the  navy,
21  Aug.,  1819,  and  from  1828  till  1838,  under  the
|  commission  of  lieutenant,  served  in  various  posts.
;  From  1839  till  1845  he  was  on  special  duty  in  Xew
York  city,  passing  through  six  degrees  of  official
promotion  during  the  term  of  six  years. He  was
then  appointed  to  the  command  of  the  store-ship
"  Southampton." at that time belonging  to  the
African  squadron. In  1846  he  was  again  ordered
!  to  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard,  where  for  the  next  five
j  years  he  was  awaiting  orders. In  the  mean  time
!  he  was  promoted  commander,  and  in  1851  was  ap-
:  pointed  to  the  charge  of  the  rendezvous  in  Xew
;  York  until  1853,  when  he  was  ordered  to  the  sloop-
:  of-war  "  Germantown,"  of  the  Brazilian  squadron.
In  1855  he  was  transferred  to  the  Mediterranean
station, where he served as fleet-captain  under
Com.  Stringham. Upon  his  return  to  the  United
States,  in  1856,  he  received  his  commission  as  cap
tain. Toward  the  close  of  1861  he  superintended
the  construction  of  the  steam  sloop-of-war  "  Pen-
sacola"  at  Washington navy-yard. In  January,
1862,  that  vessel,  under  his  command,  successfully
passed the line  of Confederate batteries  on  the
Potomac,  and,  after  anchoring  a short  time in
Hampton  roads,  set sSil  to join  the blockading
squadron  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico. The  "  Pensacola  "

Slaved  a  brilliant  part  in  the  attacks  upon  Fort
ackson  and  Fort  St.  Philip. After  the  capture  of
Xew  Orleans,  Com.  Morris  held  the  city  and  guarded
the  adjacent  coasts  till  his  health  became  seriously
affected. He  was  made  commodore,  16  July,  1862.
MORRIS.  Robert,  author,  b.  in  Massachusetts,
!  31  Aug.,  1818 ;  d.  in  La  Grange,  Ky.,  31  July,  1888.
He  entered  the  ministry,  but  left  it  to  engage  in
j  business. In  1856  he  was  president  of  Oldham
j  college.  La  Grange,  Ky.,  and  his  later  years  were
devoted to  travelling  and  literature. He early
became  an  active  Freemason,  and  wrote  and  lec
tured  largely  on  Masonry. In  1858  he  was  elected
I  grand  master  of  the  order  in  Kentucky,  and  in
i  1884  he  received  the  title  of  poet  laureate  of  Free
masonry. Among his works  are "  Lights  apd
Shadows  of  Freemasonry  "  (Louisville,  Ky.,  1852) ;
"  History  of  the  Morgan  Affair"  (Xew  York,  1852) ;
''Code  of  Masonic  Law"  (Louisville,  1855) ;  "  His
tory of Freemasonry in Kentucky "  (Frankfort,
1859) ;  "  Freemasonry  in the Holy  Land "  (Xew
|  York,  1882) ;  "  The  Poetry  of  Freemasonry  " ;  and
works  on  numismatics.

MORRIS,  Roarer,  soldier,  b.  in  England,  28
Jan.,  1717;  d.  in  York,  England,  13  Sept.,  1794.
He  obtained  a  captaincy  in  the  48th  foot,  and,
accompanying  Gen.  Edward  Braddock  to  Canada,
served  as  his  aide-de-camp,  and  was  wounded  at
his  defeat.  He  was  with  Lord  Loudoun  in  1757,
exchanged  to  the  35th  regiment  in  1758-'9,  was
stationed  at  Fort  Frederick,  and  occasionally  en
gaged  with  the  Indians  that  harassed  the  settle
ments  in  Xova  Scotia.  He  was  attached  to  the
Louisburg  grenadiers  in  Wolfe's  expedition  against
Quebec,  participated  in  the  battle  of  the  Plains  of
Abraham,  and  did  good  service  at  Sillery,  28  April,
1760.  He  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  47th
regiment  in  May  of  that  year,  and  commanded  the
3d  battery  in  the  expedition  under  Gen.  James
Murray  (q.  v.)  against  Montreal.  He  retired  from
the  army  in  1764,  settled  in  Xew  York  city,  and  in


418


MORRIS


MORRIS


December  of  that  year  was  appointed  one  of  the
executive  council.  During  the  Revolution  he  ad
hered  to  the  crown,  and  in  1776  his  estate  was
confiscated.  His  plate  and  furniture  were  sold  at
auction  a  few  years  later.  He  returned  to  England
and  died  there.— His  wife,  Mary  Philipse,  b.  in
the  Philipse  Manor  House,  on  Hudson  river,  in
1730 ;  d.  in  York,  England,  in  1825,  was  the  daughter
of  Frederick  Philipse,  the  second  lord  of  the  Manor.

She  was  carefully
educated  and  en
joyed  all  the  advan
tages  of  the  society
that  frequented  her
father's  home.  She
is  described  as  of
great  personal  beau
ty,  with  dark  eyes
and  hair,  and  as  full
of  imperious  yet
kindly  impulses.  In
the  winter  of  1756
she  visited  in  New
York  her  brother-in-
law,  Beverly  Rob
inson,  and  met  there
George  Washing
ton,  who  was  also  a
guest  of  Mr.  Rob
inson.  Her  charms
&  made  a  deep  im

pression  on  the  heart  of  the  Virginia  colonel,  whose
suit  she  is  said  to  have  declined,  but  his  papers  dis
prove  the  assertion.  She  married  Roger  Morris  in
1758,  and  they  erected  on  the  outskirts  of  New  York
the  mansion  that  was  subsequently,  after  the  con
fiscation  act,  the  headquarters  of  Washington,  and
for  many  years  the  residence  of  Madame  Jumel
(q.  i'.).  In  a  conversation  with  one  of  the  descendants
of  Mrs.  Morris,  a  contemporaneous  writer  remarked
how  different  would  have  been  her  fate  had  she
married  Washington.  "  You  mistake,  sir,"  was
the  reply;  "she  had  immense  influence  over  every
body,  and  had  she  become  the  wife  of  the  leader  of
the  rebellion  he  would  not  have  been  a  traitor ;
she  would  have  prevented  it."  Mrs.  Morris  in
herited  a  large  estate,  part  of  which  was  a  tract  of
land  in  Putnam  county,  N.  Y.,  including  Lake
Mahopac,  and  she  was  in  the  habit  of  visiting  her
tenants  semi-annually  till  the  Revolution,  occu
pying  a  log-house,  which  Washington  also  at  a
later  period  appropriated  for  his  headquarters,  as
he  had  done  the  family  mansion  near  New  York.
In  this  retreat  she  was  much  beloved  by  the  set
tlers,  whom  she  instructed  in  household  and  re
ligious  duties.  Although  she  was  revered  she  was
also  somewhat  feared  by  them,  and  the  upper  story  of
the  mill  that  adjoined  her  residence  was  crowded
with  worshippers  on  Sundays  when  "  Madam  "  was
likely  to  be  present.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revo
lution  she  fell  under  suspicion  as  a  loyalist,  and  in
the  autumn  of  1776  her  property  was  confiscated,
and  she  was  forced  to  fly  with  her  family  to  Bev
erly,  on  the  Hudson,  the  country-seat  of  Beverly
Robinson.  It  is  believed  that  Mrs.  Morris,  her
sister,  Mrs.  Robinson,  and  the  wife  of  the  Rev.
Charles  Inglis,  were  the  only  women  that  were
attainted  of  treason  during  the  Revolution.  But
the  attorney-general  of  England  having  decided
that  the  property  of  the  children,  at  the  decease
of  the  parents,  was  not  included  in  their  attainder,
and  recoverable  under  the  principles  of  law  and
right,  in  1809  the  children  of  Roger  Morris  and  his
wife  sold  their  reversionary  interest  to  John  Jacob
Astor,  of  New  York,  for  £20,000,  and  the  British


government  made  them  an  additional  compensa
tion  of  £17,000.  Mrs.  Morris  went  to  England
with  her  husband.  A  monument  is  erected  over
their  remains  in  St.  Saviour-gate  church,  York.
Of  their  children,  Henry  Gage  and  Amherst  were
captains  in  the  royal  navy.

MORRIS,  Samuel,  lay  preacher,  b.  in  Hanover
county,  Va.,  about  1700;' d.  there  after  1770.  He
had  been  educated  in  the  established  church,  but
became  a  Presbyterian,  and  did  so  much  to  ad
vance  the  interests  of  his  denomination  that  he
was  styled  the  "  Father  of  Presbyterianism  in
Virginia."  His  house  became  the  resort  of  all
those  that  were  dissatisfied  with  the  teaching  of
the  parish  incumbent,  and  when  at  length  it  be
came  too  small  to  hold  the  congregations  that
assembled  there  to  hear  him  teach  and  exhort,  he
built  what  he  termed  a  "  reading-room."  The
Episcopalians  then  made  complaint  against  Morris
and  his  followers,  and  called  them  up  for  trial ;  but
they  appealed  to  Gov.  William  Gooch,  who.  on
hearing  the  case,  and  finding  that  their  practices
were  identical  with  those  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,
in  which  he  had  been  brought  up,  dismissed  the
charges  against  them.

MORRIS,  Thomas,  senator,  b.  in  Augusta
county,  Va.,  8  Jan.,  1776;  d.  in  Bethel,  Ohio,  7
Dec.,  1844.  His  father  was  a  Baptist  clergyman  of
Welsh  descent.  The  son  removed  to  Columbia,
Ohio,  in  1795,  entered  the  service,  as  a  farm-hand,
of  Rev.  John  Smith,  first  U.  S.  senator  from  Ohio,
and  in  1800  settled  in  Clermont  county.  While
engaged  in  fanning  lie  studied  law,  and  in  1804
was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  was  elected  to  the
legislature  in  1806,  was  continuously  a  member  for
twenty-four  years,  became  eminent  in  his  profes
sion,  was  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  and  was
chosen  U.  S.  senator  in  1882.  He  was  an  ardent
opponent  of  slavery,  engaged  in  important  debate's
with  John  C.  Calhoun  and  Henry  Clay  in  defence
of  the  right  of  petition  and  the  duty  of  the  gov
ernment  to  favor  abolition,  and  was  active  in  sup
port  of  the  freedom  of  the  press.  His  anti-slavery
sentiments  being  distasteful  to  the  Democratic
party,  by  whom  he  was  elected,  he  was  not  returned
for  a  second  term,  and  in  March,  1839,  he  retired.
He  was  nominated  for  vice-president  by  the  Liberal
party  at  the  Buffalo  convention  in  August,  1844.
His  death  occurred  a  month  after  the  election.
Mr.  Morris  was  an  energetic  politician,  and  a  fear
less  champion  of  liberty  and  the  right  of  individual
opinion.  See  his  "  Life  and  Letters,"  edited  by  his
son,  Benjamin  F.  Morris  (Cincinnati,  Ohio,  1855).
— His  son,  Jonathan  I).,  congressman,  b.  in  Cler
mont  county,  Ohio,  in  1804 ;  d.  in  Connersville,
Ind.,  16  May.  1875,  became  a  lawyer,  and  for  twenty
years  was  clerk  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,  and
of  the  superior  court  of  Clermont  county.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1846,  served
in  1847-'51,  and  subsequently  returned  to  the
practice  of  his  profession. — Another  son,  Isaac
Newton,  congressman,  b.  in  Bethel,  Clermont  co.,
Ohio,  22  Jan.,  1812;  d.  in  Quincy,  111.,  29  Oct.,
1879,  was  educated  at  Miami  university,  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1835,  and  the  next  year
removed  to  Quincy,  111.  He  was  in  the  Illinois
legislature  in  1846-'8,  and  became  president  of  the
Illinois  and  Michigan  canal  board.  He  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1856,  and  served  in
1857-'61,  opposing  the  admission  of  Kansas  under
the  Lecompton  constitution,  and  offering  a  reso
lution  that  "  under  no  circumstances  shall  the
Union  be  dissolved."  In  1870  he  was  appointed
by  President  Grant  a  member  of  the  Union  Pacific
railroad  commission.


MORRIS


MORRIS


419


MORRIS,  Thomas  Armstrong,  soldier,  b.  in
Nicholas  county,  Ky.,  26  Dec.,  1811.  He  was  grad
uated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1834,  resigned
in  1836  to  follow  the  profession  of  civil  engineering,
and  was  appointed  in  that  year  resident  engineer
of  canals  and  railroads  in  the  state  of  Indiana.  He
was  chief  engineer  of  two  railroads  in  1847-'52,
engineer  in  1852— '4,  and  president  in  1854-'?  of  the
Indianapolis  and  Cincinnati  railroad,  and  presi
dent  of  the  Indianapolis,  Pittsburg  and  Cleveland
railroad  in  1859-:61.  In  April,  1861,  he  was  ap
pointed  brigadier-general  by  the  governor  of  Indi
ana,  and  served  in  the  West  Virginia  campaign  of
that  year,  but,  declining  the  commissions  of  briga
dier-general  and  major-general  of  volunteers,  he  I
was  mustered  out  of  service  in  July.  1861.  He  i
then  resumed  the  office  of  chief  engineer  of  the
Indianapolis  and  Cincinnati  railroad,  was  presi
dent  of  the  Indianapolis  and  St.  Louis  railroad  in
1867-70,  and  in  1870-'3  was  receiver  of  the  Indian
apolis,  Cincinnati,  and  Lafayette  railroad.

MORRIS,  Thomas  Asbury,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.
near  Charlestown,  Va.,  28  April,  1794  ;  d.  in  Spring
field,  Ohio,  2  Sept.,  1874.  His  parents,  John  and
Margaret  Morris,  settled  on  Kanawha  river  about
1785.  His  early  education  was  obtained  in  the
common  schools,  and  later  he  pursued  special
studies  in  a  school  that  was  taught  by  William
Paine,  an  Englishman.  Before  reaching  manhood
he  served  three  years  as  an  assistant  in  the  office
of  his  brother  Edmund,  who  was  clerk  of  the
county.  At  the  age  of  eighteen  he  was  drafted  to
serve  six  months  in  the  war  of  1812,  but,  owing  to
liis  youth,  his  family  procured  a  substitute,  by
wl  lorn  he  was  overtaken  and  released  before  the
company  reached  the  scene  of  conflict.  For  some
years  he  was  a  skeptic,  but  in  1813  was  converted,
and.  though  his  parents  were  Baptists,  he  united
with  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and  in  1814
entered  its  ministry,  connecting  himself  with  the
Ohio  conference.  In  two  years  he  travelled  5.500
miles  on  horseback,  preaching  500  times,  and  dur
ing  the  first  twelve  years  of  his  ministry  he  re
ceived  but  $2,000.  In  1826  he  suffered  an  attack
of  paralysis,  but,  in  spite  of  impaired  health,  he  was
always  a  hard  student  and  wide  reader.  As  a
preacher  he  was  concise,  clear,  instructive,  and
sometimes  eloquent.  In  1834  he  was  made  editor
of  the  "  Western  Christian  Advocate  "  in  Cincin
nati.  In  1836  he  was  elected  bishop.  As  early  as
1835  he  was  known  as  an  advocate  of  total  absti
nence.  In  1844,  when  the  church  was  divided,  he
remained  in  connection  with  the  Methodist  Epis
copal  church,  though  he  was  a  native  of  Virginia
and  regretted  the  separation  deeply.  For  sixteen
years  of  his  thirty-six  years'  service  in  the  epis
copate  he  was  the  senior  bishop  of  his  church.
He  was  practical,  witty,  and  blunt,  but  kind.  His
spirit  was  indomitable,  and  he  possessed  charming
simplicity,  both  of  taste  and  manner.  McKendree
college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1841.
Bishop  Morris  published  a  work  on  "  Church  Poli
ty  " ;  a  volume  of  sermons ;  one  entitled  "  Essays,
Biographical  Sketches,  and  Notes  of  Travel"
(1851);  and  "Sketches  of  Western  Methodism"
(Cincinnati,  1852).

MORRIS,  AVilliam,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Paisley,  Scotland,  31  Oct.,  1786;  d.  in  Montreal,  29
June,  1858.  In  1801  he  came  to  Canada  with  his
parents,  and  in  1804  he  assisted  his  father  in  busi
ness  in  Montreal.  He  was  commissioned  an  ensign
in  the  militia  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  1812,
was  present  at  the  first  attack  on  Ogdensburg,  and
commanded  a  gun-boat  there.  In  1816  he  went  to
the  military  settlement  near  the  Rideau,  and  en


gaged  in  business  in  what  is  now  the  town  of  Perth.
In  1820  he  was  elected  to  the  Upper  Canada  parlia
ment  for  the  county  of  Lanark,  and  he  represented
that  constituency  continuously  till  1836,  when  he
was  called  to  the  legislative  council.  At  a  meeting
of  Scottish  delegates  from  all  parts  of  Canada  at
Cobourg,  Mr.  Morris  was  selected  as  the  bearer  of
a  petition  to  the  king  and  parliament,  in  which  the
petitioners  asserted  their  claims  to  equal  rights
with  their  fellow-subjects  of  English  origin  to  the
clergy  reserves,  an  appropriation  of  public  lands  to
religious  purposes.  He  went  on  this  mission  in
1837,  and  on  his  return  was  presented  with  a  piece
of  plate  by  the  Scottish  inhabitants  of  Canada  in
recognition  of  his  services.  During  the  Mackenzie
rebellion  in  1837-'8  he  was  engaged  in  drilling  and
organizing  militia,  was  a  senior  colonel  in  that
force,  and  on  one  occasion  commanded  a  detach
ment  that  was  sent  to  the  frontier.  In  1841  he  was
appointed  warden  of  the  district  of  Johnstown,  and
in  1844  he  became  a  member  of  the  executive  coun
cil  in  Sir  Charles  T.  Metcalfe's  administration,  and
was  appointed  receiver-general.  While  he  held  this
portfolio  he  introduced  a  new  system  of  manage
ment  into  the  department,  and  on  his  resignation
in  1846  he  was  appointed  president  of  the  executive
council,  which  post  he  held  till  his  retirement  from
public  life  in  1848.  He  was  a  clear  and  powerful
speaker,  and  did  much  to  establish  the  character
of  legislation  in  the  body  of  which  he  was  so  long
a  member. — His  brother,  James,  Canadian  states
man,  b.  in  Paisley,  Scotland,  in  1798;  d.  in  Brock-
ville,  Upper  Canada,  29  Sept.,  1865,  came  to  Canada
with  his  parents  when  he  was  three  years  old,  and
on  leaving  school  engaged  in  business  in  Brock-
ville  with  his  brothers  Alexander  and  William.  In
July,  1837,  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature  of
Upper  Canada  for  Leeds  county.  In  1838  he  was
appointed  a  commissioner  for  the  improvement  of
the  navigation  of  the  river  St.  Lawrence,  and  he
served  in  this  capacity  until  the  completion  of  the
St.  Lawrence  canals.  He  was  elected  to  the  parlia
ment  of  united  Canada  for  his  former  constituency
in  1841,  and  in  1844  called  to  the  legislative  coun
cil  under  the  administration  of  Sir  Charles  Met-
calfe.  In  1851  Mr.  Morris  became  a  member  of  the
executive  council,  and  was  appointed  postmaster-
general,  being  the  first  to  hold  that  office  after  the
removal  of  the  department  from  imperial  control.
Immediately  after  his  appointment  he  went  to
Washington,  negotiated  a  postal  treaty  with  the
U.  S.  government,  and  introduced  into  Canada  a
uniform  postal  rate  of  five  cents  for  letters,  instead
of  sixteen.  In  1853  he  resigned  the  postmaster-
generalship,  and  was  speaker  of  the  legislative
council  until  the  autumn  of  1854.  In  1858  he  be
came  a  member  of  the  executive  council  and  speak
er  of  the  legislative  council  in  the  Brown-Dorion
administration.  In  1862  he  was  appointed  receiver-
general,  and  was  leader  of  the  Sandfield  Macdon-
ald-Sicotte  government.  He  resigned  in  1863,  ow
ing  to  illness.  He  was  a  reformer  in  politics,  of
unblemished  reputation,  and  possessed  of  great  ad
ministrative  ability. — William's  son.  Alexander,
Canadian  statesman,  b.  in  Perth,  Upper  Canada,
17  March.  1826,  was  educated  at  the  University  of
Glasgow,  Scotland,  and  at  McGill  university,  Mon
treal^  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bars
of  Upper  and  Lower  Canada  in  1851.  He  began
practice  in  Montreal,  and  in  1861  was  elected  to
the  Canada  assembly  for  South  Lanark,  which  he
continued  to  represent  till  the  union  of  1867,  when
he  was  elected  by  acclamation  for  that  constitu
ency  to  the  Dominion  parliament.  In  1864  he  was
active  in  the  negotiations  that  resulted  in  the  for-


420


MORRIS


mation  of  the  coalition  government  in  that  year,
and  also  in  advocating  confederation,  which  he
had  long  before  proposed.  In  1869  Mr.  Morris  be
came  a  member  of  the  privy  council  of  Canada,
and  minister  of  inland  revenue.  Prom  July  till
December,  1873,  he  was  the  first  chief  justice  of
the  court  of  Queen's  bench  of  Manitoba,  and  he  was
then  appointed  lieutenant-governor  of  that  prov
ince  and  the  Northwest  Territories,  and  subse
quently  he  became  also  governor  of-  the  district  of
Keewatin.  He  became  a  commissioner  of  Indian
affairs  for  Manitoba  and  the  Northwest  Territories,
16  June,  1873,  and  took  part  in  that  capacity  in
negotiating  treaties  with  various  tribes,  whereby
the  government  acquired  the  title  to  an  area  of
country  extending  from  the  highlands  above  Lake
Superior  westward  to  the  Rocky  mountains,  and
covering  the  line  of  the  Pacific  railway.  He  was
appointed  in  January,  1876,  a  commissioner  respect
ing  the  land-claims  ot  settlers  in  Manitoba,  and  re
tired  from  his  lieutenant-governorship  in  1877.  In
1878  Mr.  Morris  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for
Selkirk,  Manitoba,  for  the  Dominion  parliament ;
but  in  December  of  that  year  he  was  elected  for
Toronto  East  to  the  Ontario  legislature,  where  he
held  a  seat  till  1886,  when  he  retired,  owing  to
failing  health.  He  is  a  Conservative,  was  appoint
ed  Queen's  counsel  by  the  Dominion  government
in  1881,  has  been  president  of  St.  Andrew's  society,
Montreal,  a  governor  of  the  university  of  McGill
college,  and  is  chairman  of  the  board  of  trustees  of
Queen's  university,  Kingston.  He  is  the  author  of
"  Canada  and  her  Resources,"  a  prize  essay  pre
pared  for  the  Paris  exhibition  ;  "  Nova  Britannia,''
a  lecture  (Montreal,  1858);  "The  Hudson  Bay  and
Pacific  Territories,"  a  lecture  (Toronto,  1884) ;  "  The
Treaties  of  Canada  with  the  Indians  of  the  North
west  "  (1880) ;  and  "  Nova  Britannia,"  a  collection
of  speeches  and  lectures  on  confederation  (1869).

MORRIS,  William  Walton,  soldier,  b.  in  Balls-
ton  Springs,  N,  Y.,  31  Aug.,  1801;  d.  in  Balti
more,  Md.,  11  Dec.,  1865.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1820.  became  1st  lieuten
ant  in  1823,  participated  in  the  attack  on  the  In
dian  towns  in  the  Arickaree  expedition  in  that
year,  and  in  1824  was  transferred  to  the  artillery.
During  the  Seminole  war  he  commanded  a  bat
talion  of  Creek  volunteers,  with  the  rank  of  major,
formed  the  advance  of  Gen.  Thomas  S.  Jessup's
command,  and,  marching  into  Florida  to  the  assist
ance  of  the  state  troops  and  those  under  Col.  Zach-
ary  Taylor,  participated  in  the  battle  of  Wahoo
Swamp,  26  Nov.,  1836.  For  his  conduct  on  that
occasion  he  was  promoted  captain.  His  services  in
the  subsequent  engagements  of  this  campaign  won
him  the  brevet  of  major  in  1837.  He  served  on  the
Canadian  frontier  in  the  border  disturbances  of
1839,  during  the  Mexican  war  was  major  of  the  ar
tillery  battalion  of  the  army  of  occupation,  and
was  engaged  at  Palo  Alto  and  Resaca  de  la  Palma.
He  had  devoted  much  study  to  military  law  be
tween  1839  and  1846,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  ap
pointed  military  governor  and  alcalde  of  the  city
of  Tapico,  subsequently  assuming  the  same  duties
in  Puebla,  where  he  remained  until  the  close  of  the
war.  He  was  promoted  major  in  1853,  engaged  in
the  Seminole  war  of  1856-'7,  was  on  frontier  duty
the  next  year,  and  also  served  in  quelling  the  Kan
sas  disturbances.  He  became  colonel  in  1861,  and
during  the  civil  war  he  was  stationed  at  Fort  Mc-
Henry,  Baltimore,  Md.  By  training  his  guns  on  the
insurgents,  he  quelled  the  riots  that  occurred  in
that  city,  19  April,  1861.  Shortly  after  assuming
command  at  Fort  McIIenry,  he  refused  to  obey  a
writ  of  habeas  corpus  that  was  granted  by  a  Mary


land  judge,  to  obtain  possession  of  a  soldier  of  the
Fort  McHenry  garrison,  resisting  the  execution  of
the  writ  on  the  ground  that  the  habeas  corpus  act
had  been  suspended  by  the  beginning  of  hostilities.
From  1  Feb.,  1865,  till  his  death  he  commanded
the  middle  department  and  the  8th  army  corps.
He  received  the  brevets  of  brigadier-general  and
major-general  in  the  regular  army  on  9  June,  1862,
and  10  Dec.,  1865,  respectively.

MORRISON,  (ieorg-e  Washing-ton,  congress
man,  b.  in  Fairlee,  Vt.,  16  Oct.,  1809.  He  was  edu
cated  at  Thetford.  Vt.,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1835,
settled  in  Manchester,  N.  H.,  soon  afterward,  and
quickly  won  a  high  place  at  the  bar,  which  he
maintained  for  many  years,  till  impaired  health,  in
1872,  obliged  him  to  retire.  He  was  a  member  of
the  New  Hampshire  house  of  representatives  sev
eral  times  between  1840  and  1850,  and  solicitor  of
his  county  in  1845-'7.  He  was  chosen  to  congress
as  a  Democrat  to  fill  a  vacancy,  and  re-elected,
serving  in  1850-'!  and  in  1853-'5.  During  his  last
term  lie  opposed,  by  speech  and  note,  the  Kansas-
Nebraska  bill,  notwithstanding  his  personal  friend
ship  for  President  Pierce. — His  cousin,  Charles
Robert,  jurist,  b.  in  Bath,  N.  II.,  22  Jan.,  1819,
was  educated  at  Newbury,  Vt.,  admitted  to  the
bar  in  July,  1842,  and  was  circuit  justice,  court  of
common  pleas,  from  1851.  He  was  adjutant  of  the
llth  New  Hampshire  regiment  in  1862-'4,  and  was
wounded  thrice  in  the  service.  After  the  war  he
continued  the  practice  of  law  at  Manchester  till
1887,  when  he  removed  to  Concord,  N.  II.  He  k
the  author  of  "  Digest  of  New  Hampshire  Re
ports  "  (Concord,  1868) ;  "  Probate  Directory "
(1870);  "Justice  and  Sheriff  and  Attorney's  As
sistant"  (1872);  "Town  Officer"  (1876);  "'Digest
of  Laws  relating  to  Common  Schools  "  (1881) ;  and
'•  Proofs  of  Christ's  Resurrection,  from  a  Lawyer's
Standpoint"  (Andover,  Mass.,  1880;  revised  ed.,
1885).  In  1880  he  prepared  a  history  of  his  branch
of  the  Morrison  family,  which  was  embodied  in  the
general  history  of  the  family  by  Leonard  A.  Mor
rison  (Boston,  1880).  He  has  now  (1888)  in  prepa
ration  a  "  Digest  of  all  New  Hampshire  Reports."

MORRISON,  James,  army  contractor,  b.  in
Cumberland  county,  Pa.,  in  1755 ;  d.  in  Washing
ton,  D.  C.,  23  April,  1823.  He  was  the  son  of  an
Irish  emigrant,  and  was  for  six  years  in  the  Revo
lutionary  army,  doing  good  service  as  one  of  Dan
iel  Morgan's  corps  of  riflemen.  After  the  war  he
engaged  in  business  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and  became
sheriff.  In  1792  he  removed  to  Lexington,  Ky.
There  he  became  successively  land-commissioner,
representative  in  the  legislature,  supervisor  of  the
revenue,  navy  agent,  contractor  for  the  northwest
ern  army  during  the  war  of  1812,  quartermaster-
general,  president  of  the  Lexington  branch  of  the
United  States  bank,  and  chairman  of  the  board  of
trustees  of  Transylvania  university.  He  acquired
great  wealth,  which  he  expended  in  refined  hospi
tality,  the  judicious  patronage  of  deserving  young
men,  and  the  encouragement  of  literature.  lie
was  a  man  of  great  natural  ability  and  much  de
cision  of  character,  and  had  made  good  early  defi
ciencies  by  extensive  reading.  He  died  while  he
was  prosecuting  a  large  claim  against  the  govern
ment  in  Washington.

MORRISON,  James  Frank,  electrician,  b.  in
St.  John's,  New  Brunswick,  18  April,  1841.  After
being  educated  by  a  private- tutor  he  left  his  home
in  1855  and  went  to  Boston,  the  former  abode  of
his  family,  where  he  obtained  employment  in  a
commercial  house.  He  there  studied  telegraphy,
went  to  Baltimore  in  1862,  and  shortly  thereafter
entered  the  telegraph  service  of  the  Baltimore  and


MORRISON


MORRISON


421


Ohio  railroad  company,  in  which  he  remained  until
1868.  During  these  years  he  kept  his  mind  con
stantly  on  electrical  matters,  and  soon  became  a
recognized  expert  in  all  branches  of  the  art,  accu
mulating  a  complete  library  on  the  subject.  He
then  entered  the  service  of  the  Western  Union
telegraph  company,  where  he  was  night  manager
for  two  years.  He  was  then  appointed  superintend
ent  of  the  fire-alarm  system  of  Baltimore,  which
he  entirely  reorganized.  In  1878  Mr.  Morrison
constructed  for  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  canal
company  the  first  long  line  telephone  in  the  world,
the  length  being  210  miles  from  Georgetown,  D.  C.,
to  Cumberland,  Md.  In  1876  he  was  elected  clerk
of  the  Maryland  state  senate.  He  was  appointed
a  fire  commissioner  for  Baltimore,  and  in  1879,
while  serving  in  that  capacity,  was  appointed  to
the  wardenship  of  the  city  jail,  which,  under  his
administration,  was  entirely  reorganized.  An
English  inspector  of  prisons,  who  in  the  course  of
his  professional  duty  visited  this  country,  pro
nounced  this  institution  the  model  jail  in  the
United  States.  In  1880  Mr.  Morrison  connected
himself  with  the  Brush  electric  company,  and
through  his  exertions  its  method  of  lighting  the
city  was  adopted  and  is  now  in  successful  use.  He
then  erected  the  Morrison  electrical  works,  and
formed  the  Southern  electrical  company.  In  1887  he
resigned  the  wardenship  of  the  city  jail.  The  Na
tional  electric  light  association  of  the  United  States,
at  their  first  convention  in  Chicago  in  February,
1885,  elected  him  its  president,  which  office  he  has
since  held.  In  1886  he  was  elected  managing
director  of  the  Baxter  electric  motor  company,  and
he  is  also  manager  of  the  Electric  storage  company
and  of  the  U.  SL  light  and  power  company.  Mr.
Morrison  has  been  active  in  politics  as  a  Democrat.
MORRISON,  Joseph  Curran,  Canadian  jurist,
b.  in  the  north  of  Ireland,  20  Aug.,  1816;  d.  in
Toronto,  6  Dec.,  1885.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of
Hugh  Morrison,  of  the  42d  Highlanders,  and  was
educated  at  the  Royal  Belfast  institution,  and  at
Upper  Canada  college,  Toronto.  He  studied  law,
was  called  to  the  bar  in  1839,  and  entered  into  a
partnership  with  William  Hume  Blake.  In  May,
1843,  he  became  deputy  clerk  of  the  executive
council  of  Canada,  which  post  he  resigned  in  1847,
and  was  elected  to  the  Canada  assembly  for  West
York.  In  1851  he  was  defeated  for  this  constitu
ency,  but  he  was  elected  for  Niagara  in  1852,  and
in  1853-?4  held  office  in  the  Ilincks-Morrin  ad
ministration  as  solicitor-general  for  Upper  Canada.
In  April,  1856,  he  became  a  member  of  the  execu
tive  council,  and  in  May  receiver-general  in  the
Tache-Macdonald  administration,  and  also  a  mem
ber  of  the  board  of  railway  commissioners.  He
was  re-elected  in  the  following  August,  and  after
the  retirement  of  Mr.  Tache  he  retained  office  un
der  the  Macdonald-Cartier  government.  He  was
appointed  in  1856  a  member  of  a  commission  for
consolidating  the  statutes  of  Upper  Canada,  was
an  unsuccessful  candidate  to  parliament  in  1857
and  1858.  and  in  January,  1859,  became  registrar
of  Toronto.  This  office"  lie  resigned  in  1860  to
take  the  place  of  solicitor-general  in  the  Cartier-
Macdonald  administration,  which  he  retained  till
18  March,  1862,  when  he  was  appointed  puisne
judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas.  On  24  Aug.,
1863,  he  was  promoted  to  a  judgeship  in  the  court
of  queen's  bench,  where  he  remained  till  he  was
transferred  on  30  Nov.,  1877,  to  the  court  of  ap
peal.  He  achieved  greater  distinction  at  the  bar
than  in  politics,  and  was  identified  with  many  im
portant  cases,  both  civil  and  criminal.  He'took
an  active  part  in  the  agitation  for  the  seculariza


tion  of  the  clergy  reserves,  and  the  abolition  of
seigniorial  tenure.  Judge  Morrison  was  an  active
promoter  of  the  cause  of  education,  for  twenty-
eight  years  was  a  member  of  the  council  of  public
instruction  for  Upper  Canada,  for  almost  an  equal
length  of  time  a  member  of  the  senate  of  Toronto
university,  and  during  fourteen  years  chancellor
of  that  institution.  He  was  warm-hearted,  genial.
and  hospitable,  and  universally  popular. — His
brother,  Angus,  Canadian  legislator,  b.  in  Edin
burgh,  Scotland,  in  1822,  came  to  Canada  when  he
was  twelve  years  old,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  served  as  a  bencher  of  the  Law  so
ciety  for  several  years.  He  was  elected  to  the  par
liament  of  Canada  for  North  Simcoe  in  1858,  and
represented  that  constituency  till  1863.  He  was
elected  for  Niagara  in  1864,  and  again  to  the  Do
minion  parliament  in  1867.  In  1874  he  retired
from  the  representation  of  Niagara,  and  was  an
unsuccessful  candidate  for  center  Toronto.  In
1876-'7  he  was  mayor  of  Toronto.

MORRISON,  Joseph  Wanton,  British  soldier,
b.  in  New  York  city,  4  May,  1 783 ;  d.  at  sea,  15
Feb.,  1826.  His  father,  John,  was  deputy  commis
sary-general  in  America.  The  son  entered  the
British  army  as  ensign  in  1793,  was  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  89th  regiment  in  1813,  and  com
manded  the  corps  of  observation  that  pursued  the
American  army  under  Gen.  James  Wilkinson.  He
met  that  officer  at  Chrystler's  Field,  Canada,  and
gained  a  decisive  victory.  For  his  conduct  on
this  occasion  Col.  Morrison  received  a  medal,  a
vote  of  thanks  from  the  lower  house  of  assembly
of  Canada,  and  a  sword  from  the  merchants  of
Liverpool.  He  was  severely  wounded  at  Lundy's
Lane,  and  in  1816  was  placed  on  half  pay  with  the
brevet  of  colonel.  He  resumed  active  service  in
1821,  was  commissioned  colonel  of  the  44th  regi
ment,  and  the  next  year  was  sent  to  India  with
the  rank  of  local  brigadier-general.

MORRISON,  Leonard  Allison,  historian,  b.
in  Windham,  N.  H.,  21  Feb.,  1843.  He  received
an  academic  education,  and  was  brought  up  on
the  homestead  farm.  Pie  was  a  member  of  the
state  house  of  representatives  in  1885-'6,  and  state
senator  in  1887-'8,  serving  as  chairman  of  the  com
mittee  on  education  in  both  houses.  Dartmouth
gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1884.  Mr.  Morri
son  has  been  for  twenty-five  years  a  contributor  to
the  press.  His  works  are  a  "  History  of  the  Mori-
son  or  Morrison  Family  "  (Boston,  1880) ;  "  His
tory  of  Windham  in  New  Hampshire"  (1883);  and
"  Rambles  in  Europe,  with  Historical  Facts  relat
ing  to  Scotch-American  Families  "  (1887).

MORRISON,  Pitrairn,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  city,  18  Sept.,  1795 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  5
Oct.,  1887.  He  was  commissioned  2d  lieutenant
of  artillery  in  the  U.  S.  army  in  October,  1820,  pro
moted  1st  lieutenant  in  1826,  and  captain  in  1836,
and  received  the  brevet  of  major  for  gallant  con
duct  at  Palo  Alto  and  Resaca  de  la  Palma  in  the
war  with  Mexico.  He  was  made  major  of  infantry
in  1847,  commanded  his  regiment  in  1848-'9,  and
the  post  of  Fort  Lincoln,  Tex.,  in  1850-'!,  and  be
came  lieutenant-colonel  in  1853  and  colonel  in
1861.  He  was  retired  in  October,  1863,  "  for  dis
ability  incurred  in  the  line  of  duty,"  and  brevetted
brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army  "for  long
and  faithful  services."  After  this  he  resided  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  he
was  the  oldest  officer  by  commission  in  the  army,
with  the  exception  of  Gen.  William  S.  Harney.

MORRISON,  Thomas  Faulkner,  Canadian
statesman,  b.  in  Londonderry,  Nova  Scotia,  22
Feb.,  1808;  d.  there,  23  July^  1886.  He  was  of


422


MORRISON


MORSE


the  same  Scotch  family  that  settled  in  London
derry,  N.  II.,  in  1719.  In  early  life  he  was  a  sea-
captain,  but  he  entered  politics  in  1855  as  a  mem
ber  of  parliament  from  Colchester  county,  N.  S.,
and  served  for  fifteen  years.  He  was  a  leader  in
many  important  questions  under  consideration,
was 'immigration  agent  for  the  province,  and  in
1876  was  raised  to  the  legislative  council.  He  in
troduced  and  carried  through  parliament  the  bill
for  voting  by  ballot,  was  In  1864  one  of  seven
that  revised  the  provincial  statutes,  and  was  sev
eral  times  an  agent  of  the  Nova  Scotian  govern
ment  to  the  Dominion  parliament  at  Ottawa.

MORRISON,  William,  Canadian  explorer,  b.
in  Montreal  in  1785 ;  d.  on  Morrison's  island,  Can
ada,  7  Aug.,  1866.  His  ancestors,  the  Morrisons,
long  held  dominion  in  the  island  of  Lewis,  Scot
land.  He  entered  the  service  of  the  New  York
fur  company  at  Fond  du  Lac  in  1802,  and,  becom
ing  a  partner  soon  afterward,  explored  the  north
west  territories  in  1803-'15.  He  was  in  charge  of
John  Jacob  Astor's  fur  business  in  1816-'26,  after
which  he  retired  to  Berthier,  Canada.  It  is  claimed
for  Mr.  Morrison  that  he  preceded  Schoolcraft  in
the  discovery  of  the  sources  of  the  Mississippi,  and
he  rendered  other  services  to  geography.  He  mar
ried  an  Indian  wife,  and  one  of  their  sons  accom
panied  John  C.  Fremont  on  one  of  his  early  ex
ploring  expeditions.

MORRISON,  William  Kails,  congressman,  b.
in  Monroe  county,  111.,  14  Sept.,  1825.  He  was
educated  at  Mclvendree  college,  served  as  a  private
in  the  Mexican  war,  and  subsequently  studied  law
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  was  clerk  of
Monroe  county  in  1852-'(5,  served  in  the  legisla
ture  for  the  next  three  years,  and  was  speaker  of
the  house  in  1859.  He  organized  the  49th  Illinois
regiment  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  and
was  wounded  at  Fort  Donelson.  While  in  com
mand  of  that  regiment  in  the  field,  he  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  and  served  in  1863-:5,
but  was  defeated  for  the  39th  and  40th  congresses.
He  was  again  chosen  in  1872,  serving  from  1873
till  1887,  and  in  1873-'5  was  chairman  of  the  com
mittee  of  ways  and  means.  In  1886  he  was  an
unsuccessful  candidate  for  re-election.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  National  Union  convention  in  1866,
and  to  the  New  York  Democratic  convention  in
1868.  In  March,  1887,  he  was  appointed  by  Presi
dent  Cleveland  a  member  of  the  interstate  com
merce  commission  for  a  term  of  five  years.

MORROW,  Jeremiah,  senator,  b.  in  Gettys
burg,  Pa.,  6  Oct.,  1771 ;  d.  in  Warren  county,  Ohio.
22  March,  1852.  He  removed  to  the  northwest
territory  in  1795,  and  in  1802  was  a  delegate  to
the  convention  that  formed  the  Ohio  constitu
tion.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat
on  the  admission  of  Ohio  into  the  Union,  served
in  1803-'13,  and  was  chairman  of  the  committee
on  public  lands.  In  1814  he  was  commissioner  to
treat  with  all  the  Indians  west  of  Miami  river.
He  was  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1813-'19,
governor  of  Ohio  in  1822-'6,  served  in  the  state
senate  in  1826-'8,  subsequently  became  canal  com
missioner,  and  for  several  years  was  president  of
the  Little  Miami  railroad.  In  1841-'3  he  again
served  in  congress.

MORROW,  Thomas  Vaughn,  physician,  b.  in
Kentucky  in  1804 ;  d.  16  July,  1850.  He  founded
a  reformed  medical  school  at  Worthington,  Ohio,
in  1832,  under  the  patronage  of  Bishop  Philander
Chase,  and  on  its  close  in  1845  established  at  Cin
cinnati,  as  its  successor,  the  American  eclectic
medical  institute,  in  which  he  held  the  chair  of
the  practice  of  medicine  till  his  death,  thus  origi


nating  the  eclectic  school  of  practice  in  this  coun
try.  He  was  the  author  of  a  treatise  on  "  The
Practice  of  Medicine  "  (1852).

MORSE,  Abner,  genealogist,  b.  in  Medway,
Mass.,  5  Sept.,  1793;  d.  in  Sharon,  Mass.,  16  May,
1865.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1816,  and  at
Andover  theological  seminary  in  1819.  After  be
ing  ordained  on  16  Dec.,  1819,  he  was  pastor  of
the  Congregational  church  in  Nantucket.  Mass.,
until  1822,  and  later  he  filled  pastorates  inSennett,
N.  Y.,  Bound  Brook,  N.  J.,  and  South  Bend,  Ind.
Here  he  procured  a  charter  for  a  college  and  ap
plied  himself  to  the  study  of  natural  history,  par
ticularly  geology,  lecturing  on  that  subject.  Sub
sequently  he  delivered  courses  of  scientific  lectures
in  various  parts  of  the  United  States,  but  finally
settled  in  Sharon,  Mass.,  where  he  devoted  himself
entirely  to  genealogical  pursuits.  His  publications
include  "  Memorial  of  the  Morses  "  (1850) ;  "  De
scendants  of  Laurence  Litchfield  "  (1855) ;  "  Gene
alogy  of  Early  Planters  in  Massachusetts"  (Bos
ton, '1855);  "Genealogical  Register  of  Sherborn,
Hollister,  and  Medway,  Mass."  (1855) ;  "  Descend
ants  of  Capt.  John  Grant "  (1857) ;  "  Descendants
of  Several  Ancient  Puritans"  (3  vols.,  1857-'60);
and  ''A  Genealogical  Record  of  Several  Families
bearing  the  Name  of  Cutler  in  the  United  States,"
issued  posthumously  (1867).

MORSE,  David  Appleton,  physician,  b.  in  Ells
worth,  Ohio,  12  Dec.,  1840.  He  was  graduated  at
Cleveland  medical  college  in  1862,  and  began  prac
tice  in  Edinburgh,  Ohio.  In  1862-'5  he  served  in
the  U.  S.  army  as  surgeon,  at  first  under  Gen.
William  S.  Rosecrans  in  Tennessee,  and  then  under
Gen.  William  T.  Sherman  in  Georgia.  After  his
resignation  he  returned  to  Edinburgh  and  subse
quently  removed  to  Alliance,  Ohio,  but  in  1867
settled  in  Madison  county,  where  he  remained  for
ten  years.  In  1877  he  was  called  to  Columbus,
Ohio,  where  he  has  since  held  the  professorship  of
nervous  disorders  and  insanity  in  Starling  medical
college  and  the  post  of  physician  to  Columbus
hospital  for  the  insane.  More  recently  he  accepted
the  superintendency  of  the  Oxford  retreat  for
nervous  and  mental  diseases.  Dr.  Morse  is  a  mem
ber  of  the  American,  the  Ohio,  and  other  medical
societies.  He  is  editor  of  the  department  of  nerv
ous  disorders  and  insanity  in  the  •'  Lancet  and  Ob
server,"  to  whose  columns,  as  well  as  to  the  trans
actions  of  societies  to  which  he  belongs,  he  has
contributed  papers  on  medical  topics.

MORSE,  Edward  Sylvester,  naturalist,  b.  in
Portland,  Me.,  18  June,  1838.  He  was  educated  at
the  academy  in  Bethel,  Me.,  and  then  became  a
draughtsman  in  the  Portland  locomotive-works,
meanwhile  devoting  his  leisure  to  studies  in  natu
ral  history.  His  work  attracted  the  attention  of
Louis  Agassiz,  by  whom  he  was  invited  to  study
at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard,  where
until  1862  he  was  assistant.  Brachiopods  became
the  subject  of  his  investigations.  They  had  been
regarded  as  mollusks,  but  after  careful  research
Morse  announced  that  they  were  to  be  classed
among  the  worms.  This  work  attracted  special
attention  abroad  from  famous  naturalists,  notably
Charles  Darwin.  In  1866  he  settled  in  Salem,  and
was  associated  in  establishing  the  "  American
Naturalist,"  becoming  one  of  its  editors,  and  in
founding  the  Peabody  academy  of  sciences,  of
which  he  was  made  a  curator.  His  biological  in
vestigations  continued  until  1871  in  Salem,  during
which  time  he  published  more  than  twenty  me
moirs.  He  was  called  in  1871  to  the  chair  of  com
parative  anatomy  and  zoology  in  Bowdoin,  where
he  remained  for  three  years,  and  then  returning


MORSE


423


to  Salem  resumed  his  special  researches  on  the
brachiopods.  In  1877  he  visited  Japan  in  search
of  new  material  on  this  subject,  and  accepted
from  the  Japanese  government  the  professorship
of  zoology  in  the  Imperial  university  of  Tokio.
He  thoroughly  organized  that  department  of  the
university,  laid  the  foundation  for  the  collections  in
the  Imperial  museum,  and  established  a  zoological
station  in  the  Bay  of  Yeddo,  but  resigned  from
these  offices  in  1880  to  continue  his  researches  in  the
United  States.  During  his  stay  in  Japan  he  was
led  to  the  examination  of  prehistoric  remains  by
the  observance  of  shell-heaps  near  Tokio.  These
he  found  to  be  similar  to  those  that  had  been  dis
covered  in  New  England  and  Florida  by  Jeffries
Wyman,  with  whom  he  had  studied,  and  evidence
was  obtained  showing  the  cannibal  nature  of  this
people  that  inhabited  Japan  before  the  Ainos,  who
were  the  predecessors  of  the  present  race  there.
His  researches  extended  also  to  earthenware,  and
his  collection  of  Japanese  pottery  now  in  Salem  is
considered  the  largest,  most  valuable,  and  most
complete  in  the  wrorld.  In  1881  he  became  director
of  the  Peabody  academy  of  sciences  in  Salem,
which  office  he  has  since  retained,  except  during
1882,  when  he  again  visited  Japan,  returning  by
way  of  Europe.  His  recent  work  has  included
the  classification  of  his  material  on  Japan,  part  of
which  has  been  published,  and  an  ethnological  re
search  on  "  Ancient  Methods  of  Arrow  Release,"
which  has  received  favorable  recognition  from
English  scientists.  Prof.  Morse  has  lectured  ex
tensively  throughout  the  United  States  on  scien
tific  subjects,  and  has  delivered  special  courses  in
Boston,  Baltimore,  and  Salem.  He  has  invented
apparatus  for  utilizing  the  sun's  rays  in  heating
and  ventilating  apartments,  a  device  for  introduc
ing  fresh  air  into  a  heated  room,  and  a  pamphlet
jacket.  In  1871  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.
from  Bowdoin.  and  besides  membership  in  numer
ous  scientific  societies  received  in  1876  an  election
to  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  In  1885  he
was  elected  president  of  the  American  association
for  the  advancement  of  sciences,  and  in  1887  de
livered  his  retiring  address  at  the  New  York  meet
ing  on  "  What  American  Zoologists  have  done
for  Evolution."  His  scientific  papers  exceed  fifty
in  number,  besides  less  technical  articles  written
for  popular  journals.  He  is  the  author  of  "  First
Book  in  Zoology  "  (New  York,  1875),  a  favorite
text-book,  which  has  been  translated  into  German
and  Japanese  ;  and  "  Japanese  Homes  and  their
Surroundings "  (Boston,  1885).  Both  of  these
works  are  illustrated  by  himself,  and  he  possesses
the  rare  accomplishment  of  drawing  equally  well
with  either  hand.

MORSE,  Harmon  Northrup,  chemist,  b.  in
Cambridge,  Vt.,  15  Oct.,  1848.  He  was  graduated
at  Amherst  in  1873,  and  then  studied  in  Germany,
where  in  1875  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.
from  the  University  of  Gotiingen.  On  his  return
to  the  United  States  he  became  assistant  in  chem
istry  at  Amherst,  and  remained  there  until  1876,
when  he  became  associate  professor  of  chemistry
and  sub-director  of  the  chemical  laboratory  at
Johns  Hopkins.  Ur.  Morse  has  been  exceedingly
active  as  an  original  investigator  since  he  settled
in  Baltimore.  Not  only  has  his  attention  been  di
rected  to  various  researches  in  organic  chemistry,
but  it  also  includes  descriptions  of  original  meth
ods  of  determination,  and  the  devising  of  improved
forms  of  apparatus.  His  papers  number  about
twenty-five,  and  have  appeared  in  the  "  American
Chemical  Journal."  to  which  he  has  been  an  edi
torial  contributor  from  almost  its  earliest  issue,  and


also  in  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  German  Chemical
Society.''  of  which  he  is  a  member.

MORSE,  Henry  Ba?g,  soldier,  b.  in  Eaton,
X.  Y.,  2  July,  1886;  d.  there,  20  June,  1874.  He
received  an  academic  education,  and  then  assisted
his  father  in  various  farming  and  manufacturing
enterprises.  In  1862  he  was  authorized  by  Gov.
Edwin  D.  Morgan  to  raise  a  company  for  the
Chenango  and  Madison  regiment,  and  successively
attained  the  ranks  of  captain,  major,  and  lieuten
ant-colonel.  His  regiment  was  sent  to  the  De
partment  of  the  Gulf,  took  part  in  the  combat  at
Foil  Bisland,  La.,  and  led  in  the  charge  on  Port
Hudson,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.  Subse
quently  he  had  charge  of  a  brigade  at  Sabine  Cross
roads,  and  received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-general
of  volunteers  on  13  March.  1865.  He  was  one  of
the  board  of  prison-inspectors  for  the  Department
of  the  Gulf  in  Xew  Orleans,  and  acting  chief
quartermaster  of  the  19th  army  corps  during  the
latter  part  of  his  service.  After  the  war  he  studied
law  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  and  then  settled  in  Arkan
sas,  where  he  held  the  office  of  U.  S.  revenue-col
lector.  On  the  reorganization  of  the  state  govern
ment  he  was  appointed  probate  judge,  and  he  was
afterward  circuit  judge  for  six  years.  Failing
health  led  to  his  returning  to  the  north,  but  in
March,  1874,  he  went  again  to  Arkansas  in  the
heat  of  the  Brooks-Baxter  excitement  (see  BAXTER,
ELISHA),  and  took  an  active  part  in  state  matters
as  chairman  of  the  Jefferson  county  Republican
committee.  This  again  prostrated  him,  and  he
returned  to  the  north  to  die.

MORSE,  Henry  Dutton,  diamond-cutter,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  20  April,  1826 ;  d.  in  Jamaica
Plain,  Mass.,  1  Jan.,  1888.  In  early  life  he  learned
the  engraver's  trade,  and  afterward  became  a  jew
eler.  Pie  turned  his  attention  to  diamond-cutting
in  1861,  shortly  after  intelligence  of  the  great  yield
of  the  South  African  diamond  fields  had  been  re
ceived.  Mr.  Benjamin  S.  Pray,  of  Boston,  was  then
engaged  in  the  African  trade,  and  brought  some
rough  stones  to  this  country  with  the  idea  of  com
peting  with  foreign  dealers.  Mr.  Morse  became  as
sociated  with  Mr.  Pray,  and  before  the  end  of  a  year
diamond-cutting  in  the  United  States  had  become
a  reality.  The  business  was  established  under  the
name  of  the  Morse  diamond-cutting  company,  Mr.
Morse  superintending  all  the  work.  It  was  neces
sary  to  employ  Dutch  experts  at  first  for  cutting
and  polishing,  but  whenever  they  were  engaged
they  maintained  the  same  secrecy  respecting  their
art  as  in  their  own  country,  and  displayed  the
same  dictatorial  spirit  toward  their  employers.
In  spite  of  this  Mr.  Morse  succeeded  in  discovering
what  was  so  carefully  concealed,  and  surreptitious
ly  imparted  the  information  to  American  boys  in
a"  suburb  of  Boston.  As  a  result  of  this  policy
when  the  foreigners  struck  he  was  ready  to  fill
their  places  with  other  workers.  In  1869  Mr,
Morse  established  his  fame  as  a  diamond-cutter  by
the  skill  that  he  displayed  in  the  treatment  of  a
50-carat  stone  found  in  Manchester,  nearly  oppo
site  Richmond.  Va.  Lapidaries  who  worked  at  it
in  the  rough  expressed  the  opinion  that  it  would
be  almost  impossible  to  obtain  a  first-water  stone
of  any  size  whatever  from  the  original  gem.  but
that  it  would  be  better  to  cut  it  into  smaller  frag
mentary  crystals.  Mr.  Morse  undertook  the  task
of  cutting  it,  and  by  adroit  manipulation  and
study  of  the  laws  of  light  and  geometrical  relations,
he  produced  a  brilliant  12-carat  diamond.  He
also  invented  a  cutting  and  polishing  machine,
which  reduced  in  a  great  measure  the  tediousness
and  inaccuracy  of  the  old  manual  process.  As  an


424


MORSE


MORSE


amateur  artist  he  painted  many  well-known  pic
tures  of  animals.  He  was  also  a  skilled  taxider
mist,  and  prepared  several  fine  collections  of  birds,
regarding  the  natural  history  of  which  his  knowl
edge  was  extensive  and  accurate.

MORSE,  Isaac  Edwards,  lawyer,  b.  in  Atta-
kapas,  La.,  22  May,  1809;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,
11  Feb.,  1866.  He  was  educated  at  military  acade
mies  in  Vermont  and  Middletown,  Conn.,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1829,  and  studied  law  in
New  Orleans  and  in  Paris,  France.  After  being
admitted  to  the  bar.  he  began  the  practice  of  his
profession  in  New  Iberia,  whence  he  was  sent  to
the  state  senate.  He  was  elected  as  a  Democrat  to
congress,  served,  with  re-elections,  from  2  Dec.,
1844,  till  3  March.  1851.  and  then  became  attorney-
general  of  Louisiana.  In  1856  he  was  sent  as  U.  S.
minister  to  Colombia  to  demand  indemnity  for  the
death  of  American  citizens  that  had  been  mur
dered  while  they  were  crossing  the  isthmus  of
Panama.  Subsequently  he  followed  the  fortunes
of  his  state  in  her  secession  from  the  Union.

MORSE,  Jedidiah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Woodstock,
Conn.,  23  Aug.,  1761;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  9
June,  1826.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1783,
and  in  September  of  that  year  established  a  school
for  young  ladies  in
New  Haven,  mean
while  pursuing  theo
logical  studies  under
Dr.  Jonathan  Ed
wards  and  Dr.  Samuel
Watts.  In  the  sum
mer  of  1785  he  was  li
censed  to  preach,  but
continued  to  occupy
himself  with  teach
ing.  1  le  became  a  tu
tor  at  Yale  in  June,
1786,  but,  resigning
this  office,  was  or
dained  on  9  Nov.,
178(5,  and  settled  in
Medway,  Ga.,  where
he  remained  until
August  of  the  follow
ing  year.  He  spent  the  winter  of  1787-'8  in  New
Haven  in  geographical  work,  preaching  on  Sun
days  to  vacant  parishes  in  the  vicinity.  In  May,
1787,  he  was  invited  to  preach  at  Charlestown,
Mass.,  where  he  was  installed  on  30  April,  1789.  This
pastorate  he  held  until  1820,  when  he  removed  to
New  Haven,  and  there  spent  the  remainder  of  his
life.  He  took  great  interest  in  the  subject  of
civilizing  and  Christianizing  Indians,  and  in  1820
he  was  appointed  by  the  secretary  of  war  to  visit
and  observe  various  tribes  on  the"  border,  in  order
to  ascertain  their  actual  condition,  and  to  devise
the  most  suitable  means  for  their  improvement.
This  work  occupied  his  attention  during  two  win
ters,  and  the  results  of  his  investigations  were  em
bodied  in  a  "  Report  to  the  Secretary  of  War  on
Indian  Affairs"  (New  Haven,  1822).  In  1795  he
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of
Edinburgh,  and  he  was  an  active  member  of 'the
Massachusetts  historical  society  and  of  various
literary  and  scientific  bodies.  Throughout  his
life  he  was  much  occupied  with  religious  contro
versy,  and  in  upholding  the  faith  of  the  New  Eng
land  church  against  the  assaults  of  Unitarianism.
Ultimately  his  persevering  opposition  to  the  so-
called  liberal  views  of  religion  brought  on  him  a
persecution  that  affected  deeply  his  naturally  deli
cate  health.  He  was  very  active  in  1804  in  the
movement  that  resulted  in  enlarging  the  Massa-


chusetts  general  assembly  of  Congregational  min
isters,  and  in  1805  unsuccessfully  opposed,  as  a
member  of  the  board  of  overseers,  the  election  of
Henry  Ware  to  the  Hollis  professorship  of  divinity
in  Harvard.  Dr.  Morse  did  much  toward  securing
the  foundation  of  Andover  theological  seminary,
especially  by  his  successful  efforts  in  preventing
the  establishment  of  a  rival  institution  in  Newburg,
which  had  been  projected  by  the  Ilopkinsians.  He
participated  in  the  organization  of  the  Park  street
church  in  Boston  in  1808,  when  all  the  Congre
gational  churches  of  that  city,  except  the  Old
South  church,  had  abandoned  the  orthodox  faith.
In  1805  he  established  the  "  Panopolist  "  for  the
purpose  of  illustrating  and  defending  the  com-
|  monly  received  orthodoxy  of  New  England,  and
I  continued  its  sole  editor  for  five  years.  This  jour
nal  still  exists  as  "The  Missionary  Herald."  Dr.
Morse  published  twenty-five  sermons  and  addresses
on  special  occasions;  also  "A  Compendious  His
tory  of  New  England,"  with  Rev.  Elijah  Harris
(Charlestown,  1804) :  and  "  Annals  of  the  American
Revolution  "  (Hartford,  1824).  He  early  showed
considerable  interest  in  the  study  of  geography,
and  adapted  from  some  of  the'  larger  English
works  a  text-book  that  was  so  frequently  copied  by
his  pupils  that  he  published  it  as  "  Geography
!  Made  Easy"  (New  Haven,  1784),  and  it  was  the
first  work  of  that  character  published  in  the
United  States.  Subsequently  he  issued  "Ameri
can  Geography  "  (Elizabethtown,  1789)  :  "  The
American  Gazetteer"  (London,  1789);  and  "Ele
ments  of  Geography"  (1797).  These  books  had
an  extensive  circulation,  and  gained  for  him
the  title  of  "Father  of  American  Geography. ''—
His  son,  Samuel  Finloy  Breese,  founder  of  the
American  system  of  electro-magnetic  telegraph,  b.
in  Charlestowu,  Mass.,  27  April,  1791  ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  2  April,  1872.  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1810,  and  in  that  institution  received  his  first  in
struction  in  electricity  from  Prof.  Jeremiah  Day,
also  attending  the  elder  Silliman's  lectures  on
chemistry  and  galvanism.  In  1809  he  wrote  :  "  M  r.
Day's  lectures  are  very  interesting ;  they  are  upon
electricity;  he  has  given  us  some  very  fine  experi
ments,  the  whole  class,  taking  hold  of  hands,  form
the  circuit  of  communication,  and  we  all  received
the  shock  apparently  at  the  same  moment.  1  never
took  an  electric  shock  before  ;  it  felt  as  if  some
person  had  struck  me  a  slight  blow  across  the
arms."  His  college  career  was  perhaps  more
strongly  marked  by  his  fondness  for  art  than  for
science,  and  he  employed  his  leisure  time  in  painting.
He  wrote  to  his  parents  during  the  senior  year:
"  My  price  is  five  dollars  for  a  miniature  on  ivory,
and  I  have  engaged  three  or  four  at  that  price.  My
price  for  profiles  is  one  dollar,  and  everybody  is
willing  to  engage  me  at  that  price."  When  he  was
released  from  his  college  duties,  he  had  no  profes
sion  in  view,  but  to  be  a  painter  was  his  ambition,
and  so  he  began  art  studies  under  Washington
Allston,  and  in  1811  accompanied  him  to  Lon
don,  where  soon  afterward  he  was  admitted  to
the  Royal  academy.  He  remained  in  London  for
four  years,  meeting  many  celebrities  and  form
ing  an  intimate  friendship  with  Charles  R.  Leslie,
who  became  his  room-mate.  Under  the  tuition  of
Allston  and  Benjamin  West  he  made  rapid  prog
ress  in  his  art,  and  in  1818  exhibited  a  colossal
"Dying  Hercules"  in  the  Royal  academy,  which
was  classed  by  critics  as  among  the  first  twelve
paintings  there.  The  plaster  model  that  he  made
to  assist  him  in  his  picture  gained  the  gold  medal
of  the  Adelphi  society  of  arts.  This  was  given
when  Great  Britain  and  the  United  States  were  at


424  MORSE


rutf,  '  i:=  Italia'  .. !*r.  Mf>f$ciiid  rrn-?h  towtm!  swi:  i'in.i:

;r. Si  a  •  1vivv*t-:,  ».n.. "S|H-.oiallv  by  bis  >«<.•  •*•->;;!  I  t-rT -rt.s  in preventing

•-;•-•  -;  i  ;:i:'atv  «<-jtH, iher^^hli^hinitit  of  a  iiv-d  institution  in  Newlw:,.

tu;  '...--c. «  ;«n.. was »hK-h  hud  U-m  proj.-vi'd  hy  the  Ilonfclsisians. Hi

fif.  iw,-'.  .•':,<;.-:  !ftw  in psrtii/jpaU'd  in  the  organization  of  the  Park  .street

After  bfint;  ,  etu.rch  iu  ffcarton  in 1><(.)8.  when  all  the-  Con^re-

»•(  thi  prwtice  of  hi.* g»tv»na] <*)»«reh«>*  of that  city, except tb<- Mid

:?•'{.  - ?it-  w»>  sent  ti. v-uth  eh»ir>-li.  Iwd  abandoned  the  •  rlt1  dox  faitli.

vt.-iiiWM  tK-niof-RM  i- ji, IStt  he  fM.-iMished  t.h.->  '•  PsnojHjJixt  "  fortlic

fr  .1.1 -> I »ee.. i-;r^i,»-  •>/ illustrating  and df-fendn,^  the  eo;ii-

at'.ir  ••«•- ';•'•  -:,\)'  *«t>«:ive«l  orthodoxy  of  Xv.w  En^L'ind.  and

•»:'ii:u«l  ito  )«ole  editor  for  five-  years. This  jonr-

»:A.  ;  -  --....'.r,-  f.,r  i l.i •)«!  «t!ll  •»! L-its  as  "Thu  Missicuary  Herald." i>r.
kf.,r--«  j-u!-i:>hed  twenty-five  sermons ;ind  addre^-es

-:-,-;• .v  ;.,H(,..  ,;{ ,.;.  H->4  ;al i-y-casions :  also  "A  Compendious liis-

-f  Ve» England."  with  Rev.  Elijah FFani*

''hHr;c*-t<'wii,  IH04) :  and  "Annals  of  the  Amerii-ini

!Vv<.'i.aon  "  t Hartford, IS24). He.  early  p'towi-d

•  •'. ''i'l *i»i'twl from some of the larger  English
w«rk-«  a  t«-xt  K>ok  thai  w«s  (?o  frequently  copier!  t>y
.r,-  i--!ij>i;s that  he. published  it  as  "Geography
New Haven. m«»T!

while  jjursnint;  u-.f-  w»rk <-f  thai e.haracter published in tin-

losjk-al  studies -I?-.  -!«{•-•.. S'ubx-quently  he  issued  "  inieri-

l)r. .I,.n,,''i.^, 1-1  " fElizahethtown, 1789) : -  Tlie.

*.:r.i- s,,-'.  A.  <i*»«tt«.:r"  (London,  178!)):  and  -  Kle-

\V.i-!A in  iiiv '.«»! :;.i,it- .-t'  n«vrmphy (1797). Thc.se  !
.;i.-r.  f  IT*'*)  ii.  WH-  li- »t; .  xi.  !;>;•»• . -ii-.-ciai ion, and p'

•>•<! ;h» til  1«  of  •  Kuril.,-  of  American


spent  th"  *•'-'!••:.; .'••.  "f  in^ .*  i«»m

int.  res»  --ut-jeU of  ;  He  wr

•:-»'i-  and  in  1-S20  i  ••  My  |

v.-.r  \.<t  visit  j  and  1

i-.r«i.'-r.  in  order  ;  price

••JM'.i  to  device  i  \v;l . ,


MORSE


MORSE


425


war,  and  was  cited  a?  an  illustration  of  the  impar
tiality  with  which  American  artists  were  treated
by  England.  The  first  portrait  that  he  painted
abroad  was  of  Leslie,  who  paid  him  a  similar  com
pliment,  and  later  he  executed  one  of  Zerah  Col-
burn.  He  then  set  to  work  on  an  historical  compo
sition  to  be  offered  in  competition  for  the  highest
premium  of  the  Royal  academy,  but,  as  he  was
obliged  to  return  to  the  United  States  in  August,
1815,  this  project  was  abandoned.  Settling  in  Bos
ton,  he  opened  a  studio  in  that  city,  but,  while
visitors  were  glad  to  admire  his  "  Juofgment  of  Ju
piter,"  his  patrons  were  few.  Finding  no  oppor
tunities  for  historic  painting,  he  turned  his  atten
tion  to  portraits  during  1816-17,  visiting  the  larger
towns  of  Vermont  and  Xew  Hampshire.

Meanwhile  he  was  associated  with  his  brother,
Sidney  E.  Morse,  in  the  invention  of  an  improved
pump".  In  January,  1818,  he  went  to  Charleston,
S.  C.,  and  there  painted  many  portraits,  his  orders
at  one  time  exceeding  150  in  number.  On  18  Oct..
1818.  he  married  Lucretia  Walker  in  Concord,
X.  II..  but  in  the  following  winter  he  returned  to
Charleston,  where  he  wrote  to  his  old  preceptor,
Washington  Allston  :  "  I  am  painting  from  morn
ing  till  night,  and  have  continual  applications."
Among  his  orders  was  a  commission  from  the  city
authorities  for  a  portrait  of  James  Monroe,  then
president  of  the  United  States,  which  he  painted  in
Washington,  and  which,  on  its  completion,  was
placed  in  the  city  hall  of  Charleston.  In  1823
he  settled  in  Xew  York  city,  and  after  hiring  as  his
studio  "a  fine  room  on  Broadway,  opposite  Trinity
churchyard."  he  continued  his  painting  of  portraits,
one  of  the  first  being  that  of  Chancellor  Kent,
which  was  followed  soon  afterward  by  a  pic
ture  of  Fitz-Greene  Halleck,  now  in  the  Astor
library,  and  a  full-length  portrait  of  Lafayette  for
the  city  of  Xew  York.  During  his  residence  there
he  became  associated  with  other  artists  in  found
ing  the  Xew  York  drawing  association,  of  which  he
was  made  president.  This  led  in  1820  to  the  estab
lishment  of  the  Xational  academy  of  the  arts  of  de
sign,  to  include  representations 'from  the  arts  of
painting,  sculpture,  architecture,  and  engraving.
Morse  was  chosen  its  president,  and  so  remained
until  1842.  He  was  likewise  president  of  the  Sketch
club,  an  assemblage  of  artists  that  met  weekly  to
sketch  for  an  hour,  after  which  the  time  was  de
voted  to  social  entertainment,  including  a  supper  of
"  milk  and  honey,  raisins,  apples,  and  crackers."
About  this  time  he  delivered  a  series  of  lectures  on
'•  The  Fine  Arts  "  before  the  Xew  York  athena?um,
which  are  said  to  have  been  the  first  on  that  subject
in  the  United  States.  Thus  he  continued  until
182!),  when  he  again  visited  Europe  for  study,  and
for  three  years  resided  abroad,  principally  in  Paris
and  the  art  centres  of  Italy.

During  1826-7  Prof.  James  F.  Dana  lectured
on  electro-magnetism  and  electricity  before  the
Xew  York  athenaeum.  Mr.  Morse  was  a  regular
attendant,  and,  being  a  friend  of  Prof.  Dana,  had
frequent  discussions  with  him  on  the  subject  of  his
lectures.  But  the  first  ideas  of  a  practical  applica
tion  of  electricity  seem  to  have  come  to  him  while
he  was  in  Paris.  James  Fenimore  Cooper  refers  to
the  event  thus :  "  Our  worthy  friend  first  commu
nicated  to  us  his  ideas  on  the  subject  of  using  the
electric  spark  by  way  of  a  telegraph.  It  was  in
Paris,  and  during  the  winter  of  1831-'2."  On  1
Oct.,  1832,  he  sailed  from  Havre  on  the  packet-ship
"  Sully  "  for  Xew  York,  and  among  his  fellow-pas
sengers  was  Charles  T.  Jackson  (q.  »•.),  then  lately
from  the  laboratories  of  the  great  French  physi
cists,  where  he  had  made  special  studies  in  elec-


|  tricity  and  magnetism.  A  conversation  in  the
l  early  part  of  the  voyage  turned  on  the  recent  experi-
;  ments  of  Ampere  with  the  electro-magnet.  When
the  question  whether  the  velocity  of  electricity  is  re
tarded  by  the  length  of  the  wire  was  asked,  Dr.  Jack
son  replied,  referring  to  Benjamin  Franklin's  experi
ments,  that  "  electricity  passes  instantaneously  over
any  known  length  of  wire."  Morse  then  said :  "  If  the
presence  of  electricity  can  be  made  visible  in  any
part  of  the  circuit,  I  see  no  reason  why  intelligence
may  not  be  transmitted  instantaneously  by  elec
tricity."  The  idea  took  fast  hold  of  him,  and
thenceforth  all  his  energy  was  devoted  to  the  devel
opment  of  the  electric  telegraph.  He  said  :  "  If  it
will  go  ten  miles  without  stopping,  1  can  make  it  go
around  the  globe."  At  once,  while  on  board  the
vessel,  he  set  to  work  and  devised  the  dot-and-dash
alphabet.  The  electro-magnetic  and  chemical  re
cording  telegraph  essentially  as  it  now  exists  was
planned  and  drawn  on  shipboard,  but  he  did  not
produce  his  working  model  till  1835  nor  his  relay
till  later.  His  brothers  placed  at  his  disposal  a
room  on  the  fifth  floor  of  the  building  on  the  cor
ner  of  Nassau  and  Beekman  streets,  which  he  used
as  his  studio,  workshop,  bedchamber,  and  kitchen.
In  this  room,  with  his  own  hands,  he  first  cut  his
models ;  then  from  these  he  made  the  moulds
and  castings,  and  in  the  lathe,  with  the  graver's
tools,  he  gave  them  polish  and  finish.  In  1835  he
was  appointed  professor  of  the  literature  of  the  arts
of  design  in  the  University  of  the  city  of  X~ew
York,  and  he  occupied  front  rooms  on  the  third
floor  in  the  north  wing  of  the  university  build
ing,  looking  out  on  Washington  square.  Here  he
made  his  apparatus,  "made  as  it  was,"  he  says,
"  and  completed  before  the  first  of  the  year  1836.
I  was  enabled  to  and  did  mark  down  telegraphic  in
telligible  signs,  and  to  make  and  did  make  distin
guishable  signs  for  telegraphing;  and,  having  ar
rived  at  that  point.  I  exhibited  it  to  some  of  my
friends  early  in  that  year,  and  among  others  to
Prof.  Leonard  D.  Gale."  His  discovery  of  the  relay
in  1835  made  it  possible  for  him  to  re-enforce  the
current  after  it  had  become  feeble  owing  to  its  dis
tance  from  the  source,  thus  making  possible  trans
mission  from  one  point  on  a  main  line,  through
great  distances,  by  a  single  act  of  a  single  operator.
In  1836-'7  he  directed  his  experiments  mainly  to
modifying  the  marking  apparatus,  and  later  in
varying  the  modes  of  uniting,  experimenting  with
plumbago  and  various  kinds  of  inks  or  coloring-
matter,  substituting  a  pen  for  a  pencil,  and  devis
ing  a  mode  of  writing  on  a  whole  sheet  of  paper
instead  of  on  a  strip  of  ribbon.  In  September,
1837,  the  instrument  was  shown  in  the  cabinet  of
the  university  to  numerous  visitors,  operating
through  a  circuit  of  1,700  feet  of  wire  that  ran  back
and  forth  in  that  room.  At  this  time  the  appara
tus,  which  is  shown  in  the  accompanying  illustra
tion,  was  described  by  Prof.  Leonard  D.  Gale  as
consisting  of  a  train  of  clock-wheels  to  regulate  the
motion  of  a  strip  of  paper  about  one  and  a  half
inches  wide  ;  three  cylinders  of  wood,  A,  B,  and  C,
over  which  the  paper  passed,  and  which  were  con
trolled  by  the  clock-work  D  that  was  moved  by  the
weight  E".  A  wooden  pendulum,  F,  was  suspended
over  the  centre  of  the  cylinder  B.  In  the  lower
part  of  the  pendulum  was  fixed  a  case  in  which  a
pencil  moved  easily  and  was  kept  in  contact  with
the  paper  by  a  light  weight  g.  At  h  was  an  electro
magnet,  whose  armature  was  fixed  on  the  pendu
lum.  The  wire  from  the  helices  of  the  magnet
passed  to  one  pole  of  the  battery  I,  and  the  other  to
the  cup  of  mercury  at  K.  The  other  pole  of  the
battery  was  connected  by  a  wire  to  the  other  cup  of


426


MORSE


MORSE


mercury,  J.  The  port  rule  represented  below  the
table  contained  two  cylinders  connected  by  a  band.
M  shows  the  composing-stick  in  which  the  type
were  set.  At  one  end  of  the  lever  0  0  was  a  fork


of  copper  wire,  which  was  plunged  when  the  lever
was  depressed  into  the  two  cups  of  mercury  J  and
K.  while  the  other  end  was  kept  down  by  means  of  a
weight.  A  series  of  thin  plates  of  type  metal,  eleven
in  number,  having  one  to  five  cogs  each,  except  one
which  was  used  as  a  space,  completed  the  apparatus.
His  application  for  a  patent,  dated  28  Sept.,  1837,
was  tiled  as  a  caveat  at  the  U.  S.  patent-office,  and
in  December  of  the  same  year  he  made  a  formal
request  of  congress  for  aid  to  build  a  telegraph-
line.  The  committee  on  commerce  of  the  house  bf
representatives,  to  which  the  petition  had  been  re
ferred,  reported  favorably,  but  the  session  closed
without  any  action  being  taken.  Francis  0.  J.
Smith,  of  Maine,  chairman  of  the  committee,  be
came  impressed  with  the  value  of  this  new  applica
tion  of  electricity,  and  formed  a  partnership  with
Mr.  Morse.  In  May,  1838,  Morse  went  to  Europe
in  the  hope  of  interesting  foreign  governments  in
the  establishment  of  telegraph-lines,  but  he  was
unsuccessful  in  London.  He  obtained  a  patent  in
France,  but  it  was  practically  useless,  as  it  required
the  inventor  to  put  his  discovery  into  operation
within  two  years,  and  telegraphs  being  a  govern
ment  monopoly  no  private  lines  were  permissible.
Mr.  Morse  was  received  with  distinction  by  scien
tists  in  each  country,  and  his  apparatus  was  ex
hibited  under  the  auspices  of  the  Academy  of  sci
ences  in  Paris,  and  the  Royal  society  in  London.

After  an  absence  of  eleven  months  he  returned
to  New  York  in  May.  1839,  as  he  writes  to  Mr.
Smith,  "  without  a  farthing  in  my  pocket,  and
have  to  borrow  even  for  my  meals,  and,  even  worse
than  this,  I  have  incurred  a  debt  of  rent  by  my  ab
sence."  Four  years  of  trouble  and  almost  abject
poverty  followed,  and  at  times  he  was  reduced
to  such  want  that  for  twenty-four  hours  he  was
without  food.  His  only  support  was  derived  from
a  few  students  that  he  taught  art,  and  occasional
portraits  that  he  was  commissioned  to  paint.  In
the  mean  time,  his  foreign  competitors — Wheat-
stone  in  England,  and  Steinheil  in  Bavaria — were


receiving  substantial  aid.  and  making  efforts  to
induce  congress  to  adopt  their  systems  in  the
United  States,  while  Morse,  struggling  to  per
suade  his  own  countrymen  of  the  merits  of  his  sys
tem,  although  it  was  conceded  by  scientists  to  "be
the  best,  was  unable  to  accomplish  anything.  He
persisted  in  bringing  the  matter  before  congress
after  congress,  until  at  last  a  bill  granting  him
$30.000  was  passed  by  the  house  on  23  Feb.,  1842,
by  a  majority  of  eight,  the  vote  standing  90  to  82.
On  the  last  day  of  the  session  he  left  the  capitol
thoroughly  disheartened,  but  found  next  morning
that  his  bill  had  been  rushed  through  the  senate
without  division  on  the  night  of  3  March,  1843.
There  were  yet  many  difficulties  to  be  overcome,
and  with  renewed  energy  he  began  to  work.  His
intention  was  to  place  the  wires  in  leaden  pipes,
buried  in  the  earth.  This  proved  impracticable,
and  other  methods  were  devised.  Ezra  Cornell
(q.  i1.)  then  became  associated  with  him,  and  was
charged  with  the  laying  of  the  wires,  and  after
various  accidents  it  was  ultimately  decided  to  sus
pend  the  wires,  insulated,  on  poles  in  the  air.  These
difficulties  had  not  been  considered,  as  it  was  sup
posed  that  the  method  of  burying  the  wires,  which
had  been  adopted  abroad,  would  prove  successful.
Nearly  a  year  had  been  exhausted  in  making  ex
periments,  and  the  congressional  appropriation  was
nearly  consumed  before  the  system  of  poles  was  re
sorted  to.  The  construction  of  the  line  between
Baltimore  and  Washington,  a  distance  of  about
forty  miles,  was  quickly  accomplished,  and  on  11
May,  1844,  Mr.  Morse  wrote  to  his  assistant,  Alfred
Vail,  in  Baltimore,  '-Everything  worked  well."
Among  the  earliest  messages,  while  the  line  was
still  in  an  experimental  condition,  was  one  from
Baltimore  announcing  the  nomination  of  Henry
Clay  to  the  presidency  by  the  Whig  convention  in
that  city.  The  news  was  conveyed  on  the  railroad
to  the  nearest  point  that  had  been  reached  by  the
telegraph,  and  thence  instantly  transmitted  over
the  wires  to  Washington.  An  hour  later  passen
gers  arriving  at  Washington  were  surprised  to  find
that  the  news  had  preceded  them.  By  the  end  of
the  month  communication  between  the  two  cities
was  complete,  and  practically  perfect.  The  day
that  was*  chosen  for  the  public  exhibition  was  24
May,  1844,  when  Mr.  Morse  invited  his  friends  to
assemble  in  the  chamber  of  the  U.  S.  supreme
court,  in  the  capitol,  at  Washington,  while  his  as
sistant.  Mr.  Vail,  was  in  Baltimore,  at  the  Mount
Claire  depot.  Miss  Annie  G.  Ellsworth,  daughter
of  Henry  L.  Ellsworth,  then  commissioner  of  pat
ents,  chose  the  words  of  the  message.  As  she  had
been  the  first  to  announce  to  Mr.  Morse  the  pas
sage  of  the  bill  granting  the  appropriation  to  build
the  line,  he  had  promised  her  this  distinction.  She
selected  the  words  "  What  hath  God  wrought,"
taken  from  Numbers  xxiii.,  23.  They  were  received
at  once  by  Mr.  Vail,  and  sent  back  again  in  an  in
stant.  The  strip  of  paper  on  which  the  telegraphic
characters  were  printed  was  claimed  by  Go  v.  Thomas
H.  Seymour,  of  Connecticut,  on  the  ground  that
Miss  Ellsworth  was  a  native  of  Hartford,  and  is
now  preserved  in  the  archives  by  the  Hartford
athenamm.  Two  days  later  the  national  Demo
cratic  convention  met  in  Baltimore  and  nominated
James  K.  Polk  for  the  presidency.  Silas  Wright,
of  New  York,  was  then  chosen  for  the  vice-presi
dency,  and  the  information  was  immediately  con
veyed  by  telegraph  to  Morse,  and  by  him  communi
cated  to  Mr.  Wright,  then  in  the  senate  chamber.
A  few  minutes  later  the  convention  was  astonished
by  receiving  a  telegram  from  Mr.  Wright  declining
the  nomination.  The  despatch  was  at  once  read


MORSE


MORSE


427


before  the  convention,  but  the  members  were  so
incredulous  that  there  was  an  adjournment  to  await
the  report  of  a  committee  that  was  sent  to  Wash
ington  to  get  reliable  information  on  the  subject.

Morse  offered  his  telegraph  to  the  U.  S.  govern
ment  for  $100,000.  but,  while  $8,000  was  voted
for  maintenance  of  the  initial  line,  any  further
expenditure  in  that  direction  was  declined.  The
patent  then  passed  into  private  hands,  and  the
Morse  system  became  the  property  of  a  joint-stock
company  called  the  Magnetic  telegraph  company.
Step  by  step,  sometimes  with  rapid  strides,  but
persistently,  the  telegraph  spread  over  the  United
States,  although  not  without  accompanying  difficul
ties.  Morse's  patents  were  violated,  his  honor  dis
puted,  and  even  his  integrity  was  assailed,  and
rival  companies  devoured  for  a  time  all  the  profits
of  the  business,  but  after  a  series  of  vexatious  law
suits  his  rights  were  affirmed  by  the  U.  S.  supreme
court.  In  1846  he  was  granted  an  extension  of  his
patent,  and  ultimately  the  Morse  system  was  adopt
ed  in  France,  Germany.  Denmark,  Sweden,  Russia,
and  Australia.  The  following  statement,  made  in
186!)  by  the  Western  Union  telegraph  company,
the  largest  corporation  of  its  kind  in  the  world,  is
still  true  :  "  Nearly  all  the  machinery  employed  by
the  company  belongs  to  the  Morse  system.  This
telegraph  is"  now  used  almost  exclusively  every
where,  and  the  time  will  probably  never  come  when
it  will  cease  to  be  the  leading  system  of  the  world.
Of  more  than  a  hundred  devices  that  have  been
111:11  le  to  supersede  it,  not  one  has  succeeded  in
accomplishing  its  purpose,  and  it  is  used  at  the
present  time  upon  more  than  ninety-five  per  cent
of  all  the  telegraph-lines  in  existence."  The  estab
lishment  of  the  submarine  telegraph  is  likewise
due  to  Morse.  In  October,  1842,  he  made  experi
ments  with  a  cable  between  Castle  Garden  and  Gov
ernor's  island.  The  results  were  sufficient  to  show

the  practicability
of  such  an  under
taking.  Later  he
held  the  office  of
electrician  to  the
New  York,  New
foundland,  and
London  telegraph
company,  organ
ized  for  the  pur
pose  of  laying  a
cable  across  the
Atlantic  ocean.
While  in  Paris
during  March,
1839,  Morse  met
Daguerre.  and  be
came  acquainted
with  his  process
of  reproducing  pictures  by  the  action  of  sunlight
on  silver  salts.  He  had  previously  experimented  in
the  same  lines  while  residing  in  New  Haven,  but
without  success.  In  June  of  the  same  year,  after
the  French  government  had  purchased  the  method
from  Daguerre,  he  communicated  the  details  to
Morse,  who  succeeded  in  acquiring  the  process,  and
was  associated  with  John  W.  Draper  (q.  v.)  in  simi
lar  experiments.  For  some  time  afterward,  until
the  telegraph  absorbed  his  attention,  he  was  en
gaged  in  experimenting  toward  the  perfecting  of
the  daguerreotype,  and  he  shares  with  Prof.  Draper
the  honor  of  being  the  first  to  make  photographs
of  living  persons.  Morse  also  patented  a  machine
for  cutting  marble  in  1823,  by  which  he  hoped  to
be  able  to  produce  perfect  copies  of  any  model.
In  1847  he  purchased  property  on  the  east  bank  of


the  Hudson,  near  Poughkeepsie,  which  he  called
"  Locust  Grove,"  where,  after  his  marriage  in  1848
to  Sarah  E.  Griswold,  he  dispensed  a  generous  hos
pitality,  entertaining  eminent  artists  and  other
notable  persons.  Soon  afterward  he  bought  a  city
residence  on  Twenty-second  street,  where  he  spent
the  winters,  and  on  whose  front  since  his  death  a
marble  tablet  has  been  inserted,  bearing  the  in
scription,  "  In  this  house  S.  F.  B.  Morse  lived  for
many  years  and  died."

He  had  many  honors.  Yale  gave  him  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1846,  and  in  1842  the  American
institute  gave  him  its  gold  medal  for  his  experi
ments.  In  1830  he  was  elected  a  corresponding
member  of  the  Historical  institute  of  France,  in
1837  a  member  of  the  Royal  academy  of  fine  arts
in  Belgium,  in  1841  corresponding  member  of  the
National  institution  for  the  promotion  of  science
in  Washington,  in  1845  corresponding  member  of
the  Archaeological  society  of  Belgium,  in  1848  a
member  of  the  American  philosophical  society,
and  in  1849  a  fellow  of  the  American  academy  of
arts  and  sciences.  The  sultan  of  Turkey  present
ed  him  in  1848  with  the  decoration  of  Nishan
Iftichar.  or  order  of  glory,  set  in  diamonds.  A
golden  snuff-box,  containing  the  Prussian  golden
medal  for  scientific  merit,  was  sent  him  in  1851 ;
the  great  gold  medal  of  arts  and  sciences  was
awarded  him  by  Wiirtemberg  in  1852,  and  in  1855
the  emperor  of  Austria  sent  him  the  great  gold
medal  of  science  and  art.  France  made  him  a
chevalier  of  the  Legion  of  honor  in  1856.  Denmark
conferred  on  him  the  cross  of  the  order  of  the
Dannebrog  in  1856,  Spain  gave  him  the  honor  of
knighthood  and  made  him  commander  of  the
royal  order  of  Isabella  the  Catholic  in  1859,  Por
tugal  made  him  a  knight  of  the  tower  and  sword
in  1860,  and  Italy  conferred  on  him  the  insignia
of  chevalier  of  the  royal  order  of  Saints  Lazaro
Mauritio  in  1864.  In  1856  the  telegraph  com
panies  of  Great  Britain  gave  him  a  banquet  in
London.  At  the  instance  of  Napoleon  III.,  em
peror  of  the  French,  representatives  of  France,
Austria.  Sweden,  Russia,  Sardinia,  the  Nether
lands,  Turkey,  Holland,  the  Papal  States,  and
Tuscany,  met  in  Paris  during  August.  1858,  to
decide  upon  a  collective  testimonial  to  Morse,  and
the  result  of  their  deliberations  was  a  vote  of  400,-
000  francs.  During  the  same  year  the  American
colony  of  France  entertained  him  at  a  dinner  given
in  Paris,  over  which  John  S.  Preston  presided.  On
the  occasion  of  his  later  visits  to  Europe  he  was  re
ceived  with  great  distinction.  As  he  was  return
ing  from  abroad  in  1868  he  received  an  invitation
from  his  fellow-citizens,  who  united  in  saying:
"  Many  of  your  fellow  countrymen  and  numerous
personal  friends  desire  to  give  a  definite  expression
of  the  fact  that  this  country  is  in  full  accord  with
European  nations  in  acknowledging  your  title  to
the  position  of  the  father  of  the  modern  telegraph,
and  at  the  same  time  in  a  fitting  manner  to  welcome
you  to  your  home."  The  day  selected  was  30  Dec.,
1868.  and  Salmon  P.  Chase,  chief  justice  of  the  U.
S.  supreme  court,  presided  at  the  banquet  in  New
York.  On  10  June.  1871,  he  was  further  honored
|  by  the  erection  of  a  bronze  statue  of  himself  in
Central  park.  Voluntary  contributions  had  been
gathered  for  two  years  from  those  who  in  various
ways  were  connected  with  the  electric  telegraph.
The  statue  is  of  heroic  size,  modelled  by  Byron
M.  Pickett,  and  represents  Morse  as  holding  the
first  message  that  was  sent  over  the  wires.  In  the
evening  of  the  same  day  a  reception  was  held  in
the  Academy  of  music,  at  which  many  eminent
men  of  the  nation  were  present.  At  the  hour  of


428


MORSE


MORTEMAET


nine  the  chairman  announced  that  the  telegraphic
instrument  before  him,  the  original  register  em
ployed  in  actual  sei-vice,  was  connected  with  all
the' wires  of  the  United  States,  and  that  the  touch
of  the  finger  on  the  key  would  soon  vibrate
throughout  the  continent.  The  following  message
was  then  sent :  "  Greeting  and  thanks  to  the  tele
graph  fraternity  throughout  the  land.  Glory  to
God  in  the  highest,  on  earth  peace,  good  will  to
men."  At  the  last  click  of  the  instrument,  Morse
struck  the  sounder  with  his  own  name,  amid  the
most  extravagant  applause.  When  the  excitement
had  subsided,  the  chairman  said  :  "  Thus  the  father
of  the  telegraph  bids  farewell  to  his  children."
The  last  public  service  that  he  performed  was  the
unveiling  of  the  statue  of  Benjamin  Franklin  in
Printing  house  square,  on  17  Jan.,  1872,  in  the
presence  of  a  vast  number  of  citizens,  lie  had
cheerfully  acceded  to  the  request  that  he  would
perform  this  act,  remarking  that  it  would  be  his
last.  It  was  eminently  appropriate  that  he  should
do  this,  for,  as  was  said  :  "  The  one  conducted  the
lightning  safely  from  the  sky ;  the  other  conducts
it  beneath  the  ocean,  from  continent  to  continent.
The  one  tamed  the  lightning,  the  other  makes  it
minister  to  human  wants  and  human  progress."
Shortly  after  his  return  to  his  home  he  was  seized
with  neuralgia  in  his  head,  and  after  a  few  months
of  suffering  he  died.  Memorial  sessions  of  con
gress  and  of  various  state  legislatures  were  held  in
his  honor.  "In  person,"  says  his  biographer,
"  Prof.  Morse  was  tall,  slender,  graceful,  and  attrac
tive.  Six  feet  in  stature,  he  stood  erect  and  firm
even  in  his  old  age.  Ilis  blue  eyes  were  expressive
of  genius  and  affection.  His  nature  was  a  rare
combination  of  solid  intellect  and  delicate  sensi
bility.  Thoughtful,  sober,  and  quiet,  he  readily
entered  into  the  enjoyments  of  domestic  and  social
life,  indulging  in  sallies  of  humor,  and  readily
appreciating  and  enjoying  the  wit  of  others.  Dig
nified  in  his  intercourse  with  men,  courteous  and
affable  with  the  gentler  sex,  he  was  a  good  hus
band,  a  judicious  father,  a  generous  and  faithful
friend."  He  was  a  ready  writer,  and,  in  addition
to  several  controversial  pamphlets  concerning  the
telegraph,  he  published  poems  and  articles  in  the
"  North  American  Review."  He  edited  the  "  Re
mains  of  Lucretia  Maria  Davidson  "  (New  York,
1829),  to  which  he  added  a  personal  memoir,  and
also  published  "  Foreign  Conspiracy  against  the
Liberties  of  the  United  States "  (1835) ;  "  Immi
nent  Dangers  to  the  Free  Institutions  of  the
United  States  through  Foreign  Immigration,  and
the  Present  State  of  the  Naturalization  Laws,  by
an  American,"  originally  contributed  to  the  "Jour
nal  of  Commerce  "  in  1835,  and  published  anony
mously  in  1854 ;  "  Confessions  of  a  French  Catho
lic  Priest,  to  which  are  added  Warnings  to  the
People  of  the  United  States,  by  the  same  Author  "
(edited  and  published  with  an  introduction,  1837) ;
and  "  Our  Liberties  defended,  the  Question  dis
cussed,  Is  the  Protestant  or  Papal  System  most
Favorable  to  Civil  and  Religious  Liberty?"  (1841).
See  "  Life  of  Samuel  F.  B.  Morse,"  by  Sam
uel  Ireiueus  Prime  (New  York,  1875). — Another
son  of  Jedidiah,  Sidney  Edwards,  journalist,  b.
in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  7  Feb..  1794 :  d.  in  New
York  city,  24  Dec.,  1871,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1811,  and  studied  theology  at  Andover  seminary,
and  law  at  the  Litchfield,  Conn.,  school.  Mean
while  he  became  a  contributor  to  the  "  Columbian
C'entinel "  of  Boston,  writing  a  series  of  articles
that  illustrated  the  danger  to  the  American  Union
from  an  undue  multiplication  of  new  states  in  the
south,  and  showing  that  it  would  give  to  a  sec


tional  minority  the  control  of  the  government.
These  led  to  his  being  invited  by  Jeremiah  Evarts
and  others  to  found  a  weekly  religious  newspaper,
to  which  he  gave  the  name  "  Boston  Recorder."
He  continued  as  sole  editor  and  proprietor  of  this
journal  for  more  than  a  year,  and  in  this  time
raised  its  circulation  until  it  was  exceeded  by  that
of  only  two  Boston  papers.  Mr.  Morse  was  then
associated  with  his  elder  brother  in  patenting  the
flexible  piston  pump  and  extending  its  sale.  In
1823  he  came  to  New  York,  and  with  his  brother,
Richard  0.  Morse,  founded  the  "  New  York  Ob
server,"  now  the  oldest  weekly  in  New  York  city,
and  the  oldest  religious  newspaper  in  the  state.
He  continued  as  senior  editor  and  proprietor  until
1858.  when  he  retired  to  private  life.  Mr.  Morse
in  1839  was  associated  with  Henry  A.  Munson  in
the  development  of  cerography,a  method  of  printing
maps  in  color  on  the  common  printing-press.  He
used  this  process  to  illustrate  the  geographical
text-books  that  he  published,  and  in  early  life  he
assisted  his  father  in  the  preparation  of  works  of
that  character.  The  last  years  of  his  life  were
devoted  to  experimenting  with  an  invention  for
the  rapid  exploration  of  the  depths  of  the  sea.
This  instrument,  called  a  bathyometer,  was  ex
hibited  at  the  World's  fair  in  Paris  in  1809,  and
during  1870  in  New  York  citv.  His  publications
include  "A  New  System  of  Modern  Geography"
(Boston,  1823),  of  which  more  than  half  a  million
copies  were  sold  ;  "  Premium  Questions  on  Slave
ry"  (New  York,  1860);  "  North  American  Atlas"  ;
and  •'  Cerographic  Maps,  comprising  the  Whole
Field  of  Ancient  and  Modern,  including  Sacred,
Geography,  Chronology,  and  History." — Another
son,  Richard  Cary,  journalist,  b.  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  18  June,  1795;  d.  in  Kissingen,  Bavaria,  23
Sept.,  1868,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1812,  and
spent  the  year  following  as  amanuensis  to  Presi
dent  Timothy  Dwight,  with  whose  family  he  re
sided,  lie  then  entered  Andover  theological
seminary,  and  after  his  graduation  in  1817  was
licensed  to  preach  in  the  same  year.  During  the
winter  of  1817-'18  he  acted  as  supply  to  the  Presby
terian  church  on  John's  island,  S.  C.,  and  on  his
return  to  New  Haven  he  assisted  his  father  in  the
preparation  of  his  geographical  works.  In  1823,
with  his  brother.  Sidney  E.  Morse,  he  established
the  "  New  York  Observer,"  of  which  he  continued
associate  editor  and  part  proprietor  until  his  death,
contributing  largely  to  its  columns,  especially
French  and  German  translations.  In  1858  he  re
tired  from  active  life,  and  in  1863  removed  to  New
Haven,  where  he  spent  his  last  years.

MORSE,  John  Torrey,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  9  Jan.,  1840.  He  was  graduated  at  Har
vard  in  1860,  and  has  served  his  university  as  lec
turer  on  history  in  1876-'9,  and  as  overseer  since
1876.  Mr.  Morse  was  a  member  of  the  Massachu
setts  legislature  during  one  term,  and  is  a  member
of  the  State  historical  society.  For  two  years  he
was  co-editor  with  Henry  Cabot  Lodge  (q.  v.)  of  the
"International  Review,"  and  in  addition  to  sun
dry  articles  in  the  reviews  he  has  published  "  Trea
tise  on  the  Law  relating  to  Banks  and  Banking"
(Boston,  1870);  "Law  of  Arbitration  and  Award"
(1872);  "Famous  Trials"  (1874);  and  "Life  of
Alexander  Hamilton  "  (2  vols.,  1876).  More  re
cently  he  has  edited  the  series  of  lives  of  American
statesmen,  to  which  he  has  contributed  the  vol
umes  "John  Quincy  Adams"  (1883);  "Thomas
Jefferson"  (1883);  and  "John  Adams"  (1884).

MORTEMART,  Yictnrnieu  Henry  Elzear
de  Rochechouart,  Viscount  do  (mor-tay-marr),
French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Paris  in  1757;  d.  in


MORTIER


MORTON


429


Fort  de  France,  Martinique,  in  1783.  He  became
a  midshipman  in  1771  and  a  lieutenant  in  1779,
serving  in  the  West  Indies  during  the  war  of
1778-'83.  He  accompanied  de  Grasse  in  Chesa
peake  bay  in  1781,  and  fought  with  the  marines  in
the  assault  on  Yorktown  in  October,  1781.  Hav
ing  captured  the  English  frigate  "  Isis  "  in  Chesa
peake  bay,  12  April,  1783,  he  was  promoted  com
modore  and  appointed  to  the  command  of  a  divis
ion,  with  which  he  defeated  the  English  off  Mar
tinique.  He  died  from  yellow  fever  a  few  weeks
after  the  conclusion  of  peace  in  1783.

MORTIER,  Edonard  Louis  (mor-te-ay),
French  naturalist,  b.  in  Mulhouse  in  1801  ;  d.  in
Rio  Janeiro  in  1852.  He  was  sent  in  1835  on  a
''  "Scientific  mission  to  South  America,  and  explored
the  Guianas,  the  United  States  of  Colombia,  Vene
zuela,  Peru,  and  Brazil,  returning  to  France  in
1840.  In  1843  he  settled  in  Brazil,  and  became
professor  of  botany  and  natural  history  in  the  Col
lege  of  Rio  Janeiro,  which  post  he  held  till  his
death.  He  published  "  Des  origines  des  Indiens
habitant  I'Amerique  du  Sud  "  (Paris,  1841) ;  "  Traite
du  tabac  et  du  cacao"  (1841);  "  Historia  planta-
ruin  circa  Cayenne  sponte  crescentium "  (1843) ;
"  Prodomus  flora)  Brasilicae,  sistens  enumerationem
plantarum  cellularium  quie  in  insula  Santa  Cati-
lina  crescent "  (2  vols.,  Rio  Janeiro,  1849) ;  "  His
toria  generalis  plantarum  Americanarum  in  qua
familiie  per  tabu  las  disponuntur "  (2  vols.,  1850);
and  several  other  works.

MORTON,  Alexander,  inventor,  b.  in  Darvel,
Ayrshire,  Scotland,  8  March,  1820;  d.  in  New
York  city,  12  Oct.,  1869.  He  came  to  this  country
in  early  life,  and  entered  Yale  in  1844,  but  failing
health  prevented  his  graduation.  lie  began  the
manufacture  of  gold  pens  in  New  York  city  dur
ing  the  summer  of  1851,  and  between  that  year  and
18(50  invented  automatic  processes  for  pointing,
tempering,  and  grinding  them,  which  had  pre
viously  been  done  unequally,  and  often  imperfectly,
by  hand.  His  pens  attained  a  high  reputation,  and
he  amassed  wealth  and  gave  generously  in  aid  of
the  National  government  during  the  civil  war.

MORTON,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pendavy,
Cornwall,  England,  in  1626 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
11  April,  1698.  He  was  descended  from  Thomas
Morton,  secretary  to  Edward  III.,  was  educated  at
Oxford,  of  which  he  became  a  fellow,  took  holy
orders,  and  for  some  time  was  a  royalist,  but  on
his  conversion  to  Puritanism  was  ejected  from  his
living,  under  the  act  of  conformity  of  1662.  He
then  retired  to  the  parish  of  St.  Ives,  where  he
preached  to  a  small  non-conformist  congregation,
and  after  the  great  fire  of  London  established  a
boys'  academy  at  Alwington  Green,  where,  among
other  youths,  he  taught  Daniel  Defoe.  At  length
the  annoyances  that  he  suffered  under  the  processes
of  the  bishop's  court  induced  him  to  emigrate  to
New  England.  With  his  pupil,  the  future  histo
rian,  Samuel  Penhallow,  he  arrived  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  in  1686,  and  a  few  months  afterward  he  was
chosen  to  the  pastorate  of  the  church  there,  which
he  held  until  his  death.  It  was  at  first  suggested
that  he  be  appointed  president  of  Harvard,  but  a
person  so  obnoxious  to  the  government  was  judged
unsuitable  to  occupy  that  post,  and  the  office  of
vice-president  was  therefore  created  for  him.  He
also  read  lectures  on  philosophy  to  a  large  class  of
students,  but,  by  the  order  of  the  corporation,  they
were  discontinued.  Morton  had  great  learning
and  much  influence  with  his  students.  He  was
an  enemy  of  large  volumes,  and  therefore  com
paratively  little  record  is  preserved  of  his  busy
life.  One  of  his  manuscript  pamphlets,  entitled


"  Compendium  physicale  ex  auctoribusextractum,"
is  in  the  library  of  the  American  antiquarian  so
ciety,  and  another,  "  A  Complete  System  of  Natu
ral  Philosophy  in  General  and  Particular,"  is
in  that  of  Bowdoin  college.  His  published  works
include  "  A  Discourse  on  Improving  the  Country
of  Cornwall,"  a  part  of  which,  on  the  use  of  sea
sand  as  manure,  is  printed  in  the  "  Philosophical
Transactions  "  for  April,  1675  ;  "  The  Ark,  its  Loss
and  Recovery  "  ;  and  a  "  System  of  Logic,"  long  a
text-book  at  Harvard  (Charlestown,  1693).

MORTON,  or  MOURT,  Ueorge,  author,  b.  in
York,  England,  in  1585;  d.  about  1628. Hebe-
came  a  Puritan  in  1600,  and  was  one  of  the  earli
est  Pilgrims  that  settled  in  Leyden,  Holland,  where
he  married  in  1612,  and  until  1620  was  the  agent
of  those  of  his  sect  that  lived  in  London. At  the
latter  date  he  emigrated  to  New  England,  arriving
in  Plymouth  on  the  "  Ann,"  and  bringing  re-en-
forcernents  to  the  Pilgrims. After  a  residence  of
several  years  he  returned  to  England,  according
to  some  authorities,  but  others  assert  that  he  died
in  Plymouth. Morton  is  the  author  of  the  first
book  that  was  published  in Great Britain that
gave  an  account  of  the  planting  of  Plymouth  colo
ny. This  work,  known  as  "  Mourt's  Relation  of
the Beginning and Proceeding of the English
Plantation  settled  at  Plymouth  in  New  England,"
is  full  of  valuable  information  and  is  an  authority
even  at  the  present  day  (London,  1622;  abridged
and  reprinted  in  Massachusetts  historical  collec
tion  ;  2d  ed.,  with  notes  by  Rev.  George  B.  Chee-
ver,  entitled  "  Journal  of  the  Pilgrims," Boston,
1845 ; 3d  ed.,  with  notes  by  William  T.  Harris,
New York, 1852; 4th ed., with  notes  by  Rev.
Henry  M.  Dexter,  Boston,  1865). — His  son,  Na
thaniel,  author,  b.  in  Leyden,  Holland,  in  1613  :
d.  in  Plymouth,  Mass.,  16  June.  1685,  came  with
his  father  to  this  country,  and  after  the  death  of
his  parents  was  brought  up  in  the  family  of  Gov.
William  Bradford,  who  had  married  Nathaniel's
maternal  aunt. He  early  became  Bradford's  as
sistant  in  the  management  of  public  affairs,  and
by  annual  popular  vote  was  secretary  of  the  colo
ny  from  7  Dec.,  1647,  until  his  death. Almost  all
the  recoi'ds  of  the  Plymouth  colony  are in  his
handwriting. He  read  extensively,  and  took  great
pains  to  note  down  the  incidents  of  the  early  days
of  the  colony,  which  he  published  under  the  title
of  "  New  England's  Memorial,  or  a  Brief  Relation
of  the  most  Memorable  and  Remarkable  Passages
of  the  Providence  of  God  manifested  to  the  Plant
ers  of  New  England" (Cambridge,  Mass., 1669;
reprinted  in  England  the  same  year,  with  supple
ment  by  Josiah  Cotton,  Boston,  1721 ;  3d  ed.,  New
port,  R,  I.,  1772 ;  4th  ed.,  containing,  besides  the
original  work  and  the  supplement,  large  additions
with  marginal  notes,  and  a  lithographic  copy  of
an  ancient  map  by  John  Davis,  Boston,  1826 ;  6th
ed.,  by  the  Boston  Congregational  board  of  publica
tion,  1855). This  work,  .compiled  at  the  request  of
the  commissioners  of  the  four  united  colonies,  was
chiefly  attested  as  correct  by  the  most  eminent
survivors  of  the  earlier  generations. Until  the  re
covery  of  Bradford's  own  history  in 1855,  Mor
ton's  was  the  chief  early  authority  for  the  history
of  Plymouth  colony. He  also  wrote  a  "  Synopsis
of  the  Church  History  of  Plymouth  "  (1680),  which
is  preserved  in  Ebenezer  Hazard's  "  Historical  Col
lections  "  and  published  by  Alexander  Young  in
his  "Chronicles  of  the Pilgrim Fathers of the
Colony  of  Plymouth"  (Boston,  1841);  and  he  was
the  author  of  numerous  verses  in  commemoration
of  the  virtues  of  the  Pilgrims,  the  best  specimens  of
which  are  those  on  the  death  of  his  aunt,  Mrs.  Brad-


430


MORTON


MORTON


ford,  published  at  the  end  of  Gov.  Bradford's
"History"  (Boston,  1856).— His  grandson,  Perez.
lawyer,  b.  in  Plymouth,  Mass..  13  Nov.,  1751 ;  d.
in  Dorchester,  Mass..  14  Oct.,  1837,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1771.  He  was  a  member  of  the
committee  of  safety  in  1775,  and  active  in  the  ad
ministration  of  public  affairs  during  the  Revolu
tion.  In  April.  1776,  he  delivered,  in  behalf  of
the  Boston  civil  authorities,  the  funeral  oration
over  the  remains  of  Gen.  Joseph  Warren.  This
address,  although  eloquent,  was  an  elaborately  or
nate  production.  He  studied  law  after  the  peace,
became  eminent  in  his  profession,  and  was  speaker
of  the  Massachusetts  house  of  representatives  in
1806-'!  1,  and  attorney-general  in  1811-'32.  In
1820  he  was  a  delegate'  to  the  State  constitutional
convention.— His  wife.  Sarah  Wentworth  Ap-
thorp,  author,  b.  in  Braintree,  Mass..  29  Aug.,
1759 ;  d.  in  Quincy,  Mass..  14  May,  1846,  was  a
constant  contributor  of  short  poems  to  the  "Mas
sachusetts  Magazine,"  and  gained  a  reputation
under  the  pen-name  of  "  Phililenia,"  part  of  which
was  due  to  the  laudatory  comments  of  Robert
Treat  Paine,  Jr.,  by  whom  she  was  styled  the
"  American  Sappho."  She  also  published  "  Ouabi,
or  the  Virtue  of  Nature,"  an  Indian  tale  in  four  can
tos  (Boston,  1790);  "  My  Mind  and  My  Thoughts,"
reflections  in  prose  arranged  with  great  formality;
and  numerous  minor  poems  (1823).

MORTON.  Henry  Jackson,  clergyman.  1).  in
New  York  city,  25  Sept.,  1807.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Columbia  in  1827,  and  at  the  General  theo
logical  seminary.  New  York,  in  1830,  and  became
assistant  in  charge  of  St.  James's  Episcopal  church,
under  Bishop  William  White,  in  Philadelphia.  In
1837  he  was  made  rector  of  this  church  and  con
tinued  so  until  1887,  when,  after  a  service  of  fifty-
six  years,  he  resigned  and  continued  as  emeritus
rector.  For  many  years  he  was  president  of  the
standing  committee  of  the  diocese  of  Pennsylva
nia,  and  he  has  been  since  1844  a  trustee  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  from  which  he  re
ceived  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1844.  Dr.  Morton
published  "  Sunday-School  Teacher's  Call  "  (New
York,  1838)  and  "  The  Sunday-School  Teacher's
Aid"  (1838). — His  son,  Henry,  physicist,  b.  in
New  York  city,  11  Dec.,  1836,  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1857,  and  then
took  a  post-graduate  course  in  chemistry.  At
first  he  directed  his  attention  to  law,  but.  on  being
offered  the  post  of  instructor  in  chemistry  and
physics  at  the  Protestant  Episcopal  academy  of
Philadelphia,  he  abandoned  his  legal  studies  and
thenceforth  devoted  his  life  to  science.  In  1863
he  delivered  a  course  of  lectures  on  chemistry  at
the  Franklin  institute,  and  during  the  same  year
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Philadelphia  dental
college,  becoming  its  first  professor  of  chemistry.
A  year  later  he  was  made  resident  secretary  of  the
Franklin  institute,  and  in  connection  with  this
office  delivered  a  series  of  lectures  on  light,  which,
owing  to  their  being  brilliantly  illustrated  by
unique  experiments,  attracted  notice  in  Europe  as
well  as  in  the  United  States.  He  was  invited  to
fill  the  chair  of  physics  and  chemistry  in  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  during  the  absence  of
Prof.  John  F.  Frazer  in  1867-'8,  and  in  1869  the
professorship  was  divided  and  the  chair  of  chem
istry  assigned  to  him.  In  1870  he  was  called  to
the  presidency  of  Stevens  institute  of  technology,
then  about  to  be  organized  in  Hoboken,  N.  J.,
under  the  will  of  Edwin  A.  Stevens.  The  build
ing  of  this  institution  was  then  in  course  of  erec
tion,  and  President  Morton  was  intrusted  with
the  selection  of  a  faculty,  with  whom  he  arranged


the  course  of  instruction.  He  has  since  continued
to  hold  this  office,  and  in  1880  he  presented  to  the
trustees  a  workshop  that  he  had  caused  to  be  built,
and  equipped  with  steam-engines  and  tools  at  a
cost  of  $10,000.  Again,  in  1883,  he  gave  $2.500
for  the  purchase  of  electrical  apparatus.  In  1809
he  organized  and  conducted  the  photographic  di
vision  of  the  eclipse  expedition  that  was  sent  to
Iowa  under  the  auspices  of  the  "  U.  S.  Nautical  Al
manac  "  office.  He  secured  numerous  successful  ex
posures,  among  which  were  several  partial  phase
photographs  that  showed  a  bright  line  in  the  sun's
disk,  adjacent  to  the  edge  of  the  moon.  This  had
been  previously  noticed  in  photographs  of  other
eclipses,  and  had  been  explained  by  Sir  George  B.
Airy,  astronomer  royal  of  England,  as  a  result  of
diffraction.  President  Morton  showed  by  a  simple
experiment  that  it  was  due  to  chemical  action  dur
ing  the  operation  of  developing  the  plate.  He
was  a  member  of  the  private  expedition  that  was
organized  by  Henry  Draper  to  observe  the  total
solar  eclipse  of  29  'July,  1878,  at  Rawlins,  Wyo
ming.  In  1873  he  conducted  a  series  of  researches
on  the  "Fluorescent  and  Absorption  Spectra  of
the  Uranium  Salts,"  and  also  on  the  like  spectra  of
pyrene.  and  of  a  new  material  found  by  him  in
some  petroleum  residues  to  which  he  gave  the
name  of  thallene,  from  its  brilliant  green  fluores
cence.  He  succeeded  in  1878  to  the  vacancy  on
the  light-house  board  that  was  caused  by  the
death  of  Joseph  Henry,  which  appointment  he  held
until  1885,  conducting  meanwhile  investigations
on  fog-signals,  electric  lighting,  fire-extinguishers,
illuminating  buoys,  and  like  subjects,  which  ap
pear  in  the  annual  reports  of  the  board.  Presi
dent  Morton  has  been  frequently  called  into  court
since  1870  as  an  expert  in  questions  relating  to
chemistry  and  physics  in  connection  with  patent
and  other  suits.  In  this  capacity  he  has  acquired
an  extended  reputation.  The  degree  of  Ph.  I),
was  conferred  on  him  by  Dickinson  college  in
1869.  and  by  Princeton  in  1871.  He  is  a  member
of  scientific  societies,  and  in  1874  was  elected  to
membership  in  the  National  academy  of  sciences,
on  whose  commissions  he  has  occasionally  served.
During  1867-'70  he  was  editor  of  the  "Journal  of
the  Franklin  Institute."  and,  besides  several  im
portant  cyclopa'dia  articles  on  his  specialties,  he
has  published  the  results  of  his  researches  in  sci
entific  journals  in  the  United  States  and  Europe.
He  was  associated  in  the  preparation  of  "  The  Stu
dent's  Practical  Chemistry  "  (Philadelphia,  1868),
and  also  during  his  college  course  in  1859  in  the
publication  of  a  translation  of  the  trilingual  hiero
glyphic  inscription  of  the  Rosetta  stone,  for  which
he  made  the  lithographic  drawings.

MORTON,  Jackson,  senator,  b.  in  Spottsylvania
county,  Va.,  10  Aug.,  1794;  d.  in  Santa  Rosa
county,  Fla.,  20  Nov.,  1874.  He  was  educated  in
his  native  state,  and,  removing  to  Florida,  engaged
in  lumbering  in  Pensacola,  and  was  an  extensive
manufacturer,  but  subsequently  removed  to  Mor-
tonia,  and  became  a  planter.  He  was  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate  as  a  Whig  in  1848.  served  in  1849-'55,
and  during  the  civil  war  was  a  member  of  the
Confederate  congress.  Through  his  influence
Buckingham  Smith  became  secretary  of  legation
at  Madrid  in  1851,  which  appointment  resulted  in
the  acquisition  and  publication  of  a  valuable  series
of  manuscripts  on  the  Spanish  history  of  Florida
and  Louisiana  (by  the  Bradford  club,  1866).

MORTON,  John,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  b.  in  that  part  of  Chester  county
that  is  now  Delaware  county,  Pa.,  in  1724;  d.  there
in  April,  1777.  His  ancestors,  who  were  among


MORTON


MORTON


431


the  first  Swedish  emigrants  to  this  country,  settled
in  what  are  now  the  suburbs  of  Philadelphia.  His
father  died  in  the  son's  youth,  and  his  stepfather,
John  Sketchier,  an  Englishman,  superintended
his  education.  He  became  a
&  n  //  j.  justice  of  the  peace  in  1704.
<$  Vfvn.  i^tl  G~>Jffn  was  soon  afterward  elected
to  the  general  assembly  of
Pennsylvania,  served  for  many  years,  and  was
frequently  speaker  of  the  house.  He  was  a  dele
gate  to  "the  Stamp-act  congress  in  1765,  was
sheriff  of  Chester  county  in  1766-'9,  and  sub
sequently  president  judge  of  the  court  of  com
mon  pleas,  and  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of
the  province.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  1st  congress
in  1774-'6,  gave  the  casting  vote  of  Pennsylvania
in  the  affirmative  upon  the  question  of  adopting
the  Declaration  of  Independence,  and  was  chair
man  of  the  committee  of  the  whole  on  the  adop
tion  of  the  system  of  confederation.  At  the  close
of  his  life  he  was  abandoned  by  many  of  his
friends  whose  political  sentiments  differed  from
his  own.  On  his  death-bed  he  said:  "Tell  them
they  will  live  to  see  the  hour  when  they  shall  ac
knowledge  my  signing  of  the  Declaration  of  Inde
pendence  to  have  been  the  most  glorious  service
that  I  ever  rendered  my  country."  There  is  no  au
thentic  portrait  of  Morton.  In  1876  a  memorial
tablet  was  placed  by  his  grandson  in  Independence
hall.  Philadelphia.  '

MORTON,  Levi  Parsons,  banker,  b.  in  Shore-
ham.  Vt.,  10  May,  1824.  He  became  a  clerk  in  a
country  store,  soon  developed  aptitude  for  busi
ness,  and  rose  rapidly.  In  1850  he  wTas  made  a

member  of  the  firm
of  Beebe,  Morgan
and  Co.,  merchants
of  Boston,  and  in
1854  he  removed  to
New  York,  where
he  established  the
firm  of  Morton  and
Grinnell.  In  1863  he
founded  the  bank
ing-house  of  Mor
ton,  Bliss  and  Co.,
in  New  York,  and
that  of  Morton,  Rose
and  Co.,  in  London.
The  latter  were  the
fiscal  agents  of  the


The  firms  of  which

Mr.  Morton  is  the  head  were  active  in  the  syndicates
that  negotiated  U.  S.  bonds  and  in  the  payment  of
the  Geneva  award  of  §15.500,000  and  the  Halifax
fishery  award  of  $5,500,000.  Mr.  Morton  was  ap
pointed  honorary  commissioner  to  the  Paris  expo
sition  in  1878.  In  the  same  year  he  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Republican,  and  he  was  re-elected
in  1880.  In  the  latter  year  he  declined  the  nomi
nation  for  vice-president  on  the  Republican  ticket.
President  Garfield  offered  to  nominate  Mr.  Morton
for  secretary  of  the  navy  or  minister  to  France.
He  chose  the  latter  post,  and  filled  it  from  1881
to  1885.  Through  his  intercession  the  restric
tions  upon  the  importation  of  American  pork  were
removed,  and  American  corporations  obtained  a
legal  status  in  France.  He  was  American  com
missioner-general  to  the  Paris  electrical  exposition,
the  representative  of  the  United  States  at  the  sub
marine  cable  convention,  and  publicly  received,  in
the  name  of  the  people  of  the  United  States,  the
Bartholdi  statue  of  Liberty  enlightening  the  world.


Mr.  Morton,  in  1887,  purchased  "  Ellerslie,"  the  es
tate  of  William  Kelly,  at  Rhinebeck  on  the  Hudson.
The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by
Dartmouth  in  1881.  In  1887  he  was  a  candidate  for
U.  S.  senator,  and  on  6  Nov.,  1888,  he  was  chosen
vice-president  of  the  United  States.

MORTON,  Marcus,  jurist,  b.  in  Freetown,
Mass.,  19  Feb.,  1784;  d.  in  Taunton,  Mass.,  6  Feb.,
1864.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1804,  and  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  Taunton.  Mass.  He  was  clerk  of
the  state  senate  in  1811-'12,  elected  to  congress  as  a
Democrat  in  1816,  serving  in  1817-'21,  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  executive  council  in  1823,  and  became
lieutenant-governor  the  next  year.  He  was  on  the
state  supreme  bench  in  1825-?39,  was  elected  gov
ernor  of  Massachusetts  by  one  vote  over  Edward
Everett  in  1840,  and  from  1845  until  his  resigna
tion  in  1848  was  collector  of  the  port  in  Boston.
He  left  the  Democratic  party  about  1848  to  become
a  Free-soiler,  and  was  a  member  of  the  State  con-
j  stitutional  convention  in  1853.  and  of  the  legisla-
!  ture  in  1858.  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  I),  in  1840.  He  advocated  the  restriction  of
slavery,  and  throughout  the  civil  war  was  an  ar
dent  supporter  of  the  National  cause. — His  son,
Marcus,  jurist,  b.  in  Taunton,  8  April,  1819,  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1838.  studied  two  years  at
Harvard  law-school,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1841.  He  practised  in  Boston,  but  since  1850
has  resided  in  Andover.  He  was  a  member  of  the
State  constitutional  convention  in  1853,  and  in
1858  was  in  the  legislature,  and  was  appointed  a
justice  of  the  superior  court  of  Suffolk  county.
He  was  elevated  to  the  superior  bench  in  1859,
and  became  an  associate  justice  of  the  supreme
court  of  Massachusetts  in  1869,  and  chief  justice
in  1872.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Princeton  in  1870.  and  from  Harvard  in  1882.

MORTON,  Oliver  Perry,  statesman,  b.  in
Saulsbury,  Wayne  co.,  Ind.,  4  Aug.,  1823 ;  d.  in
Indianapolis,  Ind.,  1  Nov.,  1877.  His  father,  a  na
tive  of  New  Jersey,  whose  ancestors  came  from
England  with  Roger  Williams,  dropped  the  first
syllable  in  the  family  name  of  Throckmorton.  At
the  age  of  fifteen  the  son  was  taken  from  school
and  indentured  to  a  brother,  who  was  a  hatter.
After  working  at  this  trade  four  years  he  deter
mined  to  fit  himself  for  the  bar,  spent  two  years
at  Miami  university,  studied  law  at  Centreville,
and  began  practice  there  in  1847.  He  soon  at
tained  professional  eminence,  and  was  elected  a
circuit  judge  in  1852,  but  at  the  end  of  a  year,
when  his  term  expired  by  the  adoption  of  a  new
state  constitution,  he  willingly  left  the  bench,  and
before  resuming  practice  spent  a  year  at  a  law-
school  in  Cincinnati.  Having  been  a  Democrat
with  anti-slavery  convictions,  he  entered  into  the
people's  movement  in  1854,  took  an  active  part  in
the  formation  of  the  Republican  party,  and  was  a
delegate  to  the  Pittsburg  convention  the  same  year,
and  the  candidate  of  the  new  party  for  governor.
In  a  joint  canvass  with  Ashbel  P.  Willard,  the
Democratic  nominee,  he  established  a  reputation
j  for  political  ability,  but  was  beaten  at  the  polls,
i  and  returned  to  his  law  practice.  In  1860  he  was
i  nominated  for  lieutenant-governor  on  the  ticket
i  with  Henry  S.  Lane,  and  during  the  canvass
took  strong  ground  in  favor  of  exacting  from
'  the  southern  states  obedience  to  the  constitution.
I  Upon  convening,  the  legislature  elected  Gov.  Lane
!  U.  S.  senator,  and  on  16  Jan.,  1861,  Mr.  Morton
took  the  oath  as  governor.  He  opposed  every  com
promise  with  the  Secessionist  party,  nominated  to
the  Peace  congress  men  of  equally  pronounced
views,  began  to  prepare  for  the  coming  conflict


432


MORTON


MORTON


before  Fort  Sumter  was  fired  upon,  and  when
President  Lincoln  called  for  75.000  volunteers  he
offered  to  send  10,000  from  Indiana.  The  state's
quota  was  raised  at  once.  He  reconvened  the

legislature  on  24
April,  obtained  au
thority  to  borrow
$2,000,000,  and  dis
played  great  energy
and  ability  in  plac
ing  troops  in  the
field  and  provid
ing  for  their  care
and  sustenance.  He
gave  permission  to
citizens  of  Indiana
to  raise  troops  in
Kentucky,  allowed
Kentucky  regiments
to  be  recruited  from
the  population  of
two  of  the  south
ern  counties,  pro
cured  arms  for  the  volunteer  bodies  eidisted  for
the  defence  of  Kentucky,  and  by  thus  co-operating
with  the  Unionists  in  that  state  did  much  toward
establishing  the  ascendency  of  the  National  gov
ernment  within  its  borders.  When  the  question
of  the  abolition  of  slavery  arose,  the  popular  ma
jority  no  longer  upheld  the  governor  in  his  support
of  the  National  administration.  In  1862  a  Demo
cratic  legislature  was  chosen,  which  refused  to  re
ceive  the  governor's  message,  and  was  on  the  point
of  taking  from  him  the  command  of  the  militia,
when  the  Republican  members  withdrew,  leaving
both  houses  without  a  quorum.  In  order  to  carry
on  the  state  government  and  pay  the  state  bonds,
he  obtained  advances  from  banks  and  county
boards,  and  appointed  a  bureau  of  finance,  which,
from  April,  1863,  till  January,  1865,  made  all  dis
bursements  of  the  state,  amounting  to  more  than
$1,000,000.  During  this  period  he  refused  to  sum
mon  the  legislature.  The  supreme  court  con
demned  this  arbitrary  course,  but  the  people  sub
sequently  applauded  his  action,  and  the  state  as
sumed  the  obligations  that  he  incurred.  The  draft
laws  provoked  the  Secessionists  in  Indiana  to  form
secret  organizations  and  commit  outrages  on  Union
men.  They  plotted  against  the  life  of  Gov.  Morton
and  arranged  a  general  insurrection,  to  take  place
in  August,  1864.  The  governor  discovered  their
plans  and  arrested  the  leaders  of  the  Knights  of
the  golden  circle,  or  Sons  of  liberty,  as  the  associa
tion  was  called.  In  1864  he  was  nominated  for
governor,  and  defeated  Joseph  E.  McDonald  by
20.883  votes,  after  an  animated  joint  canvass.  He
resigned  in  January,  1867,  to  take  his  seat  in  the
U.  S.  senate,  to  which  he  was  re-elected  in  1873.
In  the  senate  he  was  chairman  of  the  committee
on  privileges  and  elections  and  the  leader  of  the
Republicans,  and  for  several  years  he  exercised  a
determining  influence  over  the  political  course  of
the  party.  On  the  question  of  reconstruction  he
supported  the  severest  measures  toward  the  south
ern  states  and  their  citizens.  He  labored  zealously
to  secure  the  passage  of  the  15th  amendment  to  the
constitution,  was  active  in  the  impeachment  pro
ceedings  against  President  Johnson,  and  was  the
trusted  adviser  of  the  Republicans  of  the  south.
After  supporting  the  Santo  Domingo  treaty  he  was
offered  the  English  mission  by  President  Grant,
but  declined,  lest  his  state  should  send  a  Demo
crat  to  succeed  him  in  the  senate.  At  the  Repub
lican  National  convention  in  1876  Mr.  Morton,  in
the  earlier  ballots,  received  next  to  the  highest


number  of  votes  for  the  presidential  nomination.
He  was  a  member  of  the  electoral  commission  of
1877.  After  having  a  paralytic  stroke  in  1865  he
was  never  again  able  to  stand  without  support,  yet
there  was  no  abatement  in  his  power  as  a  debater
or  in  the  effectiveness  of  his  forcible  popular  ora
tory.  Immediately  after  his  return  from  Europe,
whither  he  had  gone  to  consult  specialists  in
nervous  diseases,  he  delivered,  in  1866,  a  political
speech,  of  which  more  than  1,000,000  copies  were
circulated  in  pamphlet-form.  After  visiting  Ore
gon  in  the  spring  of  1877  as  chairman  of  a  sena
torial  committee  to  investigate  the  election  of
Lafayette  Grover,  he  had  another  attack  of  paraly
sis,  and  died  soon  after  reaching  his  home.  See
"Life  and  Public  Services  of  Oliver  Perry  Mor
ton  "  (Indianapolis,  1876).

MORTON,  Robert,  diarist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  30  Oct.,  1760;  d.  there,  17  Aug.,  1786.  He  was
the  son  of  Samuel  Morton,  a  merchant  of  Phila
delphia.  During  the  time  the  British  army  occu
pied  that  city  young  Morton,  although  then  only
sixteen  years  old,  kept  a  diary  (published  in  "  Penn.
Mag.  of  History,"  vol.  i.,  1877),  which  possesses
much  interest,  and  shows  him  to  have  been  a  youth
possessed  of  a  well-cultivated  mind,  a  facility  of
expression,  and  large  observation.

MORTON,  Suiiiucl  (ieorge,  physician,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa..  26  Jan.,  17!»9;  d.  there,  15  May,
1851.  He  was  educated  in  the  strictest  school  of
orthodox  Friends,  and  originally  destined  for  com
mercial  pursuits,  but  studied  medicine  under  Dr.
Joseph  Parrisli,  of  Philadelphia,  and  was  graduated
at  the  medical  department  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1820,  and  at  that  of  the  University
of  Edinburgh  in  1823.  On  his  return  to  Philadel
phia  the  next  year  he  began  the  practice  of  his
profession,  became  an  active  member  of  the  Acade
my  of  natural  sciences,  was  recording  secretary  of
that  body  in  1825,  and  president  in  1850.  During
the  early  part  of  his  professional  career  geology
was  his  favorite  pursuit,  and  the  results  of  his
studies  were  embodied  in  an  "  Analysis  of  Tabular
Spar  from  Bucks  County,  Pa."  (Philadelphia,
1827),  and  a  "  Synopsis  of  the  Organic  Remains  of
the  Cretaceous  Group  of  the  United  States  "  (1834).
He  was  professor  of  anatomy  in  Pennsylvania  col
lege  in  1839-'43,  and  for  several  years  a  clinical
teacher  at  the  city  Alms-house  hospital.  He  began
a  collection  of  skulls  in  1830,  and  thus  relates  its
origin:  "Having  had  occasion  in  the  summer  of
1830  to  deliver  an  introductory  lecture  to  a  course
of  anatomy,  I  chose  for  my  subject  '  The  Different
Forms  of  the  Skull  as  exhibited  in  the  Five  Races
of  Man.'  I  could  neither  buy  nor  borrow  a  cranium
for  each  of  these  races,  and  I  finished  my  discourse
without  showing  either  the  Mongolian  or  the
Malay.  Impressed  with  this  deficiency  in  a  most
important  branch  of  science,  I  at  once  resolved  to
make  a  collection  for  myself."  His  efforts  resulted
in  the  largest  museum  of  comparative  craniology
in  existence,  containing  about  1.500  specimens,  900
of  which  were  human,  and  which  were  obtained
from  widely  separated  regions.  It  now  belongs  to
the  Philadelphia  academy  of  natural  sciences.  Dr.
Morton  finally  adopted  the  theory  of  a  diverse
origin  of  the  human  race,  on  which  subject  he
maintained  a  once  celebrated  controversy  with
Rev.  John  Bachman,  of  Charleston,  S.  C.  The
result  of  his  investigations,  as  bearing  on  the
American  aborigines,  is  embodied  in  "  Crania
Americana,  or  a  Comparative  View  of  the  Skulls  of
Various  Aboriginal  Nations  of  North  and  South
America,"  to  which  is  prefixed  an  essay  on  the
"Varieties  of  the  Human  Species"  (Philadelphia,


MORTOX


MORTOX


433


1839).  His  "  Crania  Egyptica,  or  Observations  on
Egyptian  Ethnography,  derived  from  the  History
of  the  Monuments,"  with  numerous  plates  and
illustrations  (4  vols.,  1844),  was  principally  based
on  a  collection  of  ninety-eight  heads  that  were
obtained  by  George  R.  Gliddon  from  the  tombs
and  catacombs  of  Egypt.  He  also  published  "  Ob
servations  on  the  Ethnology  and  Archeology  of  the
American  Aborigines"  in  "Silliman's  Journal"
(1846);  an  essay  on  "Hybridity  in  Plants  and
Animals  considered  in  reference  to  the  Question  of
the  Unity  of  the  Human  Species,"  in  the  same
(1847);  and  an  "Illustrated  System  of  Human
Anatomy,  Special,  General,  and  Microscopic"
(Philadelphia,  1849).— His  son,  James  St.  Clair,
soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  24  Sept.,  1829 ;  d.
in  Petersburg.  Va.,  17  June,  1864,  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1851,  entered  the
engineer  corps,  and  was  assistant  professor  of  engi
neering  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1855-'?.
He  explored  the  Chiriquin  country.  Central  Ameri
ca,  for  a  railroad  route  across  the  isthmus  in  1860
by  authority  of  congress,  and  on  his  return  took
charge  of  the  work  on  the  Washington  aqueduct.
He  superintended  the  fortifying  of  Toitugas,  in
March.  1861,  was  promoted  captain  in  that  year,
and  in  May,  1862.  reported  to  Gen.  Don  Carlos
Buell  as  chief  engineer  of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio.
In  October  he  became  chief  engineer  of  the  Army
of  the  Cumberland,  and  commanded  the  bridge
brigade  of  that  army,  becoming  brigadier-general
of  volunteers,  29  Nov.,  1862.  He  constructed  the
intrenchments  about  Murfreesborough,  Tenn.,  par
ticipated  in  the  capture  of  Chattanooga,  was
wounded  at  Chickamauga,  and  superintended  the
engineering  operations  under  Gen.  William  S.
Rosecrans.  He  was  promoted  major  of  engineers
in  July,  1863.  was  chief  engineer  of  the  9th  army
corps  in  the  Richmond  campaign  of  1864,  and  was
engaged  in  the  battles  of  North  Anna,  Tolopotomy,
Bethesda  Church,  and  the  assault  on  Petersburg.
Va..  where  he  was  killed  while  leading  the  attack.
He  had  received  the  brevet  of  lieutenant-colonel
for  gallantry  at  Stone  River,  and  colonel  for  Chicka
mauga.  and  after  his  death  was  given  that  of
brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,  for  Petersburg.  He
published  "An  Essay  on  Instruction  in  Engineer
ing"  (New  York,  1856);  "An  Essay  on  a  New
System  of  Fortifications  "  (1857) ;  "  Memoir  on
Fortification  "  (1858) :  "  Dangers  and  Defences  of
New  York  City  "  (1859) ;  and  "  Life  of  Maj.  John
Saunders,  of  the  Engineers  "  (1860). — Another  son,
Thomas  George,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  8
Aug.,  1835,  was  educated  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  and  graduated  in  the  medical  depart
ment  there  in  1856.  He  practised  general  surgery
in  Philadelphia  for  the  next  three  years,  actively
engaged  during  the  civil  war  in  the  establishment
of  military  hospitals,  and  was  a  surgeon  at  Satter-
lee  hospital,  and  consulting  surgeon  to  the  U.  S.
army  hospital.  Chesnut  Hill.  Pa.  He  has  also  held
offices  in  numerous  other  hospitals,  including  the
Orthopedic,  of  which  he  was  the  originator.  In
1876  he  was  appointed  a  commissioner  to  erect  the
State  insane  asylum  for  the  southern  district  of
Pennsylvania,  and  was  chairman  of  the  committee
on  plans  and  buildings.  He  was  chosen  president
of  the  Pennsylvania  society  for  the  restriction  of
vivisection  in  1880,  and  vice-president  of  the  Penn
sylvania  society  for  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to
children  the  same  year,  was  appointed  a  commis
sioner  of  state  public  charities  in  1883.  and  chair
man  of  the  committee  of  lunacy  in  1886.  He  is  a
member  of  numerous  foreign  and  domestic  profes
sional  bodies,  and  has  successfully  performed  nu-
VOL.  iv. — 28


merous  difficult  surgical  operations.  He  introduced
the  ward-carriage  into  the  Pennsylvania  hospital
in  1866,  the  bed-elevator  and  carriage  in  1874,  and
in  1876  received  the  Centennial  medal  that  was
awarded  for  his  hospital  ward  dressing-carriage.
He  has  published  numerous  professional  papers  in
the  "American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences"
and  the  "  Pennsylvania  Hospital  Reports  " ;  "  Lec
ture  on  the  Transfusion  of  Blood  and  its  Practical
Application"  (New  York,  1877);  with  Dr.  William
Hunt.  "Surgery of  Pennsylvania  Hospital"  (Phila
delphia,  1880):  and  "Transfusion  of  Blood  and  its
Practical  Application"  (New  York,  1887).

MORTON,  Thomas,  adventurer,  b.  in  England
about  1575 ;  d.  in  Agamenticus,  Me.,  in  1646.  He
was  a  lawyer  of  Clifford's  inn,  London,  and  in  1622
came  to  New  England  with  a  party  of  emigrants,
many  of  whom  returned  the  following  year.  The
remainder  scattered  about  Plymouth  settlement,
and,  according  to  Morton,  "  were  very  popular  while
their  liquor  lasted,  but  were  afterward  turned
adrift."  He  went  home,  but  returned  in  1625  with
Capt.  Wollaston,  an  English  adventurer,  who  set
tled  part  of  his  followers  in  Virginia,  and  a  few
others  under  Morton  at  Mount  Wollaston  (now
Braintree),  Mass.,  where  the  latter  founded  the
town,  and  henceforth  styled  himself  "  mine  host  of
Mare-Mount."  There  he  relates  that  on  May-day,
1626,  he  "  brewed  a  barrel  of  excellent  ale,  provided
a  case  of  good  bottles  to  be  spent  with  other  good
cheer,  and  prepared  a  song  fitting  to  the  time  and
occasion.  We  also  brought  the  May-pole  to  the
place  appointed,  with  drums,  guns,  pistols,  and
there  erected  it  with  the  help  of  Salvages  that  came
hither  for  purpose  to  see  the  manner  of  our  revels."
This  proceeding  caused  great  scandal  to  the  Plym
outh  colonists,  and,  according  to  Nathaniel  Mor
ton  (q.  v.),  the  first  chronicler  of  Plymouth,  "  they
fell  into  great  licentiousness  of  life,  in  all  profane"-
ness,  and  the  said  Morton  became  a  lord  of  mis
rule,  and  maintained  a  school  of  atheism,  spending
£10  worth  of  liquors  in  a  morning,  setting  up  a
May-pole,  and  drinking,  frisking,  and  dancing
about  it  like  so  many  fairies  or  furies."  Morton
also  instructed  the  Indians  in  the  use  of  fire-arms,
for  which  violation  of  the  law  he  was  arrested  by
Capt.  Miles  Standish,  by  order  of  the  governor.
But,  although  guarded  by  six  men,  he  escaped  in
the  dead  of  night,  while  his  watchers  were  asleep.
Of  this  episode  Thomas  Morton  says  :  "  When  the
word  was  given  that  the  bird  had  flown,  the  grand
leader  took  on  furiously  and  tore  his  clothes  for
anger.  The  rest  were  eager  to  have  torn  their  hair
from  their  heads,  but  it  was  so  short  it  would  give
them  no  hold."  He  was  subsequently  recaptured
and  sent  to  England,  the  May-pole  was  cut  down,
and  the  name  of  the  place  changed  to  Dagon.  He
returned  the  next  year,  and  was  forced  to  submit
to  the  search  of  his  house,  under  the  suspicion  that
it  was  filled  with  stolen  corn.  In  1630  he  was
again  arrested  for  "  mischievous  behavior,"  his
dwelling  was  torn  down,  and  he  was  seized  and
transported,  and,  arriving  in  London,  was  so
"  metamorphosed  by  his  long  voyage  that  he  looked
like  Lazarus  in  the  painted  cloth."  He  visited
Massachusetts  for  the  fourth  time  in  1643,  but,
having  published  his  "  scandalous  book,"  as  the
colonists  called  it,  was  imprisoned  one  year  in  Bos
ton,  after  which  he  removed  to  Maine,  where  he
died  in  poverty.  This  work,  "  The  New  England
Canaan"  (Amsterdam,  1637),  is  a  description  of
the  country  and  the  Indians,  and  full  of  ridicule
of  the  Puritan  creed  and  customs.  Morton's  his
tory  is  embodied  in  Nathaniel  Hawthorne's  short
story  of  "  The  Maypole  of  Merry  Mount."


434


MORTON


MOSBY


MORTON,  William  Thomas  Green,  dentist,
b.  in  Charlton,  Mass.,  19  Aug.,  1819;  d.  in  New
York  city,  15  July,  18G8.  He  early  left  home  to
enter  business  in  Boston,  but,  being  unsuccessful,
went  to  Baltimore  in  1840,  and  there  studied  den
tistry.  In  1841  he  returned  to  Boston,  where  he
introduced  a  new  kind  of  solder  by  which  false
teeth  could  be  fastened  to  gold  plates.  In  his
efforts  to  remove  the  roots  of  old  teeth  without
pain  he  tried  stimulants,  opium,  and  magnetism,
but  without  success.  Meanwhile  he  attended
medical  lectures,  and  studied  chemistry  under  Dr.
Charles  T.  Jackson  (</.  r.),  in  whose  laboratory  he
became  acquainted  with  the  ana>sthetic  properties
of  sulphuric  ether.  After  experimenting  on  him
self  with  this  agent,  and  becoming  satisfied  of  its
safety,  he  administered  it  to  a  patient  on  30  Sept.,
1846,  producing  unconsciousness,  during  which  a
firmly  rooted  bicuspid  tooth  was  painlessly  ex
tracted.  Other  successful  experiments  followed,
and  he  communicated  the  results  to  Dr.  John  C.
Warren.  This  new  anaesthetic  was  first  publicly
administered  on  16  Oct.,  1846,  to  a  patient  in  the
Massachusetts  general  hospital,  from  whose  jaw  a
vascular  tumor  was  removed  by  Dr.  Warren.  From
this  operation  dates  the  introduction  into  general
surgery  of  ethereal  anaesthesia.  In  November.  1846,
Dr.  Morton  obtained  a  patent  for  its  use,  giving  to
it  the  name  of  "letheon,"  and  a  month  later  he
secured  a  patent  in  England.  He  offered  free
rights  to  all  charitable  institutions  throughout  the
country,  but  the  government  appropriated  the
discovery  to  its  own  use  without  compensation.
Various  claimants  opposed  his  right  of  discovery,
notably  Dr.  Jackson  and  Horace  Wells,  and  the
matter  was  investigated  by  the  French  academy  of
sciences,  who  decreed  one  of  tho  Montyon  prizes  of
2,500  francs  to  Dr.  Jackson,  and  a  similar  award
of  2,500  francs  to  Mr.  Morton,  for  the  application
of  the  discovery  to  surgical  operations.  His  claims
were  so  earnestly  opposed  in  Boston  that  his  busi
ness  was  entirely  ruined.  He  applied  to  congress
for  relief  in  1846,  and  again  in  1849,  strengthened
by  the  action  of  the  trustees  of  the  Massachusetts
general  hospital,  who  conceded  to  him  in  1848  the
discovery  of  the  power  and  safety  of  ether  in  pro
ducing  anaesthesia.
In  1852  a  bill  appro
priating  $100,000
as  a  national  testi
monial  for  his  dis
covery  was  intro
duced  in  congress,
with  the  condition
that  he  should  sur
render  his  patent  to
the  U.  S.  govern
ment,  but  it  failed,
and  he  was  equally
unsuccessful  in  1853
and  in  1854.  Tes
timonials  crediting
him  with  the  ap
plication  of  ether  as
an  anaesthetic  were
signed  by  the  med
ical  profession  in
Boston  in  1856,  in
Nc\v  York  in  1S5S.
and  in  Philadelphia
in  1860.  The  last

years  of  his  life  were  spent  in  agricultural  pur
suits  in  Wellesley,  Mass.,  where  he  also  raised  and
imported  fine  cattle.  Mr.  Morton  received,  in
addition  to  the  Montyon  medal,  decorations  froin


Russia  and  Sweden,  which  are  now  deposited  in
the  rooms  of  the  Massachusetts  historical  society.
See  "  Trials  of  a  Public  Benefactor,"  by  Dr.  Nathan
P.  Weyman  (New  York,  1859).  The  illustration
shows  the  monument  that  was  presented  by  Thomas
Lee  to  the  city  of  Boston  in  1868.  It  is  placed  in
the  Public  garden  and  bears  the  following  inscrip
tion  :  "  To  commemorate  the  discovery  that  the
inhaling  of  ether  causes  insensibility  to  pain.  First
proved  to  the  world  at  the  Massachusetts  general
hospital  in  Boston,  October,  A.D.  MDCCCXLVI."
On  each  of  the  sides  is  a  marble  medallion  repre
senting  the  physician  and  the  surgeon  operating
upon  the  sick  and  injured,  who  have  been  placed
under  the  influence  of  ether.

MORWIT/,  Edward,  publisher,  b.  in  Dantzic,
Prussia,  12  June,  1815.  lie  studied  at  the  uni
versities  of  Halle,  Leipsic,  and  Berlin,  received  in
1841,  from  the  latter,  the  degree  of  M.  D.,  and  was
made  first  assistant  of  the  llufelande  clinic  there.
In  1H50  he  came  to  this  country,  settling  in  Phila
delphia,  where  in  1853  he  purchased  the  "German
Democrat,"  which  is  still  edited  and  published  by
him.  lie  also  became  the  owner  of  the  "Pennsyl-
vanian  "  and  the  "  Age,"  which  he  conducted  i'or
some  time,  and  he  is  now  the  owner  of  various
printing-houses  in  several  of  the  states,  from  which
houses  are  issued  more  than  200  newspapers.  Dr.
Morwitz  has  invented  an  improved  needle-gun.
He  has  published  numerous  books,  including  a
"  History  of  Medicine  "  (Leipsic,  1845)  and  "  Ger
man-American  Dictionary"  (Philadelphia,  1882).

MOSBY,  John  Singleton,  soldier,  b.  in  Pow-
hatan  county,  Va.,  6  Dec.,  1833.  He  entered  the
University  of  Virginia,  and  before  completing  his
course  shot  and  seriously  wounded  a  student  who
assaulted  him.  He  was  fined  and  sentenced  to  im
prisonment,  but  was  pardoned  by  the  governor,
and  his  fine  was  remitted  by  the  legislature.  He
studied  law  during  his  confinement,  and  soon  after
his  release  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised
in  Bristol.  Washington  co..  Va.  At  the  beginning
of  hostilities  in  the  spring  of  1861  he  enlisted  in  a
company  of  cavalry,  and  served  in  the  campaign  of
Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston  in  the  Shenandoah  valley
and  the  Manassas  operations,  and  on  picket  duty
on  the  Potomac  during  the  winter.  At  the  expira
tion  of  twelve  months  he  and  a  friend  were  the
only  soldiers  in  his  company  that  were  willing  to
re-enlist  withcmt  first  receiving  a  furlough.  On  14
Feb.,  1862,  he  was  made  adjutant  of  his  regiment,
but  two  months  later,  when  the  colonel,  William
E.  Jones,  was  displaced,  he  returned  to  the  ranks.
Gen.  James  E.  B.  Stuart,  the  brigade  commander,
observed  Mosby's  abilities,  and  invited  him  to  serve
as  a  scout  at  his  headquarters.  He  guided  Stuart's
force  in  a  bold  raid  in  the  rear  of  Gen.  George  B.
McClellan's  position  on  the  Chickahominy,  14  June,
1862.  In  January,  1863,  he  crossed  the  Rappahan-
nock  into  northern  Virginia,  which  had  been  aban
doned  the  year  before  to  the  occupation  of  the  Na
tional  army,  and  recruited  a  force  of  irregular  cav
alry,  with  which,  aided  by  the  friendly  population
of  Loudoun  and  Fauquier  counties,  he  harassed
the  National  lines,  and  did  much  damage  by  cut
ting  communications  and  destroying  supply-trains
in  the  rear  of  the  armies  that  invaded  Virginia.
His  partisan  rangers,  when  not  on  a  raid,  scattered
for  safety,  and  remained  in  concealment,  with  or
ders  to  assemble  again  at  a  given  time  and  place.
Several  expeditions  were  sent  to  capture  Mosby
and  his  men ;  but  he  always  had  intelligence  of  the
approach  of  the  enemy,  and  evaded  every  encoun
ter,  though  the  district  was  repeatedly  ravaged  as
a  punishment  to  the  people  for  harboring  and  abet-


MOSBY


MOSENTIIAL


435


ting  the  guerillas.  Many  cavalry  outposts  were
captured  by  them,  and  the  National  forces  were
compelled  to  strengthen  their  pickets,  sometimes
to  contract  their  lines,  and  to  use  constant  vigi
lance  against  stratagems,  surprises,  and  nocturnal
attacks.  His  force  was  made  up  of  deserters  from
the  Confederate  ranks,  of  volunteers  from  civil  life,
and  of  furloughed  cavalrymen  who  had  lost  their
horses  and  joined  him  temporarily  in  order  to  ob
tain  remounts  captured  from  the  enemy.  One  of
his  boldest  lieutenants  was  a  deserter  from  the  Na
tional  army.  At  Chantilly.  on  10  March,  1863,  he
made  a  counter-charge,  and  routed  a  cavalry  force
much  larger  than  his  own.  At  Dranesville,  on  1
April,  18(53,  he  defeated  a  detachment  sent  specially
to  capture  him.  While  the  armies  were  engaged
at  Chancellorsville  he  surprised  a  body  of  cavalry
at  Warrenton  Junction,  but  was  routed  by  a  detach
ment  that  came  to  the  rescue.  He  raised  a  new
force,  obtained  a  howitzer,  passed  to  the  rear  of
Gen.  Hooker's  army,  wrecked  a  railroad-train,  in
flicted  severe  damage  on  the  troops  that  surround
ed  him.  and  finally  cut  his  way  through  the  lines.
In  May,  1804,  Mosby  captured  a  railroad  transport
near  Aquia  creek,  and  compelled  Gen.  Grant,  while
his  army  was  engaged  in  the  Wilderness,  to  detach
a  cavalry  force  to  protect  his  communications.
Mosby  received  a  captain's  commission  in  March,
18G3,  and  two  weeks  later  that  of  a  major,  and  he
reported  to  Gen.  Stuart  till  the  time  of  that  offi
cer's  death  in  May,  1864,  and  after  that  to  Gen.
Robert  E.  Lee.  Before  the  close  of  the  war  he  was
made  a  full  colonel.  He  received  several  bullet-
wounds.  His  partisan  rangers,  under  an  act  of  the
Confederate  congress,  stood  on  the  same  footing  as
the  cavalry  of  the  line,  and  received  the  same  pay,
besides  being  allowed  to  retain  captured  spoils.
On  21  April,  1865,  he  took  leave  of  his  partisans,
saying :  "  Soldiers  of  the  43d  regiment  :  I  have
summoned  you  together  for  the  last  time.  The
vision  we  have  cherished  of  a  free  and  independent
country  has  vanished,  and  that  country  is  now  the
spoil  of  a  conqueror.  I  disband  your  organization
in  preference  to  surrendering  it  to  our  enemies.  I
am  now  no  longer  your  commander."  Remaining
in  Fauquier  county,  where  he  was  at  the  close  of
the  war,  he  opened"  a  law-office  in  Warrenton,  and
obtained  a  lucrative  practice.  In  1872  he  incurred
much  obloquy  in  the  south  by  publicly  supporting
the  Republican  presidential  candidate,  Ulysses  S.
Grant,  who  had  extended  his  protection  to  Mosby's
guerillas  at  the  surrender  in  1865.  He  defended
his  course  on  the  ground  that  the  south,  which  had
already  accepted  the  enfranchisement  of  the  ne
groes,  might  consistently  support  the  Republican
party,  and  thereby  most  quickly  attain  tranquillity
and  home  rule.  During  President  Grant's  second
term  he  exerted  himself  to  appease  the  spirit  of
dissatisfaction  in  the  south,  but  declined  all  favors
from  the  administration.  He  supported  the  can
didacy  of  Rutherford  B.  Hayes  in  1876.  in  a  letter
to  the  New  York  "  Herald,"  in  which  first  appeared
the  phrase  "  the  solid  south."  He  was  appointed
consul  at  Hong  Kong,  introduced  reforms  in  the
consular  service,  and  remained  there  more  than
six  years,  but  was  removed  on  the  accession  of
President  Cleveland.  On  his  return  to  the  United
States  he  settled  in  San  Francisco  and  resumed
the  practice  of  law.  In  December,  1886,  he  deliv
ered  in  Boston  a  lecture  on  Stuart's  cavalry,  which
was  repeated  in  other  places,  and  published  in  a
volume  entitled  "War  Reminiscences"  (Boston,
1887).  See  also  "  Partisan  Life  with  Mosby,"  by
John  Scott  (New  York,  1867) :  and  "  Mosby  and
his  Men,"  by  J.  Marshall  Crawford  (1867).


MOSBY,  Mary  Webster,  author,  b.  in  Henrico
county,  Va.,  in  April,  1791 :  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,
19  Nov.,  1844.  Her  parents  dying  during  her  in
fancy,  she  was  adopted  by  her  paternal  grandfa
ther,  Robert  Pleasants,  a  Quaker  planter  who  had
set  free  more  than  a  hundred  slaves.  She  was
educated  at  a  Friends'  school  near  Philadelphia,
and  married  in  1810  John  Garland  Mosby.  She
contributed  to  magazines  and  annuals  under  the
signature  of  "  M.  M.  Webster,"  and  published  a
book  entitled  "  Pocahontas  "  (Philadelphia,  1840),
treating  of  the  legend  of  the  Indian  heroine,  from
whom,  through  her  maternal  grandfather,  Thomas
Mann  Randolph,  she  was  a  lineal  descendant.

MOSCOSO,  Luis  Alvarado  de  (mos-ko-so),
Spanish  adventurer,  b.  in  Badajos  in  1505 ;  d.  in
Peru  in  1561.  He  served  as  captain  under  Pedro
de  Alvarado  (q.  v.)  in  Guatemala  from  1529,  and
accompanied  him  in  1534  on  his  expedition  to
Peru.  When  Alvarado  relinquished  all  claims  to
the  possession  of  the  country,  in  consideration  of
100,000  gold  castellanos,  Moscoso  received  a  large
share  of  this  indemnity  and  lived  luxuriously  for
a  few  years  in  Spain.  After  he  had  dissipated  his
fortune  he  joined  Hernando  De  Soto  (q.  r.),  who
was  preparing  his  expedition  to  Florida.  After
De  Soto's  death,  20  June,  1542,  Moscoso  became
commander-in-chief  of  the  expedition,  and,  having
wintered  with  the  Natchitoches,  resolved  on  the
evacuation  of  the  country.  Beginning  his  retreat
on  1  July,  1543,  he  returned  with  greatly  dimin
ished  forces  to  the  Mississippi,  built  seven  frail
boats,  on  which  he  embarked  his  men,  drifted  down
the  river,  and,  after  several  fights  with  the  Indians
on  the  banks,  entered  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  19  July,
1543.  On  10  Sept.  they  reached  Panuco  river,  in
New  Spain,  and  arrived  at  last  in  Mexico  on  23
Dec.,  1543.  Moscoso  was  well  received  by  the
viceroy,  Mendoza  (q.  v.),  and  accompanied  the  lat
ter  in  1551  to  Peru,  where  he  held  various  impor
tant  commands,  and  was  employed  against  the  In
dians  with  success  till  his  death.

MOSELEY,  Benjamin,  English  physician,  b.  in
Essex  about  1739 ;  d.  in  1819.  He  resided  for  several
years  in  Kingston,  Jamaica,  and  subsequently  be
came  physician  to  Chelsea  hospital.  Among  his
numerous  works  are  "  Dysentery  of  the  West  In
dies"  (Jamaica  and  London.  1781);  "Tropical
Diseases"  (1788);  learned  and  able  treatises  on
"Coffee"  (1788)  and  "Sugar"  (1799);  and  "Lues
Bevilla,  or  Cow-Pox,"  in  which  he  strongly  op
poses  vaccination  (2d  ed.,  1805),

MOSELEY,  William  D.,  governor  of  Florida,
b.  in  Lenoir  county,  N.  C.,  1  Feb.,  1795;  d.  in  Pa-
latka,  Fla.,  4  Jan.,  1863.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  North  Carolina  in  1818,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  practice  in  1820.  In
1829-'36  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate,  of
which  he  was  speaker  for  four  years.  In  1834
he  was  the  Democratic  candidate  for  governor.
He  removed  to  Monticello,  Fla.,  in  1839,  having
purchased  a  plantation  in  the  neighborhood,  was
sent  the  next  year  to  the  territorial  legislature,
declined  a  renomination,  was  elected  a  senator  in
1844,  and  on  the  admission  of  Florida  to  the  Union
in  1845  was  nominated  and  elected  governor  by
the  Democrats  over  Richard  K.  Call,  who  had  been
the  territorial  governor.  After  serving  through
his  term  of  four  years  he  retired  to  his  plantation,
and  in  1855  removed  to  Palatka.

MOSEXTHAL,  Joseph,  musician,  b.  in  Cassel,
Germany,  30  Nov.,  1834.  He  studied  music  in  his
native  town  under  his  father  and  Ludwig  Spohr,
emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1853,  and  settled
in  New  York  city.  He  became  organist  and  choir-


436


MOSES


MOSQUERA


director  of  Calvary  church  in  18CO,  but  resigned
in  1887.  In  1807  he  became  conductor  of  the  Men
delssohn  glee-club,  which  takes  the  highest  rank
among  choral  associations.  He  lias  composed  nu
merous  songs,  choruses,  and  other  musical  works
for  the  Episcopal  church  service.

MOSES,  Thomas  Freeman,  physician,  b.  in
Bath,  Me.,  8  June,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at
Bowdoin  in  1857,  and,  after  attending  lectures  in
New  York,  London,  Paris,  and  Philadelphia,  took
his  degree  at  Jefferson  medical  college  in  1861.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  acting  assistant  sur
geon  in  the  U.  S.  army,  in  charge  of  government
transports  and  hospitals,  and  after  18(54  he  settled
in  practice  in  Hamilton  county,  Ohio.  lie  was
elected  professor  of  natural  sciences  in  Urbana
university,  Ohio,  in  1870,  and  in  1886  became  act
ing  president  of  that  institution.  Prof.  Moses
is  a  member  of  several  scientific  societies,  and  has
edited  the  '•  Proceedings  of  the  Central  Ohio  Scien
tific  Association"  (Urbana,  1878).  to  which  he  con
tributed  papers.  He  has  also  published  an  anno
tated  edition  of  Emile  Saigey's  "  Unity  of  Natural
Phenomena"  (Boston,  1873).

MOSHER,  Jacob  Simmons,  physician,  b.  in
Coeyman's,  Albany  co.,  N.  Y.,  19  March,  1834 ;  d.
in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  13  Aug.,  1883.  He  removed
with  his  parents  to  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  and  in
1853  entered  Rutgers  college,  but  left  it  near  the
close  of  his  junior  year.  Soon  afterward  he  came
to  Albany  and  for  a  time  was  principal  of  a  pub
lic  school  there,  lie  was  graduated  at  Albany
medical  college  in  1863,  appointed  instructor
in  chemistry  and  experimental  philosophy  in  Al
bany  academy,  and  in  1865  made  professor  of
chemistry  in  that  institution,  serving  until  1870.
In  1864  he  was  commissioned  a  volunteer  surgeon,
and  subsequently  he  was  appointed  assistant  medi
cal  director  for  the  state  of  New  York.  In  July,
1804,  he  had  been  appointed  lecturer  on  chemistry
in  the  Albany  medical  college,  and  in  December
following  he  was  appointed  professor  of  chemistry
and  medical  jurisprudence,  serving  also  as  regis
trar  and  librarian  of  the  college  from  1865.  In
1870  he  resigned  his  professorship,  having  been
appointed  deputy  health  and  executive  officer  of
the  port  of  New  York,  but  he  resigned  in  1876  and
returned  to  Albany  and  again  entered  on  the
practice  of  his  profession.  In  January  of  that
year  he  had  been  appointed  professor  of  medical
jurisprudence  and  hygiene  in  Albany  medical  col
lege,  and  re-elected  registrar,  and  in  1881  he  was
made  professor  of  pathology,  practice,  clinical
medicine,  and  hygiene,  which  post  he  held  till  his
death.  In  1878  he  served  as  a  member  of  the
commission  of  experts,  appointed  by  President
Hayes,  to  study  the  origin  and  cause  of  the  yellow-
fever  epidemic  of  that  year,  and  the  effectual
work  of  this  board,  though  their  report  was  not
published  by  the  government,  resulted  in  the  crea
tion  of  the  National  board  of  health.  He  was  one
of  the  founders,  trustees,  and  professors  of  Albany
college  of  pharmacy,  which  was  established  in
1881,  and  the  president  of  its  faculty.  He  was  a
member  of  many  medical  societies,  a  fellow  of  the
New  York  academy  of  medicine,  and  president  of
the  Albany  county  medical  society  in  1882.  Rut
gers  gave  him  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  in  1878.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Albany  board  of  health,  and
its  chairman  at  the  time  of  his  death.

MOSLER,  Henry,  artist,  b.  in  New  York  city,
G  June,  1841.  He  went  with  his  family  to  Cincin
nati  in  1851,  and  three  years  later  to  Nashville.
Tenn.  Here  his  talent  for  art  was  first  shown  by
some  engravings  that  he  made  on  blocks  of  wood


with  crude  tools.  After  this  his  father  gave  him
what  assistance  he  could  toward  perfecting  his
drawing,  and  he  obtained  later  his  first  knowledge
of  painting  in  oils  from  George  Kerr,  an  amateur.
In  1855  he  returned  with  his  family  to  Cincinnati,
where  for  a  year  he  was  a  draughtsman  for  the
••  Omnibus/'  a  comic-  weekly.  He  then  went  to
Richmond,  whence  he  returned  in  1857.  In  185!)  he
became  a  pupil  ot  James  11.  Beard,  in  whose  studio
he  painted  until  1801.  In  1802-?3  he  followed  the
western  army  as  art  correspondent  for  "Harper's
Weekly."  He  was  appointed  on  Gen.  William
Nelson's  staff,  and  while  the  army  was  in  camp
painted  portraits  of  that  officer,  Gen.  Richard  W.
Johnson,  Gen.  Lovell  II.  Rousseau,  and  others.  lie
went  to  Europe  in  1803,  studying  for  two  and  a
half  years  under  Miicke  and  Kindler  in  Diisseldorf,
and  for  six  months  under  Ernest  Hebert  in  Paris,
lie  returned  to  the  United  States  in  I860,  remain
ing  eight  years,  during  which  time  he  produced
numerous  pictures,  notably  his  "  Lost  Cause,"
which  achieved  for  him  a  national  reputation.
On  his  return  to  Europe  in  1874  he  studied  for  three
years  under  Piloty  in  Munich,  where  he  won  a
medal  at  the  Royal  academy.  In  1877  lie  removed  to
Paris,  where  he  has  since  resided,  with  the  excep
tion  of  a  brief  visit  to  this  country  in  1885,  when
he  exhibited  a  collection  of  his  works  in  New  York
and  Cincinnati.  II is  "  Le  retour,"  exhibited  at
the  Paris  salon  of  1879,  was  bought  by  the  French
government  for  the  Musee  du  Luxembourg,  and  in
1885  he  was  the  recipient  at  the  exhibition  of  the
American  art  association  of  one  of  the  four  cash
prizes  for  his  "  Last  Sacrament."  lie  also  won  a
medal  at  the  international  exhibition  at  Nice  in  1884.
His  best-known  works  include  "Early  Cares"  and
"  Quadroon  Girl  "  (1878) ;  "  The  Return  "  and  "  Les
femmes  et  les  secrets"  (1879);  "Purchase  of  the
Wedding  Gown"  and  "Spinning  Girl"  (1880);
"  Night  after  the  Battle  "  and  "  Return  of  the  Eish-
erwomen"  (1881);  "  Discussing  the  Marriage  Con
tract "  (1882);  "Wedding  Morning"  and  "Rainy
Day"  (1883);  "Last  Sacrament"  and  "Village
Clock  maker  "  (1884) ;  "  Approaching  Storm  "  (1885) ;
and  "Visit  of  the  Marquise"  (1880-'7).

MOSQl  ERA,  Rn.v  Garcia  (moss  -  kay' -  rah),
Spanish  adventurer,  b.  in  Seville  in  1501 ;  d.  in
Asuncion,  Paraguay,  in  1555.  Nothing  is  known
of  his  life  before  1520,  when  he  served  under  Se-
bastien  Cabot  (q.  v.)  in  the  expedition  that  sailed
from  Cadiz  in  January,  1526,  for  the  river  Plate.
In  1530,  when  Cabot  determined  to  abandon  his
establishment  and  return  to  Europe,  Mosquera
urged  the  advisability  of  continuing  the  establish
ment  in  the  hope  of  better  times,  and  as  a  result
Cabot  left  him  behind  with  Nuilo  de  Lara  and
170  men.  The  Spaniards  made  a  truce  with  the
Indians,  and  promoted  good  relations.  Mangore
(q.  v.),  cacique  of  the  Timbu  tribe,  conceived  a  pas
sion  for  Lucia,  the  wife  of  Sebastian  Hurtado,  one
of  the  garrison,  and  during  the  absence  of  Lara
and  Mosquera  captured  and  burned  the  fort  and
carried  off  Lucia.  He  met  with  the  Spanish  forces
on  their  return,  and  Lara  and  the  greater  part  of
the  Spaniards  perished,  only  a  few  escaping  with
Mosquera  in  a  small  boat,  in  which  they  descended
the  river  Plate  to  the  ocean.  They  built  a  fortress
near  Cape  Santa  Maria,  and,  being  threatened  by
the  Portuguese,  Mosquera  attacked  them  and
drove  them  beyond  San  Vicente,  which  he  plun
dered.  He  established  himself  afterward  in  the
island  of  Santa  Catharine,  but  when  Pedro  de
Mendoza  (q.  v.)  arrived  in  1535  and  founded  Bue
nos  Ayres,  Mosquera,  with  his  colonists,  sailed  to
join  his  countrymen  and  after  the  destruction  of


MOSQU?]RA


MOTA-PADILLA


437


Buenos  Ay  res  settled  in  Asuncion,  where  his  de
scendants  still  live.

MOSQUERA,  Tomas  Cipriano  de,  Colombian
statesman,  b.  in  Popayan,  20  Sept.,  1798;  d.  in
Coconueo,  7  Oct.,  1878.  He  entered  the  patriot
army  in  1813,  and  in  181(3  was  taken  prisoner  by
the  Spaniards,  but
escaped  to  Jamaica.
On  his  return,  early
in  1819,  he  joined  the
patriot  forces  again,
and  took  part  in  all
the  campaigns  of  Co
lombia  and  Peru,  the
latter  under  Bolivar,
who  promoted  him  to
the  rank  of  general
in  1829,  and  sent  him
as  envoy  to  Peru.
After  Bolivar's  death
he  emigrated  to  the
United  States,  and
travelled  through  Eu
rope,  returning  to  his
country  in  1833  to
occupy  a  seat  in  con
gress.  He  became  a

skilful  and  distinguished  soldier  in  the  civil  wars  of
his  country,  and  played  an  important  part  in  her
history.  He  was  senator,  secretary  of  state,  minis
ter  to  foreign  countries,  and  president  of  the  repub
lic.  Under  his  administration,  from  1843  till  1848,
the  country  prospered  in  every  respect.  In  1859
he  was  commander-in-chief  in  the  revolution  that
overthrew  the  conservative  government  of  Ospina.
He  summoned  a  convention  for  the  constitution  of
a  new  government,  according  to  the  federal  sys
tem  and  on  the  most  liberal  principles.  Capital
punishment  was  abolished,  religious  toleration  was
proclaimed,  and  freedom  of  the  press  was  estab
lished.  Congress  granted  Mosquera  in  1803  the
title  of  grand-general,  and  in  1804  an  annual  pen
sion  of  $12,000.  In  1866  he  was  again  elected
president,  but  in  May,  1867,  by  a  successful  revolu
tion,  lie  was  deprived  of  his  office,  tried,  and  ban
ished  to  Lima,  where  he  was  crowned  with  honors
and  granted  a  pension.  After  three  years  he  re
turned,  and  became  governor  of  the  state  of  Cauca
and  member  of  congress.  He  was  a  member  of
several  scientific  societies,  and  wrote  a  "  Vida  de
Bolivar"  (New  York,  1853)  and  a  '•  Memoria  sobre
geografia  fisica  y  politica  de  la  Nueva  Granada.''

MOSS,  John  Calvin,  inventor,  b.  near  Bent-
leysville,  Pa.,  5. Ian.,  1838.  He  received  a  common-
school  education  in  his  native  county,  and  became
a  printer,  publishing  during  1859-'00  "The  Col-
leaguer  "  in  Washington,  Pa.  Meanwhile  he  be
came  interested  in  photographic  chemistry,  and
devoted  considerable  attention  to  the  subject  of
photo  -  engraving.  He  experimented  for  many
years,  and  finally,  while  in  Philadelphia,  obtained
a  relief  plate  from  which  printed  impressions
could  be  made.  In  1863  he  came  to  New  York
and  continued  his  experiments  in  perfecting  the
process.  Having  interested  various  persons  in  the
enterprise,  he  founded  the  Actinic  engraving  com
pany  in  1870,  and  became  its  superintendent.  In
1872  he  became  the  superintendent  of  the  Photo
engraving  company,  which  office  he  held  until
1880,  when  he  established  the  Moss  engraving
company,  of  which  he  became  president  and  super
intendent.  The  present  corporation  owns  the
largest  plant  of  its  kind  in  the  world,  and  its  work
is  a  substitute  for  wood-engraving,  accomplished
by  chemical  means.  Mr.  Moss  was  the  first  to


make  photo-engraving  a  practical  business  success,
and  while  his  methods  have  never  been  patented,
he  is  known  as  the  inventor  of  what  is  called  the
•'  Moss  process,"  "  Moss  new  process,"  and  the
"  moss-type  process."

MOSS,  Lemuel,  educator,  b.  near  Burlington,
Ky.,  27  Dec.,  1829.  He  was  a  printer  for  nine
yours  in  early  life,  but,  deciding  to  enter  the  Baptist
ministry,  was  graduated  at  Rochester,  X.  Y.,  uni
versity  in  1858,  and  at  the  theological  school  there
in  I860.  He  was  secretary  of  the  U.  S.  Christian
commission  in  1863-'o,  and  after  holding  theologi
cal  professorships  in  Lewisburg,  Pa.,  and  at  Crozer
seminary,  near  Philadelphia,  was  in  1874-'5  presi
dent  of  the  University  of  Chicago,  and  in  1875-'84
of  Indiana  university.  He  received  from  Roches
ter  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1868  and  that  of  LL.  D.
in  1883.  Dr.  Moss  edited  the  "  National  Baptist"
in  Philadelphia  in  1868-'72,  and  has  written  "  An
nals  of  the  United  States  Christian  Commission"
(Philadelphia.  1866)  and  various  articles  on  educa
tional  and  religious  subjects.  He  edited  "  The
Baptists  and  the  National  Centenary"  (1876).

MOSS,  Thomas,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Cobourg,
20  Aug.,  1836;  d.  in  Nice,  France,  4  June,  1881.
He  was  educated  at  Upper  Canada  college  and  the
University  of  Toronto,  studied  law,  and  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1861.  He  became  a  partner
of  Hector  (now  Sir  Hector).  Cameron,  and  after
ward  of  James  Patton,  and  still  later  became  a
member  of  the  firm  of  Harrison,  Osier  and  Moss.
In  1871  he  was  appointed  equity  lecturer  for  the
Law  society,  in  1872  became  queen's  counsel,  and
in  the  same  year  declined  the  offer  of  the  vice-
chancellorship.  In  1873  he  was  elected  to  the
Dominion  parliament  for  west  Toronto.  He  was
re-elected  in  1874,  but,  on  being  appointed  a  judge
of  the  court  of  appeals,  he  left  parliamentary  life.
He  became  president  of  the  court  of  appeals  in
1877,  and,  at  the  death  of  Chief-Justice  William  H.
Draper,  chief  justice  of  Ontario  in  1878.

MOTA,  Alonso  de  la  (mo-tah),  Mexican  R.  C.
bishop,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  about  1550 ;  d.  in
Puebla,  15  April.  1625.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Mexico  and  appointed  pastor  of  Chi-
apa,  which  parish  is  still  known  as  Chiapa  de  Mota.
He  afterward  went  to  Spain,  and  was  nominated
successively  by  the  king  for  the  deaneries  of  the
cathedrals  of  Michoacan,  Puebla,  and  Mexico.  He
declined  the  bishopric  of  Nicaragua  and  Panama,
but  was  obliged  to  acce'pt  that  of  Guadalajara,
which  he  occupied  from  1599  till  1607,  when  he
was  appointed  coadjutor  of  the  bishop  of  Tlaxcala.
In  1601  he  pacified  the  Indian  tribes  of  the  Topia
mountains,  and  on  his  return  visited  the  warlike
Tepehuanes,  converting  many  of  their  caciques  by
means  of  their  Aztec  interpreters,  which  language
he  spoke  fluently.  He  also  founded  in  the  city  of
Puebla  the  College  of  San  Ildefonso  for  the  Jesuits.
He  wrote  "  Flistoria  y  Descripcion  de  la  Nueva  Ga-
licia,  sus  Ciudades  y  Puertos,  Indies  tributaries  y
de  encpmienda,"  the"  manuscript  of  which  is  in  the
Royal  library,  and  "Relacion  del  alboroto  y  pacifi
cation  de  la  Sierra  de  Topia,"  which  was  published
by  Father  Torquemada.

MOTA-PADILLA,  Mafias  de  la,  Mexican  his
torian,  b.  in  Guadalajara,  2  Oct.,  1688  ;  d.  there  in
1776.  Very  little  is  known  about  his  youth,  but  it
is  believed  that  he  studied  in  the  College  of  San
Jose  de  Gracia.  On  4  May,  1711,  he  was  gradu
ated  in  lawT  in  Mexico.  From  1713  till  1739  he
obtained  different  employments,  and  he  was  then
appointed  treasurer  of  the  audiencia  of  Guadalajara,
and  from  1744  till  1748  served  as  associate  judge
of  the  criminal  court.  He  began  the  establish'


438


MOTLEY


ment  of  the  University  of  Guadalajara  and  urged
the  merchants  of  the  latter  city  to  open  trade  with
Guatemala  by  the  South  sea.  Padilla  owes  his
celebrity  specially  to  the  work  that,  under  the  title
of  "  Historia  de  la  Nucva  Galicia,"  he  wrote  by  or
der  of  the  king  to  celebrate  the  heroic  feats  of  the
conquerors,  among  whom  were  his  ancestors.  This
work  was  finished  in  1742  and  was  sent  to  Spain,
but,  as  it  had  not  reached  its  destination,  the  king
ordered  in  1747  two  more  copies,  which  were  made
at  the  expense  of  Padilla :  but,  notwithstanding  all
his  efforts  and  expense,  his  work  not  only  was  left
imprinted,  but  the  copies  never  reached  Spain.  By
order  of  the  king,  on  21  Feb.,  1790,  it  was  copied
again  and  forms  the  fifth  and  sixth  volumes  of  the
collection  of  "  Memorias  historicas."  In  1871  it
was  printed  by  the  Mexican  "  Sociedad  de  Geogra-
fia  y  Estadistica."

MOTLEY,  John  Lothrop,  historian  and  diplo
matist,  b.  in  Dorchester,  Mass,  (now  part  of  Bos
ton),  15  April,  1814;  d.  near  Dorchester,  England,
2(J  May,  1877.  His  father  was  a  merchant,  a  man
of  wit  and  literary
tastes,  and  he  inherited
through  his  mother
the  blood  of  two
much-respected  Bos
ton  clergymen,  the
Rev.  John  Lothrop
and  the  Rev.  Sam
uel  Checklev.  John
Lothrop  was  a  rather
delicate  boy,  but  fond
of  skating  and  swim
ming,  a  great  reader,
with  much  liking  for
plays  and  declamat  ion.
Among  the  compan
ions  of  his  boyhood

welc


i  and  Thomas  (1.  .  \|>-
I  pleton.  His  mother
described  him  as  sensitive,  excitable,  with  a  quick
sense  of  honor,  and  scrupulously  truthful.  lie
went  to  school  first  to  Mr.  Green  at  Jamaica
Plain,  and  after  that  at  Round  Hill,  under  the
charge  of  Dr.  Cogswell  and  Mr.  Bancroft.  At  the
age  of  thirteen  he  entered  the  freshman  class  at
Harvard,  where  he  took  high  rank  at  first,  but
cared  too  much  for  general  literature  to  devote
himself  very  closely  to  the  regular  studies  of  the
college  course.  He  was  an  insatiable  reader,  espe
cially  of  novels  and  poetrv,  and  early  began  writ
ing  in  prose  and  verse,  lie  was  a  great  favorite,
admired  for  his  brilliancy,  his  great  personal  beauty,
and  his  generous,  impulsive  character.  After  gradu
ation  in  1831  he  studied  at  the  universities  of  Ber
lin  and  Gottingen.  At  Gottingen  he  became  inti
mate  with  Bismarck,  with  whom  his  friendly  rela
tions  were  continued  in  after-life.  The  great  chan
cellor  says  of  him  :  "  The  most  striking  feature  of
his  handsome  and  delicate  appearance  was  uncom
monly  large  and  beautiful  eyes.  He  never  entered
a  drawing-room  without  exciting  the  curiosity  and
sympathy  of  the  ladies."  In  1837  Mr.  Motley'mar-
ried  Mary  Benjamin,  sister  of  Park  Benjamin,  a  lady
of  great  personal  charm  and  beauty  of  character.
Three  of  their  children,  daughters,"  are  living,  all
well  known  and  well  connected  in  English  society,
one  being  the  accomplished  wife  of  Sir  W7illiafn
Vernon  Harcourt.  Two  years  after  his  marriage
appeared  his  first  published  work,  an  historical
novel  called  "  Morton's  Hope"  (1839).  As  a  story
it  was  not  a  success,  but  it  contained  many  eloquent
passages,  and  as  a  self-portraiture  still  possesses  a


peculiar  interest.  In  the  autumn  of  1841  Mr.
Motley  was  appointed  secretary  of  the  American
legation  at  Petersburg,  but  returned  home  after  a
few  months.  A  second  novel,  "  Merry  Mount,  a
Romance  of  the  Massachusetts  Colony,"  had  been
lying  by  him  for  some  years  when  it  was  published
in  1849.  This  was  recognized  as  a  great  advance
on  his  first  effort,  but  it  had  become  evident  to  his
friends  and  to  himself  that  history  rather  than
imaginative  story-telling  was  the  literary  pursuit
best  fitted  to  his  natural  endowments.  His  stud
ies  had  been  long  and  laborious  in  that  direc
tion.  Before  committing  himself  to  any  of  the
more  considerable  works  he  had  in  view,  Mr.  Mot
ley  tried  his  hand  in  an  elaborate  historical  article
in  the  "  North  American  Review "  for  October,
1845.  This  was  a  narrative  and  critical  essay  on
the  life  and  character  of  Peter  the  Great  of  Rus
sia.  His  friends  found  their  predictions  as  to  his
future  success  as  a  historian  fully  justified  by  this
brilliant  paper.  Soine  marks  of  his  youthful,  al
most  boyish,  vivacity  might  perhaps  be  found  in
this  remarkable  essay,  but  it  was  generally  conceded
that  the  writer  had  in  him  the  stuff  for  a  powerful
historian.  No  man  needed  the  encouragement  of
criticism  more  than  Motley.  The  limited  success
of  his  first  novel  satisfied  him  that  he  must  discon
tinue  invertebrate  story-telling  and  deal  with  sub
jects  that  had  backbones  of  their  own.  The  fas
cination  which  the  region  of  romance  still  had  for
him  is  shown  in  his  article  on  the  novels  of  Balzac,
published  in  the  "  North  American  Review  "  for
July,  1847.  Two  years  later,  in  the  same  review,
he  published,  in  the  form  of  a  review  of  a  work  on
the  colonization  of  New  England,  an  essay  on  the
"  Polity  of  the  Puritans."  All  his  love  of  liberty,
all  his  thorough  Americanism,  show  themselves  un
mistakably  in  this  able  essay.  Two  events  in  Mr.
Motley's  personal  history  require  special  mention.
In  1847  he  lost  his  most  intimate  friend,  Mr.  Joseph
Lewis  Stackpole.  killed  by  an  accident  on  a  rail
road,  and  this  loss  was  never  made  up  to  him.  Mr.
Stackpole,  older  than  Mr.  Motley,  a  man  of  culti
vation  and  high  character,  was  more  than  a  brother
to  him,  and  exercised  the  best  influence  upon  him,
being  of  a  more  equable  and  calmer  temperament.
The  other  circumstance  was  his  election  as  a  mem
ber  of  the  Massachusetts  house  of  representatives.
His  political  career  in  this  capacity  was  brief  and,
to  himself  at  least,  far  from  satisfactory.  He  was
made  chairman  of  the  committee  on  education.
He  wrote  a  report  which  he  thought  was  unan
swerable,  but  a  young  man  from  the  country,  well
known  since  that  time  in  the  politics  of  the  coun
try,  got  up  and,  according  to  Motley's  own  account,
demolished  it.  He  could  not  defend  it  against  the
attack  of  his  rural  assailant.  Mr.  Boutwell  says
that  his  failure  was  not  due  to  his  want  of  faculty,
or  to  the  vigor  of  his  opponent,  but  that  he  was  on
the  weak  and  unpopular  side.

As  early  as  1846  Mr.  Motley  had  been  collecting
materials  for  a  history  of  Holland.  While  matur
ing  his  plans  he  learned  through  his  friend,  Stack-
pole,  that  Mr.  Prescott  was  at  work  on  a  history
which  would  fully  cover  the  same  ground  as  that
which  he  contemplated.  Like  a  perfectly  frank
and  generous-hearted  man,  as  he  was,  Motley  went
directly  to  Prescott  and  told  him  of  his  project
and  his  apprehensions  that  if  it  were  carried  out
there  might  be  an  interference  in  their  works.  The
story  of  Prescott's  reception  of  his  young  rival,
who  was  unavoidably  approaching  his  own  ground,
would  form  an  interesting  chapter  in  a  work  on
the  friendships  and  enmities  of  authors.  Pres
cott  recognized  the  ability  in  Motley  from  what


MOTLEY


439


he  had  already  seen  of  his  writings,  and  was  well  '
aware  that  he  was  about  to  have  a  formidable  com-  '
petitor  in  a  field  in  which  he  had  hitherto  been
unchallenged. In  pursuance  of  his  plans  of  writ
ing  a  history  of  the  Dutch  Republic,  Mr.  Motley  j
went  to  Europe  and  followed  his  previous  studies,
with  investigations  at  Berlin,  Dresden,  the  Hague,
and  Brussels. One  year  was  spent  quietly  at  Vevay.  ,
It  was  ten  years  from  the  time  when  he  first  con-  ;
ceived  the  project  of  writing his history of  the  j
Dutch  Republic  before  the  work  was  ready  for  the  i
press. He  had some  difficulty  in  finding  a  pub-  ,
lisher. Mr.  Murray declined the manuscript,  a
mistake  which  he  found  occasion  to  regret,  and  the  j
work  was published at the  author's  expense by
John  Chapman  (1856). The  history  was  received  ;
with  enthusiasm in  Europe  and  in  America. Mr.  j
Fronde  characterized  the  work  as  "  complete  as  in
dustry  and  genius  can  make  it,  one  which  will  take  ;
its  place  among  the  finest  stories  in  this  or  any  '
language."  In  this  country  Dr.  Lieber,  Mr.  Everett,  j
Mr. Irving,  Mr.  Bancroft, Mr.  Sumner,  and  the  j
generous  Mr.  Prescott  all  joined  in  the  chorus  of  ;
praise. M.  Guizot  superintended  a  translation  of  •
it  into  French,  and  himself  wrote  the  introduction.
Both  in  England  and  America  the  work  was  sold
largely,  and  Mr.  Motley  found  himself  everywhere  |
recognized  as  a  great  historian. He  returned  with
his  family  to  the  United  States  in  1856,  and  spent  |
the  winter  of  1856-'?  in  Boston,  taking  a  mod-  j
est  house  in  Boylston  place  for  his  residence. In
1858  he  returned  to  England,  where  he  was  most  i
cordially  welcomed  and  received  as  an  honored  j
guest  in  the  highest  social  circles,  where  he  took  i
his  place  Dei  gratia  as  naturally  as  the  first-born  j
of  a  princely  household. Mr.  Motley  took  much  •
interest  in  the  '•  Atlantic  Monthly,"  arid  in  the  first  j
number,  dated November,  1857,  is an article  by
him  entitled  "  Florentine  Mosaics,"  continued  in  |
the  December  number. It  is  a  pleasant  series  of  !
descriptions  of  churches  and  other  public  edifices  i
and  the  works  of  art  they  contain,  interesting  as  j
showing  his  tastes  and  illustrating  his  peculiarities
of  thought  and  style. He  was  too  busy  with  more
serious  work  to  continue  writing  for  periodicals,
and  does  not  appear  again  in  the"  Atlantic  Month
ly  "  until  December,  1868,  when  he  wrote  a  review
of  Sarah  Edwards  Henshaw's  history  of  the  work
of  the  northwest  sanitary  commission. Here  again
the  characteristics  of  the  writer  show  themselves,
his  ardent  patriotism,  his  large  humanity,  his  elo
quence,  and  his  scholarly  fastidiousness,  which  in
the  midst  of  his  generous  sympathy  and  admiration
takes  offence  at  such  words  as  "  tireless  "  and  "  men
tality,"  and  leads  him  to  say :  "  We  would  implore
her  on  our  bended  knees  not  to  call  a  soldier  in
the  National  armies  a  '  Federal.' It  used  to  be  bad
enough  to  hear  this  from  the  London  '  Times.' "

In  1860  Mr.  Motley  published  the  first  two  vol
umes  of  his  second  great  work,  "  The  History  of
the  United  Netherlands,"  which  were  received
with  a  hearty  welcome  from  critical  authorities  as
well  as  the  public.  "  Mr.  Motley  combines  as  an  j
historian  two  qualifications  seldom  found  united —  ;
to  great  capacity  for  historical  research  he  adds
much  power  of  pictorial  representation."  This  is
from  an  article  in  the  "  Edinburgh  Review,"  and
expresses  what  would  be  the  general  verdict  of
scholars :  With  that  power  of  pictorial  represen
tation  went  a  certain  vivacity  which  occasion
ally  betrayed  him  into  a  mode  "of  expression  that
reminded  the  friends  of  his  early  days  of  his
youthful  dash  and  play  of  expression,  a  something
more  juvenile  than  we  should  have  expected  in
a  scholar  who  could  tire  out  the  laborious  drudges


around  him  by  his  indefatigable  labor.  The  four
years- that  followed  the  publication  of  the  first  two
volumes  of  the  "  History  of  the  United  Nether
lands "  were  not  favorable  to  the  calm  pursuits  of
the  historian.  Fond  as  he  was  of  his  historical
studies,  he  loved  his  own  time  and  his  own  coun
try  with  a  passion  still  more  fervent  than  his
scholarly  enthusiasm.  He  was  excited  to  the  high
est  point  at  finding  the  animus  of  the  leading
classes  in  England  so  largely  in  sympathy  with  the
south  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  and  he  did
his  best  to  uphold  the  cause  of  freedom  and  of  the
north  at  a  time  when  the  dearest  interests  of  both
were  imperilled.  His  two  letters  to  the  London
"  Times  "  remain  as  an  imperishable  record  of  his
patriotism  and  his  ability  as  the  champion  of  lib
erty  and  humanity.  No  other  American  voice
could  probably  have  been  as  effective  at  that  par
ticular  moment,  and  the  country  can  hardly  know
all  it  owes  to  its  prompt  and  spirited  defender.

In  1861  Mr.  Motley  was  appointed  by  President
Lincoln  as  minister  to  Austria.  His  daughter.
Lady  Harcourt,  says  of  him  :  "  In  the  first  dark
years  the  painful  interest  of  the  great  national
drama  was  so  all-absorbing  that  literary  work  was
entirely  put  aside,  and  with  his  countrymen  at
home  he  lived  only  in  the  varying  fortunes  of  the
day,  his  profound  faith  and  enthusiasm  sustaining
him  and  lifting  him  above  the  natural  influence  of
a  by  no  means  sanguine  temperament.  Later,
when  the  tide  was  turning  and  success  was  near-
ing,  he  was  more  able  to  work."  His  successor  at
Vienna,  Mr.  John  Jay,  some  two  years  after  he  left
that  post  of  official  duty,  said  :  "  I  had  occasion  to
read  most  of  his  despatches,  which  exhibited  a
mastery  of  the  subjects  they  treated,  with  much  of
the  clear  perception,  the  scholarly  and  philosophic
tone  and  decided  judgment  which,  supplemented
by  his  picturesque  description,  full  of  life  and
color,  have  given  character  to  his  histories."  But
notwithstanding  the  acceptable  manner  in  which
he  had  performed  services  of  great  importance  to
his  country.  Mr.  Motley  resigned  his  office  as  min
ister  to  Austria  in  1867  in  consequence  of  an  at
tack  from  an  obscure  source,  which  should  have
been  ignored  by  his  government  and  was  not  de
serving  of  the  importance  he  attached  to  it.  In
1868  the  two  concluding  volumes  of  the  "  History
of  the  Netherlands  "  were  published  and  sustained
the  reputation  he  had  gained  by  his  previous  la
bors.  In  June,  1868,  Mr.  Motley  returned  to  Boston
and  established  himself  at  No.  2  Park  street.  This
same  year  he  delivered  two  important  addresses :
•'  Four  Questions  for  the  People  at  the  Presidential
Election,"  an  electioneering  speech,  as  its  title  im
plies,  but  noble  in  thought  and  language ;  and  one
before  the  New  York  historical  society,  entitled
"  Historic  Progress  and  American  Democracy."
Soon  after  the  election  of  Gen.  Grant  as  president,
Mr.  Motley  received  the  appointment  of  minister
to  England.  His  sudden  recall  in  1870  was  never
explained  to  the  satisfaction  of  his  friends  and  the
public.  The  blow  was  wholly  unexpected  and  un
prepared  for,  a  cruel  surprise,  from  which  he
never  recovered.  There  was  nothing  left  for  him
but  to  return  to  his  historical  labors.  He  had
meant  to  occupy  his  later  years  with  a  work  of
wider  scope  than  those  already  given  to  the  public.
Before  beginning  this  great  undertaking  he  em
ployed  himself  in  writing  a  biography  that  was
itself  more  like  a  history.  It  was  entitled  "  The
Life  and  Death  of  John  of  Barneveld,  Advocate  of
Holland,  with  a  View  of  the  Primary  Causes  and
Movements  of  the  Thirty- Years'  War."  This  was
characterized  by  the  London  "  Quarterly  Review  "


440


MOTOLIX1A


MOTT


as  "a  fine  and  continuous  story,  of  which  the
writer  and  the  nation  celebrated  by  him  have  equal
reason  to  be  proud  ;  a  narrative  that  will  remain  a
prominent  ornament  of  American  genius  while  it
has  permanently  enriched  English  literature  on
this  as  well  as  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic."
The  most  authoritative  of  the  Dutch  critics  sub
jected  it  to  close  questioning,  but  recognized  it  as
perhaps  the  most  classical  of  Motley's  productions.
With  his  strong  feeling  for  religious  as  well  as
political  liberty  he  could  not  avoid  disturbing  the
prejudices  of  the  old-fashioned  Calvinists  like
Groen  von  Prinsterer.  In  the  story  of  John  of  Bar-
neveld  the  careful  reader  will  get  at  many  points  of
Motley's  personal  history  and  feelings  through  the
thin  disguise  of  his  narrative.  The  death  of  Mrs.
Motley  in  1874  found  him  already  in  an  enfeebled
state  and  left  him  with  little  hope  of  any  future
activity,  yet  never  wholly  giving  up  the  thought
of  further  literary  labors.  An  attack  of  an  apo
plectic  nature  had  practically  disabled  him.  He
seemed  to  live  almost  wholly  in  the  past,  yet  his
affections  were  warm  toward  the  living,  and  with
his  few  friends  he  was  always  as  interesting,  and
occasionally  as  cheerful,  as  in  his  earlier  days.  He
passed  the  summer  and  a  part  of  the  autumn  of
1875  in  Boston  and  its  vicinity.  This  was  his  last
visit  to  the  United  States,  and  those  who  met  him
saw  but  too  clearly  that  his  working-days  were
over.  His  first  apoplectic  attack  was  in  August.
1873.  This  left  some  partial  paralysis,  so  that  he
walked  with  an  imperfect  gait  and  was  glad  of  a
friendly  arm  to  assist  him.  His  mental  powers
were  not  clouded,  but  lie  was  not  equal  to  any  se
rious  intellectual  labor.  On  29  May,  1877",  Sir
William  Gull,  who  had  been  his  medical  adviser
for  years,  was  summoned  to  his  daughter's  resi
dence  in  Dorsetshire,  where  Motley  was  staying,
but  did  not  reach  the  place  until  he  was  no  longer
living.  He  was  buried  by  the  side  of  his  wife  in
Kensall  Green  cemetery,  near  London.  On  3  June,
Dean  Stanley  delivered  a  sermon  in  Westminster
Abbey,  in  which  he  referred  with  feeling  anfl  elo
quence  to  Motley  as  "  one  of  the  brightest  lights  of
the  western  hemisphere,  the  high-spirited  patriot,
the  faithful  friend  of  England's  best  and  purest
spirits,  the  brilliant,  the  indefatigable  historian,
who  told  as  none  before  him  had  told  the  history
of  the  rise  and  struggle  of  the  Dutch  Republic.  So
long  as  the  tale  of  the  greatness  of  the  house  of
Orange,  of  the  siege  of  Leyden,  of  the  tragedy  of
Barneveld,  interests  mankind,  so  long  will  Holland
be  indissolubly  connected  with  the  name  of  Mot
ley  in  that  union  of  the  ancient  culture  of  Europe
with  the  aspirations  of  America,  which  was  so  re
markable  in  the  ardent,  laborious,  soaring  soul  that
has  passed  away."  Expressive  tributes  of  respect
to  his  memory  were  paid  by  the  historical  societies
of  Massachusetts  and  New  York.  The  list  of  hon
ors  conferred  upon  him  is  very  long,  and  includes
degrees  from  the  English  universities,  from  Har
vard  and  Xew  York,  and  honorary  membership  in
many  learned  associations  of  various  countries.
The  last  honor,  and  one  of  the  highest  conferred
on  him,  was  his  election  as  foreign  associate  of  the
French  academy  of  moral  and  political  sciences.
A  uniform  edition  of  his  works,  in  nine  volumes,
is  published  in  Xew  York.  See  "John  Lothrop
Motley,  a  Memoir,"  by  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes
(Boston  and  London.  1878).

MOTOLINIA,  or  BENAVENTE,  Toribio  de
(mo-to-lecn'-yah),  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in  Bena-
vente,  Zamora,  late  in  the  15th  century :  d.  in
Mexico,  9  Aug.,  15(58.  lie  came  to  Mexico  with
the  first  twelve  Franciscan  friars  in  1523.  When


the  Indians  of  Tlaxcala  saw  them  entering  bare
footed  and  travel-worn,  they  exclaimed  "  Moto-
linia!"  On  asking  the  signification  of  that  word,
Friar  Toribio  was  told  that  it  meant  "  poor  fellow,"
and  adopted  it  as  his  surname.  He  soon  learned
the  Mexican  language  and  was  assigned  to  the
missions  of  the  provinces  of  Tapachula  and  IIuc-
xotzingo,  where  he  converted  and  baptized  thou
sands  of  Indians,  and  in  152!)  he  colonized  in  Hue-
xcotzingo  the  Indians  that  had  fied  from  persecu
tion  in  Guatemala.  In  1530  he  was  sent  to  Tlax
cala,  and,  by  order  of  the  president,  Ramirez  Fuen-
leal,  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  city  of  Puebla
de  los  Angeles,  where  he  chanted  the  first  mass  on
16  April.  He  was  afterward  superior  of  the  con
vent  of  Texcoco,  and  in  1548  was  elected  provincial
of  Santiago.  He  wrote  "  Doctrina  Cristiana  en
lengua  Mexicana,"  "  De  Moribus  Indorum,''  and
"  Relacion  de  un  viaje  a  Guatemala."  The  manu
scripts  of  these  works  were  lost,  but  in  the  convent
of  Texcoco  there  exists  a  copy  of  the  first  in  Span
ish  (Seville,  1532),  with  the  written  indorsement  of
Bishop  Zumarraga  "to  Father  Motolinia  to  be
translated."  The  second  was  largely  used  by
Father  Torquemada  in  his  historical  work,  and
Clavijero  mentions  it.  Of  the  third  a  large  part
was  translated  into  Aztec  by  Friar  Juan  Bautista
and  printed  under  the  title  of  "  Vida  y  Martirio  de
los  tres  nifios  nobles  de  Tlaxcala.  Cristobal,  hijo
del  cacique  Acxotecatl,  Antonio  y  Juan"  (Mexico,
1001).  Leon  Pinelo  also  gives  the  name  of  another
work  of  Motolinia,  "  Relacion  de  las  cosas,  ritos,
ceremonias  e  idolatria  de  los  indios  de  la  X.  E."  :
but  Xicolas  Antonio  proved  that  it  is  nothing  but
an  extract  under  the  title  "Moribus  Indorum."

MOTT,  (Jcorge  Scudder,  clergyman,  b.  in  Xew
York  city,  25  Nov.,  1829.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  the  city  of  Xew  York  in  1850,
and  at  Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1853.
lie  was  pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church  at  Rahway,
X.  J.,  till  1858,  at  Newton,  X.  J.,  in  1859-'69,  and
from  that  time  has  had  charge  of  the  church  in
Flemington,  X.  J.  In  1873  he  declined  the  pro
fessorship  of  sacred  rhetoric  in  Lincoln  university.
The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by
Princeton  in  1874.  For  several  years  Dr.  Mott  has
been  president  of  the  Xew  Jersey  Sabbath  union.
He  has  contributed  to  the  "Princeton  Review"
and  the  "  Presbyterian  Review,"  and,  besides  tracts,
sermons,  and  historical  addresses,  has  published
"The  Prodigal  Son  "  (Philadelphia,  1803);  "The
Resurrection  of  the  Dead  "  (New  York,  1807) ;  and
"The  Perfect  Law"  (1868),  translated  for  mission
ary  purposes  into  Spanish  and  Portuguese.

MOTT,  (wcrshoiii,  soldier,  b.  near  Trenton,  N.  J.,
7  April,  1822;  d.  in  New  York  city,  29  May,  1884.
He  was  the  grandson  of  Capt.  John  Mott,  of  the
Continental  line,  who  guided  the  army  of  Gen.
Washington  down  the  Delaware  river  to  the  vic
tory  at  Trenton.  After  leaving  Trenton  academy
at  the  age  of  fourteen  he  entered  upon  commercial
life  in  New  York  city.  At  the  beginning  of  the
Mexican  war  he  was  commissioned  as  2d  lieutenant
in  the  10th  U.  S.  infantry.  After  the  war  he  was
collector  of  the  port  of  Lamberton,  N.  J.,  and  in
1855  became  an  officer  of  the  Bordentown  bank.
On  4  Aug.,  1861,  he  was  commissioned  as  lieuten
ant-colonel  of  the  5th  Xew  Jersey  volunteers,  and
afterward  was  made  colonel  of  the  Oth  regiment,
and  received  a  severe  wound  in  the  second  battle
of  Bull  Run.  He  was  promoted  brigadier-general
of  volunteers  on  7  Sept.,  1802,  and  again  badly
wounded  at  Chancellorsville.  On  1  Aug.,  1804,  he
was  brevetted  major-general  for  distinguished  ser
vices  during  the  war.  On  6  April,  1865,  he  was


MOTT


441


severely  wounded  in  the  fight  at  Amelia  Springs,
Va.  After  the  army  was  disbanded  he  commanded
for  some  time  a  provisional  corps.  He  served  on
the  Wirz  commission,  was  made  a  full  major-gen
eral  on  26  May,  1865.  and  resigned  on  20  Feb.,
1866.  When  he  returned  to  civil  life  he  was  made
paymaster  of  the  Camden  and  A  in  hoy  railroad.
On  27  Feb.,  1873,  he  was  appointed  major-general
commanding  the  National  guard  of  New  Jersey.
On  1  Sept.,  1875,  he  became  treasurer  of  the  state,
and  in  1876-'81  was  keeper  of  the  state  prison.

MOTT,  James,  philanthropist,  b.  in  North
Hempstead,  L.  L,  20  June,  1788;  d.  in  Brooklyn.
N.  Y.,  26  Jan.,  1868.  At  nineteen  he  became  a
teacher  in  a  Friends'  boarding-school  in  Dutchess
county,  N.  Y.  He  removed  to  New  York  city,  and
in  1810  to  Philadelphia,  and  became  a  partner  of
his  wife's  father  in  mercantile  business,  in  which
he  continued  more  than  forty  years,  retiring  with  a
competency.  He  was  a  participant  in  the  move
ment  against  slavery  and  one  of  the  earliest  friends
of  William  L.  Garrison.  In  1833  he  aided  in  or
ganizing  in  Philadelphia  the  National  anti-slavery
society,  and  in  1840  was  a  delegate  from  the  Penn
sylvania  society  to  attend  the  World's  anti-slavery
convention  at  London,  where  he  was  among  those
who  ineffectually  urged  the  admission  of  the  female
delegates  from  the  Pennsylvania  and  other  societies.
In  1848  he  presided  over  the  first  Woman's  rights
national  convention,  at  Seneca  Falls,  N.  Y.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  and  in  later
life  aided  in  maturing  the  plans  of  government  and
instruction  for  the  Friends'  college  at  Swarthmore,
near  Philadelphia.  Pie  published  '•  Three  Months
in  Great  Britain." — His  wife,  Lueretia,  reformer,
b.  on  the  island  of  Nantucket,  Mass.,  3  Jan.,  1793  ;
d.  near  Philadelphia,  Pa..  11  Nov.,  1880,  was  de
scended  through  her  father.  Capt.  Thomas  Coffin,
from  one  of  the  original  purchasers  of  the  island.
When  she  was  eleven  years  old  her  parents  removed
to  Boston,  Mass.  She  was  educated  in  the  school
where  Mr.  Mott  was  teaching,  and  became  a  teacher
there  at  the  age  of  fifteen.  In  1809  she  joined  her
parents,  who  had  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where
she  married  in  1811.  In  1817  she  took  charge  of  a
small  school  in  Philadelphia,  and  in  1818  appeared
in  the  ministry  of  the  Friends,  and  soon  became
noted  for  the  clearness,  refinement,  and  eloquence
of  her  discourses.  In  the  division  of  the  society,
in  1827,  she  adhered  to  the  Hicksite  branch.  She
early  became  interested  in  the  movement  against  j
slavery,  and  remained  one  of  its  most  prominent  j

and  persistent  advo
cates  until  the  eman
cipation.  In  1833
she  assisted  in  the
formation  at  Phila
delphia  of  the  Ameri
can  anti-slavery  so
ciety,  though,  owing
to  the  ideas  then  ac
cepted  as  to  the  ac
tivities  of  women,
she  did  not  sign  the
declaration  that  was
adopted.  Later,  for
a  time,  she  was  ac
tive  in  the  formation
of  female  anti-sla
very  organizations.
In  "1840  she  went  to
London  as  a  delegate

from  the  American  anti-slavery  society  to  the
World's  anti-slavery  convention,  but  it  was  there
decided  to  admit  no  women.  She  was  received.


however,  with  cordiality,  formed  acquaintance  with
those  most  active  in  the  movement  in  Great  Britain,
and  made  various  addresses.  The  action  of  the
convention  in  excluding  women  excited  indigna
tion,  and  led  to  the  establishment  of  woman's
rights  journals  in  England  and  France,  and  to  the
movement  in  the  United  States,  in  which  Mrs.
Mott  took  an  active  part.  She  was  one  of  the  four
women  that  called  the  convention  at  Seneca  Falls,
N.  Y..  in  1848,  and  subsequently  devoted  part  of
her  efforts  to  the  agitation  for  improving  the  legal
and  political  status  of  women.  She  held  frequent
meetings  with  the  colored  people,  in  whose  welfare
and  advancement  she  felt  deep  interest,  and  was
for  several  years  president  of  the  Pennsylvania
peace  society.  In  the  exercise  of  her  "  gift "  as  a
minister,  she  made  journeys  through  New  Eng
land,  New  York,  Pennsylvania,  and  into  Maryland.
Virginia,  Ohio,  and  Indiana,  where  she  did  not  re
frain  from  denouncing  slavery.  She  was  actively
interested  in  the  Free  religious  associations  formed
in  Boston  about  1868,  and  in  the  Woman's  medi
cal  college  in  Philadelphia.  See  her  '•  Life,"  with
that  of  her  husband,  edited  by  her  granddaughter.
Anna  Davis  Hallowell  (Boston,  1884).

MOTT,  Valentine,  surgeon,  b.  in  Glen  Cove,
L.  I..  20  Aug.,  1785 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  26  April.
1865.  He  was  de
scended  from  an
English  Quakerwho
settled  on  Long  Isl
and  about  1660.  and
was  the  son  of  Hen
ry,  a  physician,  who
practised  for  many
years  in  New  York
city.  The  son  re
ceived  a  classical
education  at  a  pri
vate  seminary  at
Newtown,  L.  I.,  and
at  the  age  of  nine
teen  entered  the
office  of  his  kins
man,  Dr.  Valen
tine  Seaman,  under
whose  instructions
he  remained  till
1807,  at  the  same
time  attending  the

medical  lectures  at  Columbia  college,  which  gave*
him  his  degree  in  1806.  He  then  went  to  Lon
don,  became  a  pupil  of  Astley  Cooper,  studied
practical  anatomy  by  the  method  of  dissection,
visited  the  hospitals",  and  attended  the  lectures
of  the  chief  masters  of  surgery  in  that  city,  after
ward  spending  more  than  a  year  at  Edinburgh
under  the  instructions  of  eminent  teachers  of  the
university.  Returning  to  New  York  city  in  the
autumn  of  1809.  he  rapidly  attained  a  reputation
and  practice.  In  the  winter  of  1810  he  deliv
ered  a  private  course  of  lectures  on  surgery,  and
shortly  afterward  he  was  made  professor  of  surgery
in  Columbia  college.  In  1813  the  medical  faculty
withdrew  from  connection  with  the  college,  and
was  merged  in  the  College  of  physicians  and  sur
geons,  and  in  1826  the  trustees  of  this  institution
gave  offence  to  Dr.  Mott  and  his  associates,  who
formed  a  new  school  under  the  auspices  of  Rutgers
college,  and  subsequently  connected  themselves
with  the  college  at  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  but  were  com
pelled  to  close  their  institution  in  1830  on  account
of  a  decision  regarding  the  legal  right  to  confer
degrees.  Dr.  Mott  then  returned  to  the  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons,  as  professor  of  operative


442


MOTT


MOTT


surgery  and  surgical  and  pathological  anatomy.
In  1833  he  resigned  in  order  to  rest  from  exhaust
ing  labors  and  repair  his  health  by  travel.  He  was
already  recognized  in  Europe  as  one  of  the  first
surgeons  of  the  age.  After  a  visit  to  London  and
a  tour  on  the  continent,  he  returned  to  the  United
States  at  the  end  of  sixteen  months.  Finding  that
his  health  was  not  fully  restored,  he  returned  to
Europe,  and  made  annual  excursions  from  Paris
into  various  countries  till  1841,  when  he  came  back
to  New  York  completely  reinvigorated.  In  Paris
he  spent  much  time  in  the  hospitals,  and  became
interested  in  a  new  branch  of  orthopedic  surgery.
He  intended  to  open  an  institution  at  Blooming-
dale  for  the  treatment  of  orthopedic  cases  on  his
return,  but  was  dissuaded  by  his  friends.  When
visiting  Constantinople  he  removed  a  tumor  from
the  head  of  the  Sultan  Abdul  Medjid,  and  was  in
vested  for  this  service  with  the  order  of  the  Med-
jidieh.  lie  was  the  principal  founder  of  the  New
York  university  medical  college,  and  became  pro
fessor  of  surgery  and  relative  anatomy,  and  presi
dent  of  the  faculty  on  its  establishment  in  1841.
In  1850  his  lectures  were  interrupted  by  a  third
visit  to  Europe.  From  1853  till  his  death  he  was
emeritus  professor  and  lectured  occasionally  to
the  classes  every  year.  He  never  committed  to
memory  or  wrote  out  his  lectures,  but  spoke  from
carefully  digested  notes,  with  the  dissection  be
fore  him.  He  drew  his  subject-matter  and  illus
trations  largely  from  his  own  experience,  and  paid
little  attention  to  theories.  After  his  return  from
Europe  in  1841  he  was  again  surgeon  to  the  New
York  hospital  till  1850.  He  was  subsequently  for
fifteen  years  senior  consulting  surgeon  to  Belle-
vue  hospital,  and  for  different  periods  served  in
the  same  capacity  for  St.  Luke's,  the  Hebrew,
St.  Vincent's,  and  the  Women's  hospitals.  Dr.
Mott  early  gained  a  world-wide  reputation  for
boldness  and  originality  as  an  operative  surgeon.
Through  life  it  was  his  constant  practice  before
every  novel  or  important  operation  first  to  per
form  it  upon  the  cadaver.  When  but  thirty-three
years  of  age  he  was  the  first  to  place  a  ligature
around  the  innominate  artery  for  aneurism  of  the
right  subclavian  artery.  The  neighboring  arteries
became  involved,  and  the  patient  died  from  second
ary  haemorrhage,  due  to  ulceration  on  the  twenty-
third  day.  Dr.  von  Graefe,  of  Berlin,  repeated  the
operation  three  years  later,  with  the  same  result,
and  it  was  not  till  1864  that  Dr.  Andrew  W.
Smyth  performed  it  and  insured  the  recovery  of
the  patient  by  tying  also  the  common  carotid  and
the  vertebral  arteries.  In  1821  Dr.  Mott  excised
the  right  side  of  the  lower  jaw  for  osteo-sarcoma,
having  first  ligated  the  primitive  carotid  artery  in
order  to  prevent  haemorrhage,  and  afterward  he
thrice  removed  the  bone  at  the  temporo-maxillary
articulation.  He  performed  a  successful  amputa
tion  at  the  hip-joint  in  1824.  In  1827  he  ligated
the  common  iliac  artery  for  a  large  aneurism  of
the  external  iliac  artery,  placing  the  ligature  within
half  an  inch  of  the  aorta.  Tlie  artery  had  been
secured  once  before  for  the  arrest  of  haemorrhage,
with  a  fatal  result,  but  never  for  the  cure  of  aneu
rism.  Another  of  his  original  operations  was  cut
ting  out  two  inches  of  the  deep  jugular  vein,  which
was  imbedded  in  a  tumor.  He  was  also  the  first
surgeon  to  tie  both  ends  of  that  vein,  and  the  first
to  close  with  fine  ligatures  longitudinal  or  trans
verse  wounds  in  large  veins,  even  when  slices  had
been  cut  out.  lie  tied  the  common  carotid  artery
forty-six  times.  In  1828  he  removed  the  right
clavicle,  on  which  a  large  sarcomatous  tumor  had
formed  that  had  contracted  adhesions  with  impor


tant  structures  on  every  side.  In  this,  his  '•  Water
loo  operation."  as  he  called  it,  he  tied  the  jugular
vein  in  two  places  and  not  less  than  forty  arteries.
Although  the  patient  recovered,  it  was  thirty  years
before  any  surgeon  had  sufficient  confidence  in  his
dexterity,  strength,  and  knowledge  of  surgical
anatomy  to  attempt  a  similar  operation.  In  1830
he  effected  a  cure  for  hydrorachitis  or  cleft  spine,
removing  a  tumor  in  the  lower  part  of  the  back,
and  later  performed  the  same  operation  at  the
neck.  From  an  early  period  in  his  practice  he  was
remarkably  successful  in  rhinoplastic  operations,
and  in  many  instances  restored  the  form  of  cheeks
and  lips  that  had  been  badly  mutilated  through
the  excessive  use  of  mercury.  Immobility  of  the
lower  jaw,  caused  by  the  same  practice,  engaged
his  attention  soon  after  his  settlement  in  New
York  city,  and  he  finally  devised  an  instrument
on  the  screw  and  lever  principle  for  prying  open
the  jaw,  after  a  preliminary  operation  with  the
scalpel,  which  he  put  into  use  in  1822.  He  was
the  first  to  remove  the  lower  jaw  for  necrosis.
He  was  one  of  the  foremost  lithotomists  of  his
day,  operating  by  the  lateral  method  witli  the
bistoury.  He  removed  one  stone  that  weighed
more  than  seventeen  ounces,  and  operated  1(55
times  altogether,  losing  only  one  patient  in  twenty-
seven.  His  amputations  numbered  nearly  a  thou
sand.  Dr.  Mott  possessed  all  the  qualifications  for
a  great  operator.  II is  keenness  of  sight,  steadiness
of  nerve,  and  physical  vigor  were  extraordinary.
He  could  cut  with  one  hand  almost  as  well  as  with
the  other,  and  developed  a  dexterity  in  the  use  of
the  knife  that  has  never  been  surpassed.  He  culti
vated  and  refreshed  his  knowledge  of  surgical  and
pathological  anatomy  by  constant  dissections  and
post-mortem  examinations,  and  collected  a  large
museum  of  morbid  specimens,  at  a  period  when  the
law  obstructed  these  practical  methods  of  study
that  are  now  allowed  and  protected.  Although  the
most  intrepid  operator  of  his  age,  performing,  as
said  Sir  Astley  Cooper,  ''more  of  the  great  opera
tions  than  any  man  living,  or  that  ever  did  live,"
yet  he  was  a  friend  and  advocate  of  conservative
surgery,  and  never  performed  an  operation  without
weighing  the  question  of  its  necessity  with  much
deliberation.  His  success  in  capital  operations
was  due  not  simply  to  his  surgical  knowledge  and
skill,  but  in  a  large  measure  to  his  care  in  the  after-
treatment  of  the  patient  and  to  a  knowledge  of
therapeutics  that  brilliant  operators  rarely  possess.
In  addition  to  his  surgical  practice.  Dr.  Mott's  ser
vices  as  a  physician  were  often  sought.  He  in
vented  many  admirable  surgical  and  obstetrical
implements,  and  till  the  end  of  his  life  was  eager
to  adopt  in  practice  the  inventions  and  improve
ments  of  others  in  surgery  or  medicine.  The  intro
duction  of  anaesthetics  was  facilitated  by  his  early
and  frequent  use  of  them.  His  health  and  vigor
lasted  till  the  end  of  his  life,  and  in  his  old  age  he
was  still  able  to  perform  difficult  surgical  opera
tions.  In  18G4  lie  went  with  other  physicians  to
Annapolis  to  investigate  and  report  on  the  condi
tion  of  prisoners  of  war  released  from  Confederate
jails.  Dr.  Mott  received  the  honorary  degree  of
M.  D.  from  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  and  in
1851  that  of  LL.  D.  from  the  regents  of  the  New
York  state  university.  The  medical  societies  of
several  states  of  the  Union,  the  Imperial  academy
of  medicine  of  Paris,  the  Paris  clinical  society,  and
the  medical  and  chirurgical  societies  of  London
and  Brussels  each  made  him  a  fellow,  as  well  as
King's  and  Queen's  college  of  physicians  of  Ireland,
which  has  elected  only  twenty  new  members  within
two  hundred  years.  He  was  for  a  long  period


MOTT


MOTT


443


president  of  the  New  York  academy  of  medicine,
and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  president  of  the
New  York  inebriate  asylum.  Shortly  after  Dr.
Mott's  death  his  museum  of  anatomical  specimens
was  destroyed  in  the  fire  which  consumed  the
Medical  college  on  14th  street,  and  many  of  his
most  valuable  surgical  plates  and  preparations  were
consumed.  His  widow  succeeded  in  gathering
some  mementoes  of  his  laborious  life,  and  placed
them  in  a  building  at  04  Madison  avenue,  now
known  as  the  Mott  memorial,  which  was  incor
porated  in  1866.  and  is  now  under  the  special  care
of  his  son,  Prof.  Alexander  B.  Mott.  It  contains
a  library  of  nearly  4,000  volumes,  exclusively  on
medical  and  surgical  topics,  and  is  free  to  all
medical  students  and  physicians  on  application.
Dr.  Mott  created  a  trust  "in  his  will  by  virtue  of
which  one  gold,  one  silver,  and  one  copper  medal
are  bestowed  upon  the  three  graduates  of  the  New
York  university  medical  college  for  the  best  dried
anatomical  specimens.  After  returning  from  Eu
rope  in  1841  he  published  "Travels  in  Europe
and  the  East "  (New  York,  1842).  His  published
papers  on  surgical  topics  number  only  twenty-five,
though  some  of  them  are  of  great  length  and  illus
trated  with  numerous  drawings.  Literary  compo
sition  was  distasteful  to  him.  In  1818,  with  Drs.
John  Watts  and  Alexander  H.  Stevens,  the  other
professional  attendants  at  the  New  York  hospital,
he  established  the  "  New  York  Medical  and  Surgi
cal  Register,"  which  was  intended  to  chronicle  the
more  important  cases,  on  the  model  of  the  "  Dub
lin  Hospital  Reports,"  but  the  publication  was
continued  only  for  one  year.  He  supervised  the
translation  by  Dr.  Peter  S.  Townsend  of  Alfred  L.
M.  Velpeau's  "  Surgical  Anatomy,"  adding  a  pref
ace  and  copious  notes  and  illustrations  from  his
published  cases  and  reports,  filling  several  hun
dred  pages.  The  curvilinear  incision  in  resections
of  the  bones  and  operations  on  the  jaws,  to  which
Prof.  Velpeau  attached  much  importance,  was
mainly  originated  by  Dr.  Mott,  though  not  credited
to  him  in  the  French  treatise.  In  1862  he  pre
pared,  at  the  request  of  the  U.  S.  sanitary  commis
sion,  a  paper  on  the  use  of  anaesthetics  for  the  use
of  army  surgeons,  and  subsequently  a  tract  on  the
means  of  suppressing  haemorrhage  in  gun-shot
wounds,  which  was  intended  as  a  guide  for  the  use
of  soldiers  on  the  battle-field.  Several  of  his  pro
fessional  papers  were  published  in  the  '•  Transac
tions  "  of  the  New  York  academy  of  medicine,  and
one  was  presented  to  the  Royal" medical  and  chi-
rurgical  society  of  London,  treating  of  a  rare  con
genital  tumor  of  the  skin  called  pac-hydermatocele,
first  described  by  him.  fie  published  a  "  Sketch
of  the  Life  of  D"r.  Wright  Post."  His  inaugural
address  as  president  of  the  New  York  academy  of
medicine  was  printed;  also  an  address  entitled
"Reminiscences  of  Medical  Teaching  and  Teachers
in  New  York  "  (New  York,  1830) :  "  Address  before
the  Trustees  of  the  New  York  Inebriate  Asylum  at
Binghamton"  :  "Anniversary  Discourse  before  the
Graduates  of  the  University  of  New  York  "  (1860) ;
and  a  "  Eulogy  on  John  W.  Francis,  M.  D."  (1861).
Dr.  Samuel  W.  Francis  published  "  Mott's  Clin-
iques,"  being  an  abstract  of  his  later  clinical  lec
tures  (New  York.  1860).  See  "  Memoir  of  the  Life
and  Character  of  Mott,  Facile  Princeps,"  by  Sam
uel  W.  Francis  (New  York,  1865);  "Eulogy  on  the
Late  Valentine  Mott."  by  Alfred  C.  Post  (1865);
and  "Memoir  of  Valentine  Mott,"  by  Samuel  D.
Gross  (Philadelphia,  1868). — His  son,  Valentine,
physician,  b.  in  New  York  city.  22  July,  1822 :  d.
in  New  Orleans,  La.,  20  Sept.,  1854,  was" graduated
at  the  medical  department  of  the  University  of  the


city  of  New  York  in  1846  and  then  became  his
father's  assistant  and  prosector.  His  health  be
coming  impaired,  he  went  to  Palermo,  Sicily,  where
he  was  the  first  to  introduce  chloroform  and  ether
in  connection  with  operations  in  surgery,  and  at
tained  to  great  reputation.  Subsequently  he  was
identified  with  the  rebellion  in  Sicily  and  was  made
surgeon-general  of  the  insurgent  forces.  Dr.  Mott
was  also  active  in  the  field  as  colonel  of  cavalry,
and  at  one  time,  at  the  head  of  900  men,  cut  his
way  through  a  superior  force  of  the  regular  troops,
reaching  Palermo  after  losing  one  third  of  his  sol
diers.  He  opposed  the  surrender  of  that  city,  and
when  its  capitulation  was  decided  upon  he  escaped
by  means  of  an  English  vessel.  On  his  return  to
the  United  States  he  was  elected  professor  of  sur
gery  in  the  Medical  college  of  Baltimore,  and  was
the  first  to  establish  a  public  clinic  in  that  city.
His  health  again  compelled  him  to  travel,  and  he
sought  relief  in  California.  There  the  news  of  the
new  insurrections  in  Italy  reached  him.  and  he  at
once  started  for  the  field  of  action,  but  was  stricken
with  yellow  fever  while  passing  through  New  Or-
leans'and  there  died. — Another  son  of  Valentine,
Alexander  Brown,  surgeon,  b.  in  New  York  city,
31  March.  1826,  went  to  Europe  with  the  family  in
1836,  and  received  a  classical  education  during  their
five  years'  residence  abroad.  Visiting  Europe  again
in  1842,  he  travelled  for  five  years  and  underwent
many  adventures.  Returning  to  New  York  city,
he  studied  medicine  in  his  father's  office  and  in  the
University  medical  college,  and  afterward  at  the
Vermont  academy  of  medicine  in  Castleton,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1850.  He  began  practice  in
New  York  city,  and  at  the  same  time  attended  lec
tures  in  the  New  York  medical  college,  from  which
he  received  a  diploma  in  1851.  In  1850  he  was  ap
pointed  surgeon  to  the  New  York  dispensary.  He
also  became  in  1853  visiting  surgeon  to  St.  Vin
cent's  hospital,  which  he  had  assisted  in  founding
in  1849,  was  attending  surgeon  in  the  Jewish  hospi
tal  in  1855-'63,  and  for  fourteen  years  was  surgeon
to  the  Charity  hospital.  In  1857  he  obtained  the  de
gree  of  M.  D.  from  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania.  In  1859  he  was  ap
pointed  attending  surgeon  at  Bellevue  hospital,
and  subsequently  consulting  surgeon  to  the  Bureau
of  medical  and  surgical  relief  to  the  outdoor  poor
in  New  York  city.  In  April,  1861,  he  undertook
the  organization  of  the  medical  corps  of  the  mili
tia  regiments  that  were  sent  to  the  seat  of  war,  sub
sequently  acted  as  medical  director  in  New  York,
and  founded,  with  the  co-operation  of  patriotic-
ladies,  the  U.  S.  army  general  hospital  in  New
York,  of  which  he  was  made  surgeon  in  charge,  re
ceiving  on  7  Nov.,  1862,  the  commission  of  surgeon
of  U.  S.  volunteers,  with  the  rank  of  major.
Toward  the  close  of  1864  he  was  made  medical  in
spector  of  the  Department  of  Virginia,  and  attached
to  Gen.  Edward  0.  C.  Ord's  staff.  He  was  present
at  the  conference  between  Gens.  Grant  and  Lee
where  the  terms  of  surrender  were  arranged.  He
was  mustered  out  of  the  service  on  27  July,  1865,
with  the  brevet  rank  of  colonel.  Dr.  Mott  was  one
of  the  founders  of  Bellevue  medical  college,  and
was  professor  of  surgical  anatomy  from  its  opening
on  31  March,  1861,  till  1872,  and  since  that  date  has
been  professor  of  clinical  and  operative  surgery.
Among  the  important  operations  performed  by  Dr.
Mott  are  the  ligat ion  of  the  common  and  internal
carotid,  the  subclavian,  the  innominata,  the  com
mon,  internal,  and  external  iliac,  and  the  femoral
arteries ;  resection  of  the  femur;  two  amputations
at  the  hip-joint :  exsection  of  the  ulna:  removal  of
the  entire  jaw  for  phosphor-necrosis  twice ;  and  nu-


444


MOTT


MOTTK


merous  operations  of  lithotomy. — Another  son  of
Valentine,  Thaddeus  Phelps,  soldier,  1>.  in  New
York  city,  7  Dec.,  1831,  was  educated  in  the  Uni
versity  of  New  York.  In  1848-'9  he  served  as  sub
lieutenant  in  Italy.  In  1850,  on  account  of  ill
health,  he  shipped  before  the  mast  on  the  clipper
ship  "  Hornet  "  for  California.  He  was  third  mate
of  the  clipper  "  Hurricane  "  in  1851,  second  mate
of  the  ship  "St.  Denis"  in  1852,  mate  of  the  "  St.
Nicholas "  in  1854,  and  returned  to  California  in
1855.  He  served  in  Mexico  under  Ignacio  Comon-
fort  in  1850-'7.  In  1801  he  became  captain  of
Mott's  battery  in  the  3d  Independent  New  York
artillery.  He  was  made  captain  in  the  19th  V.  S.
infantry  in  1802,  lieutenant-colonel  of  cavalry  in
1803,  and  later  colonel  of  the  14th  New  York  cav
alry,  and  chief  of  outposts  in  the  Department  of  the
Gulf  under  Gen.  William  B.  Franklin.  He  re
signed  in  1804,  and  in  1807  was  nominated  as
minister  resident  to  Costa  Rica,  but  declined.  He
went  to  Turkey  in  1808,  and  was  appointed  in  1809
major-general  and  ferik-pacha  in  the  Egyptian
army.  In  1870  he  was  made  first  aide-de-camp  to
the  khedive.  In  1874,  his  contract  with  Egypt
having  expired,  he  refused  to  renew  it,  and  in  1875
went  to  Turkey,  where  he  remained  during  the
Servian  and  Russo-Turkish  wars.  In  187!)  he  set
tled  in  Toulon,  France,  on  account  of  his  health.
In  1808  Gen.  Mott  was  named  by  the  sultan  grand
officer  of  the  imperial  order  of  the  Medjidieh.  In
1872  he  was  made  grand  officer  of  the  imperial
order  of  the  Osmanien,  and- in  1878  he  was  given
the  war  medal  of  the  "  Croissant  Rouge  "  nomina-
tif,  of  which  but  eighteen  had  been  awarded,  the
sultan  himself  being  one  of  the  number. — Alex
ander  Brown's  son,  Valentine,  physician,  b.  in
New  York  city,  17  Nov.,  1852,  was  graduated  at
Columbia  in  1872,  and  then  studied  natural  sci
ence  at  Cambridge,  England,  where  he  was  gradu
ated  in  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Bellevue  medi
cal  college  in  1878,  and  began  practice  in  New
York  city.  He  has  been  attending  surgeon  for  the
out-door  department  of  Bellevue  hospital  since
1879,  and  has  performed  many  of  the  larger  opera
tions  in  surgery.  In  May,  1887,  he  went  to  Paris  as
the  representative  of  the  American  Pasteur  insti
tute,  and  studied  under  Louis  Pasteur  the  prophy
lactic  treatment  for  hydrophobia,  which  he  in
troduced  into  the  United  States,  bringing  away
the  first  inoculated  rabbit  that  Pasteur  allowed  to
leave  his  laboratory.  He  has  successfully  treated
many  that  have  been  bitten  by  rabid  animals.
His  principal  medical  paper  is  '•  Rabies  and  How
to  Prevent  it,  being  a  Discussion  of  Hydrophobia
and  the  Pasteur  Method  of  Treatment."— A  grand
son  of  the  first  Valentine,  Henry  Augustus,  chem
ist,  b.  in  Clifton,  Staten  island,  N.  Y.,  22  Oct.,  1852.
He  was  graduated  at  the  Columbia  college  school  of
mines  in  1873  with  the  degrees  of  engineer  of  mines
and  bachelor  of  philosophy,  and  in  1875  received
his  doctorate  in  course.  Dr.  Mott  at  once  directed
his  attention  to  technical  chemistry,  and  held  con
sulting  relations  to  sugar,  soda,  oleomargarine,  and
other  industries.  His  connection  with  the  manu
facture  of  artificial  butter  dates  from  its  introduc
tion  into  the  United  States,  and  his  process  for
preventing  the  crystallization  of  the  butter  made
possible  the  commercial  success  of  the  product.
In  the  domain  of  food  chemistry  his  investigations
are  numerous,  and  for  three  years  the  supplies
that  were  purchased  by  the  Indian  department
were  examined  by  him. "  Dr.  Mott  has  frequently
appeared  in  court  as  an  expert,  and  he  has  conducted
numerous  investigations  for  private  persons.  In
1881-'G  he  was  professor  of  chemistry  in  New  York


medical  college  and  hospital  for  women.  Dr.  Mott
was  the  first  to  question  the  validity  of  the  wave
theory  of  sound,  and  asserts  that  he  has  shown  its
fallacy.  He  has  devoted  much  attention  to  the
so-called  "  philosophy  of  substantialism,"  and  his
latest  investigations  and  papers  have  been  prepared
to  establish  the  entitative  nature  of  force,  claiming
that  it  has  as  much  objective  existence  as  matter,
though  not  material :  also  in  accumulating  data  to
show  the  fallacy  of  the  wave  theory  of  sound.  He
received  the  degree  of  LL.  I),  from  the  University
of  Florida  in  1880,  and  is  a  member  of  the  chem
ical  societies  of  London,  Paris,  Berlin,  and  New
York,  and  of  other  scientific  associations.  The  titles
of  his  scientific  papers  in  various  departments  of
chemistry  and  philosophy  are  very  numerous,  lie
has  published  "  The  Chemist's  Manual  "  (New  York,
1878) ;  "  Was  Man  Created  1 "  (1880) ;  "  The  Air  we
Breathe  and  Ventilation  "  (1881) ;  and  "  The  Fal
lacy  of  the  Present  Theory  of  Sound  "  (1885).

MOTT.  William  Franklin,  philanthropist,  b.
in  New  York  city.  12  Jan..  1785;  d.  there,  3  May,
1807.  He  was  a  cousin  of  Valentine  Mott.  Early
in  the  present  century,  in  partnership  with  his
brother,  Samuel  F.,  he  established  the  first  house  in
New  York  that  carried  on  the  domestic  commis
sion  business.  This  trade  increased  rapidly  during
the  war  of  1812-'15,  when  an  embargo  shut  out
foreign  goods.  He  retired  from  business  about
1830,  and  during  the  remainder  of  his  life  was  en
gaged  in  works  of  benevolence.  He  labored  to
prevent  the  inhuman  treatment  of  foundling  chil
dren  when  they  were  farmed  out  by  the  city  au
thorities,  and  also  to  check  cruelty  to  animals,  long
before  there  was  a  society  for  the  purpose.  He
was  an  active  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,
and  ji  founder  or  benefactor  of  many  charitable
corporations,  among  them  the  Manumission  so
ciety,  established  in  1807.  the  House  of  refuge,  the
Eastern  dispensary,  the  Home  for  the  friendless,
the  Colored  orphans'  asylum,  the  Institution  for
the  instruction  of  the  deaf  and  dumb,  and  the
Woman's  hospital.

MOTT  A  FEO  E  TORRES,  Lniz  tie  (mot'-tah),
Portuguese  naval  officer,  b.  in  Lisbon,  10  March.
1709;  d.  there,  20  May.  1823.  He  entered  the
navy  in  1780  as  lieutenant,  and  served  in  Brazil.
He  was  given  command  in  1800  of  a  squadron  of
seven  men-of-war,  escorted  a  convoy  of  114  vessels
to  Rio  Janeiro,  and  afterward  devastated  the  Span
ish  colonies  of  South  America.  In  1802  he  was  ap
pointed  governor  of  the  province  of  Paraiba,  in
Brazil,  and  administered  it  with  great  efficiency
till  1807,  when  he  was  sent  to  serve  under  Welling
ton  in  Portugal.  In  1811  he  was  appointed  gov
ernor-general  of  the  northern  provinces  of  Brazil,
remaining  there  till  1810.  when  he  became  captain-
general  of  Angola.  Three  years  later  he  was  given
the  presidency  of  the  council  for  the  colonies,  and
at  his  death  he  was  a  vice-admiral.

MOTTE,  Emmanuel  Auguste  Le  Cahidouc,
Cointe  (In  Boys  de  la  (mott),  French  naval  officer,
b.  in  Rennes,  7  June,  1083 ;  d.  in  his  castle  of  Des
Mottes,  near  Rennes.  23  Oct.,  1704.  He  entered
the  navy  as  a  midshipman  in  1098,  and  for  his
valor  during  the  expedition  to  Rio  Janeiro  in  June,
1711,  was  promoted  captain.  He  was  employed
afterward  in  the  West  Indies  and  in  Canada,  and
gained,  on  28  Nov.,  1747,  off  Martinique,  a  brilliant
naval  victory  over  the  English.  He  was  promoted
rear-admiral  in  1751,  and  appointed  in  June  of  the
same  year  governor-general  of  Santo  Domingo  and
the  French  possessions  in  the  West  Indies  west  of
Martinique.  Gov.  Motto  fixed  his  residence  in
Port  au  Prince,  and  did  much  to  improve  the


MOTTE


MOULD


445


colony.  During  his  administration  the  French  !
possessions  attained  great  prosperity.  La  Motte
founded  the  city  of  Jeremie.  and  built,  both  in  \
Cape  Fram;ais  and  Port  au  Prince,  navy-yards  that  .
soon  rivalled  that  of  Martinique,  also  opening  high
roads,  erecting  bridges,  draining  marshes,  import-  •
ing  from  Europe  many  useful  trees  and  seeds,
founding  public  libraries  in  all  the  principal  cities,
and  establishing  schools  everywhere  for  the  negroes.
He  was  succeeded  in  1753  by  the  Marquis  de  Vau-
dreuil,  to  the  great  regret  of  all  the  inhabitants,
and  was  sent  to  command  a  fleet  in  Canada.  In
1737  he  received  orders  to  relieve  Louisburg,  and
gained  a  decisive  victory  over  a  superior  English
force,  which  has  been  often  celebrated  by  marine
painters.  He  was  promoted  vice-admiral  in  17(52,
and  was  employed  till  the  conclusion  of  peace  in
Canada  and  the  West  Indies,  retiring  after  the
treaty  of  Paris  in  1703.  His  statue  was  erected
afterward  in  Port  au  Prince,  but  it  was  destroyed
during  the  troubles  of  1792.

MOTTE,  tinillaiime  Tonssaint.  Comte  Pie-
(juet  de  la,  generally  called  MOTTE  PICQUET,
French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Rennes  in  1720;  d.  in
Brest,  11  July,  1791.  He  entered  the  navy  as  mid
shipman  in  1733,  and  in  1745-'50  served  in  Canada.
During  the  war  of  175I5-'G3  he  was  employed  there
and  in  the  West  Indies,  with  the  rank  of  commodore,
and  was  promoted  rear-admiral  at  the  beginning  of
the  war  of  1778,  and  charged  with  escorting  to  the
United  States  a  fleet  of  eighty  vessels.  In  the  fol
lowing  year  he  brought  re-enforcements  to  Marti
nique,  and,  joining  d'Estaing,  contributed  to  the
capture  of  Grenada  in  1779,  and  the  victories  over
Admiral  Byron  in  June  of  that  year,  being  after
ward  sent  with  a  division  to  Savannah.  On  18  Dec.,
1779,  he  defeated  Admiral  Parker  off  Martinique.
In  the  following  January  he  made  a  successful  cruise
around  the  Bahama  islands,  capturing  many  Eng
lish  merchant  ships,  and  escorted  a  convoy  safely  I
to  Cape  Haytian,  after  a  successful  engagement
with  the  English.  He  then  joined  de  Guichen,
but  returned  a  few  months  later  to  Europe,  captur
ing  on  his  arrival  a  fleet  of  twenty  vessels  that  car-  I
ried  booty  that  had  been  taken  in  the  Dutch  colony  i
of  St.  Eustatius.  He  was  promoted  vice-admiral
in  1782,  but  retired  from  active  command  after  the
conclusion  of  peace  in  1783.

MOTTE,  Isaac,  soldier,  b.  in  South  Carolina,  8
Dec.,  1738; d.  there,  8 May,  1795. His father,
Jacob,  who  was  Dutch  consul  at  Dublin,  Ireland,
and  after  he  emigrated  to  this  country  for  many
years  treasurer  of  the  province  of  South  Carolina,
was  the  son  of  a  Huguenot  named  De  la  Motte,
who  fled  from  France  into  Holland  in  1(585. He
received  a  military  education,  and  served  in  Canada  j
in  175(5. In  July,  1775,  by  order  of  the  committee
of  safety,  he  landed  on  James  island  with  three
companies of William Moultrie's regiment, of
which  he  was  lieutenant-colonel,  and  took  posses
sion  of  Fort  Johnson  in  sight  of  the  British  fleet
in  Charleston  harbor. He  bore  a  conspicuous  part
in  the  defence  of  Fort  Moultrie,  where  he  was  sec
ond  in  command. In  1780-'2  he  represented  South
Carolina  in  the  Continental  congress. He  was  a  j
member  of  the  State  convention  that  ratified  the  >
U.  S.  constitution,  and  was  appointed  by  President  j
Washington  naval  officer  of  the  port  of  Charleston,  i
holding  that  office  till  his  death. — His  sister-in-
law,  Rebecca  Brewton,  heroine,  b.  in  South  Caro-  >
lina  in  1739 ;  d.  there  in  1815,  was  the  daughter  of  j
an  Englishman  who  settled  in  South  Carolina,  and  i
married  Jacob  Motte  in  1758. Her  husband  died  ;
during  the  Revolution,  leaving  his  large  estate  en
cumbered  beyond  its  value  by  debts  that  he  had  |


incurred  by  giving  security  for  friends.  During
the  occupation  of  South  Carolina  by  the  British,
her  mansion  in  Orangeburg  county,  on  Congaree
river,  was  seized  by  the  invaders,  who  built  around
it  a  high  parapet,  while  she  retired  with  her  family
to  a  farm-house  on  the  plantation.  Francis  Marion
and  Henry  Lee  laid  siege  to  Fort  Motte,  as  the
post  was  called,  and,  when  informed  of  the  approach
of  British  re-enforcements,  deliberated  over  the
plan  of  setting  fire  to  the  house,  but  were  reluctant
to  destroy  Mrs.  Motte's  property.  She  dispelled
their  scruples,  and  brought  out  an  African  bow
and  arrows  specially  adapted  for  the  purpose,  with
which  thereof  was  ignited,  causing  the  garrison  to
surrender  speedily.  Mrs.  Motte  then  provided  a
banquet  for  the  officers  on  both  sides.  Assuming
all  her  husband's  liabilities,  after  the  war  of  inde
pendence  she  purchased  on  credit  a  tract  of  rice
land  on  Santee  river,  and  by  her  energy  and  econo
my  paid  all  the  debts  that  he  had  incurred  and
accumulated  a  large  property.  Her  two  eldest
daughters  married  in  succession  Thomas  Pinckney.

MOULAC,  Vincent  Marie  (moo-lack),  French
mariner,  b.  in  Lorient,  12  March,  1780 ;  d.  in  Callao,
Peru.  6  April,  1836.  He  entered  the  navy  as  mid
shipman  in  1796,  became  lieutenant  in  1802,  and
served  in  Santo  Domingo,  but  resigned  in  1803  to
become  a  corsair.  He  re-entered  the  navy  in  1808,
became  1st  lieutenant  in  1812,  and  was  sent  to
cruise  in  the  West  Indies  from  1815  till  1822.  He
had  occasion  to  protect  the  white  population  in
Santo  Domingo  against  the  excited  negroes,  and
in  1821  saved  many  citizens  in  Port  au  Prince,  re
ceiving  them  on  board  his  vessel,  and  threatening
to  bombard  the  city.  He  became  a  commodore
in  1828.  and,  after  the  usurpation  of  Don  Miguel,
forced  the  entrance  of  the  harbor  of  Lisbon,  which
had  been  considered  impregnable.  In  1832  he  was
sent  to  command  the  station  of  the  South  sea,  and
during  an  insurrection  in  Peru  he  defended  the
European  inhabitants  against  mobs  in  Callao  and
saved  the  lives  and  property  of  many  citizens.  For
his  services  the  foreign  residents  voted  him  a  sword
of  honor.  When  he  died  of  yellow  fever  in  1836,
the  Peruvian  government  ordered  a  magnificent
funeral,  and  his  remains  were  placed  in  the  pan
theon  of  Lima.

MOULD,  Jacob  TVrey,  architect,  b.  in  Chisel-
hurst,  Kent,  England,  in  1825 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  14  June,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at  King's
college,  London,  in  1842.  and  studied  under  Owen
Jones,  the  celebrated  architect,  with  whom  he
spent  two  years  in  Spain  in  studying  the  Alham-
bra.  The  impression  that  was  made  on  him  by  the
Moorish  style  of  architecture  had  much  influence
on  his  subsequent  work.  With  Mr.  Jones  he  de
signed  the  Moresque-Turkish  divan  of  Bucking
ham  palace,  and  the  decorations  of  the  exposition
building  of  the  World's  fair  of  1851.  He  came  to
New  York  in  1853,  by  invitation  of  Moses  II.  Grin-
nell,  to  design  and  biiild  All  Souls'  church.  In  1857
he  was  appointed  assistant  architect  of  public  works,
in  which  capacity  he  furnished  designs  for  the  ter
race,  bridges,  and  other  architectural  structures  in
Central  park.  In  1870  he  became  chief  architect.
In  1874  Mr.  Mould  went  to  Lima,  Peru,  but  he  re
turned  after  a  few  years  and  continued  his  work  in
Central  park  until" his  death.  Mr.  Mould  was  an
able  and  enthusiastic  musician,  and  a  good  per
former  on  the  piano  and  organ.  He  was  a  fluent
linguist,  and  successful  in  the  adaptation  of  Eng
lish  words  to  foreign  operas,  and  his  services  were
in  frequent  demand  by  music-publishers,  both  in
England  and  the  United  States.  His  last  work
was  the  design  for  the  temporary  tomb  of  Gen.


446


MOULTON


Grant  in  Riverside  park,  which  he  executed  in  a
few  minutes.  Mr.  Mould  illustrated  the  second
volume  of  Owen  Jones's  "Alhambra"  (London,
1848),  assisted  him  in  his  "  Grammar  of  Orna
ment  "  (1856),  and  also  illustrated  editions  of
Gray's  "  Elegy  in  a  Country  Church- Yard  "  and
the  '"  Book  of  Common  Prayer."

MOULTON,  Louise  Chandler,  author,  b.  in
Pomfret,  Conn.,  5  April,  1835.  She  was  edu
cated  at  Mrs.  Emma  Willard's  seminary  in  Troy,
N.  Y.  Miss  Chandler  began  to  contribute  to  pe
riodicals  under  the  name  of  "  Ellen  Louise "  at
the  age  of  fifteen,  published  at  nineteen  her  first
book,  which  was  very  successful,  and  after  her
marriage  in  1855  to  William  U.  Moulton,  a  pub
lisher  of  Boston,  Mass.,  continued  to  write  for  the
magazines,  was  long  the  Boston  correspondent  on
literary  topics  of  the  New  York  "  Tribune,"  and
sent  le'tters  on  society  and  literature  to  newspapers
from  London  and  Paris.  Her  published  works  are
"  This,  That,  and  the  Other,"  stories,  essays,  and
poems  (Boston,  1854) ;  "  Juno  Clifford,"  a  novel,
which  was  issued  anonymously  (New  York,  1855) ;
"My  Third  Book,"  containing  short  stories  (1859);
"  Bed-Time  Stories,"  a  book  for  children  (Boston,
1873);  "Some  Women's  Hearts"  (1874);  "More
Bed-Time  Stories  "  (1875) ;  "  Poems  "  (1877) ;  "  Swal
low-Flights  and  Other  Poems  "  (1878);  "  New  Bed-
Time  Stories  "  (1880) ;  "  Random  Rambles  "  (1881) ;
"Firelight  Stories"  (1883);  and  "Ourselves  and
Our  Neighbors:  Short  Chats  on  Social  Topics"
(1887).  In  1887  she  edited  and  prefaced  with  a
biographical  sketch  the  "  Garden  Secrets  "  of  Philip
Bourke  Marston.

MOULTON,  Jeremiah,  soldier,  b.  in  York.  Me.,
in  1(588 :  d.  there,  20  July,  1705.  When  York  was
destroyed  by  the  Indians  in  1092,  he  was  carried
into  captivity,  but  with  other  children  was  re
turned  after  the  release  by  Benjamin  Church  of
some  Indian  women  and  children.  He  took  an
active  part  in  the  conflicts  between  the  English
settlers  and  the  eastern  Indians  in  Queen  Anne's
war.  In  1722  he  led  an  expedition  against  the
village  of  Norridgewock,  and,  finding  it  deserted,
carried  off  the  papers  of  Sebastian  Rale,  but  left
the  church  and  houses  standing.  On  23  Aug..
1724,  he  attacked  the  village  with  200  men.  The
Indians  were  taken  by  surprise  and  tried  to  escape
across  Kennebec  river,  but  were  killed  in  the  water,
not  more  than  fifty  reaching  the  other  shore.  The
English  slew  many  of  the  women  and  children  and
shot  Father  Rale,  who  came  out  of  his  cabin  to  ex
postulate,  notwithstanding  Moulton's  orders  that
his  life  be  spared.  The  village  and  chapel  were  de
molished,  and  the  Norridgewock  Indians  were  never
heard  of  more.  In  1745  Col.  Moulton  commanded
a  regiment  at  the  reduction  of  Louisbourg.  He
was  subsequently  sheriff,  a  member  of  the  council,
judge  of  common  pleas,  and  probate  judge.

MOULTON,  Joseph  White,  historian,  b.  in
Stratford,  Conn.,  in  June,  1789  ;  d.  in  Roslyn,  L.  I.,
20  April,  1875.  His  family  removed  to  Troy,  N.  Y.,
where  he  studied  law.  After  his  admission  to  the
bar  he  settled  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.  He  subsequently
resided  in  New  York  city,  and  finally  retired  to
Roslyn,  where  he  devoted  himself  entirely  to  an
tiquarian  and  legal  researches.  He  published,
with  John  V.  N.  Yates,  "  A  History  of  the  State  of
New  York,"  treating  merely  of  the  earlier  period
of  its  history  (New  York,  1824-'6) ;  "  Chancery
Practice  of  New  York  "  (3  vols.,  1829-'32) ;  "  View
of  the  City  of  New  Orange  as  it  was  in  1673"
(1849);  and  an  annotated  edition  of  John  F.  Mit-
ford's  "Treatise  on  Pleadings  in  the  Court  of
Chancery  "  (1849).


MOFLTRIE,  William,  patriot,  b.  in  England
in  1731 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  27  Sept.,  1805.
His  father,  Dr.  John  Moultrie,  came  to  this  coun
try  from  Scotland  about  1733  and  practised  with
reputation  in
Charleston  until
his  death  in
1773.  William
in  1761  was  ap
pointed  a  cap
tain  of  foot  in
a  militia  regi
ment  that  was
raised  to  defend
the  South  Caro
lina  frontier
against  the  in
cursions  of  the
Cherokees.  He
thus  gained  a
knowledge  of
military  affairs
that  proved  of
value  to  him  in
the  subsequent
war  of independ
ence.  At  the  be
ginning  of  the  Revolutionary  war  Moultrie,  at  once
espoused  the  patriot  cause,  although  several  of  his
family  remained  loyal  to  the  crown.  He  was  ap
pointed  to  the  command  of  the  2d  colonial  regi
ment,  and  also  represented  the  parish  of  St.  Helena
in  the  Continental  congress  of  1775.  Early  in
June,  1770,  on  the  approach  of  a  British  land  and
naval  force  under  Sir  Henry  Clinton  and  Admiral
Sir  Peter  Parker  to  invest  Charleston,  Moultrie
was  ordered  to  complete  a  fortress  on  Sullivan's
island,  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbor,  which  he  had
been  engaged  in  building  since  the  previous  March,
and  he  was  still  busy  at  the  work  when  the  enemy
made  his  appearance.  On  the  morning  of  the  28th
five  of  the  fleet  began  to  cannonade  the  unfinished
fortification  ;  but  the  repeated  broadsides  produced
little  or  no  effect,  owing  to  the  soft,  spongy  charac
ter  of  the  palmetto-wood  of  which  it  was  con
structed.  Col.  Moultrie,  on  the  other  hand,  having
but  a  limited  supply  of  ammunition,  discharged
his  guns  with  such  deliberation  that  every  shot
told  upon  the  hulls  or  rigging  of  the  enemy.  So
great  was  the  slaughter  on  board  the  admiral's
ship,  the  "  Bristol,"  that  at  one  time  only  Sir  Peter
Parker  remained  on  the  quarter-deck.  At  sunset,
after  a  nine  hours'  engagement,  only  one  of  the
guns  on  the  fort  having  been  dismounted,  the  ene
my's  fire  began  to  slacken,  the  "  Bristol "  and  "  Ex
periment  "  being  so  riddled  as  almost  to  have  be
come  wrecks.  At  half-past  nine  in  the  evening  the
attack  was  abandoned,  and  several  weeks  after  the
discomfited  squadron  returned  to  the  north.  In
commemoration  of  Moultne's  bravery  in  defending
the  fort  it  was  subsequently  called  by  his  name.
He  was  soon  afterward  commissioned  brigadier-
general  in  the  Continental  army,  and  had  charge
of  the  military  interests  of  Georgia  and  South
Carolina.  In  February,  1779,  he  defeated  a  supe
rior  British  force  under  Col.  Gardiner  near  Beau
fort.  In  the  latter  part  of  April,  Gen.  Augustine
Prevost,  taking  advantage  of  the  absence  of  Gen.
Benjamin  Lincoln  with  most  of  the  Continental
troops  in  Georgia,  advanced  upon  Charleston  with
a  large  force  of  British  regulars  and  Tories.  Moiil-
trie,  who  was  stationed  on  the  north  side  of  Sa
vannah  river  with  1,000  or  1,200  militia,  hastened
to  throw  himself  in  Prevost's  path,  and  by  re
tarding  the  progress  of  the  enemy  enabled  the


MOUNT


MOUNTAIN


447


people  of  Charleston  to  place  themselves  in  a  con
dition  of  defence.  The  return  of  Lincoln  from
Georgia  subsequently  compelled  Prevost  to  fall
back  on  Savannah.  Again  in  the  spring  of  1780
Charleston  was  attacked  by  a  strong  land  and  sea
force,  and  Moultrie,  who  was  second  in  command,
shared  in  the  capitulation  of  the  American  troops.
During  his  imprisonment,  which  lasted  nearly  two
years,  he  was  several  times  approached  by  British
officers  with  offers  of  pecuniary  compensation  and
the  command  of  a  regiment  in  Jamaica  if  he  would
leave  the  American  service.  "  Not  the  fee-simple
of  all  Jamaica,"  was  his  reply,  "  should  induce  me
to  part  with  my  integrity."  After  his  release  in
1782  congress  made  him  a  major-general,  but  too
late  to  enable  him  to  render  his  country  any  further
service.  In  1785  he  was  elected  governor  of  South
Carolina,  and  again  in  1794.  Retiring  shortly  af
terward  to  private  life,  he  devoted  his  remaining
years  to  the  preparation  of  his  "  Memoirs  of  the
American  Revolution  so  far  as  it  Related  to  the
States  of  Noi'th  and  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  "
(2  vols.,  New  York,  1802).— His  elder  brother.  John,
received  the  degree  of  M.  D.  at  Edinburgh  univer
sity,  rose  to  eminence  in  his  profession,  and  during
the  Revolution,  espousing  the  royal  cause,  was  gov
ernor  of  East  Florida. — His  cousin.  James,  physi
cian,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  27  March,  1793  ;  d.
there  in  April,  1869.  He  was  graduated  at  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl
vania  in  1812,  and  succeeded  his  father  as  port
physician  of  Charleston,  S.  C.,  and  physician  to
the  jail  and  the  Magazine  guards.  In  1820  he  was  j
president  of  the  State  medical  society,  and  on  the  I
organization  of  the  Medical  college  of  South  Caro
lina  in  1824  he  was  elected  professor  of  anatomy,
but  declined.  In  1833  he  was  elected  to  the  chair
of  physiology  and  accepted,  retaining  it  until  1867.
On  the  formation  of  the  American  medical  asso
ciation  in  Philadelphia  in  1847  he  was  chosen  vice-
president,  and  he  was  made  president  at  the  annual
meeting  at  Charleston  in  1851.  He  was  devoted
to  the  study  of  natural  history,  and  in  the  inter
vals  of  his  professional  duties  made  large  contribu
tions  to  the  different  departments  of  zoology.  He
was  also  a  thorough  musician,  and  pursued  his
investigations  into  the  more  recondite  laws  of
acoustics  governing  musical  sounds.

MOUNT,  William  Sidney,  painter,  b.  in  Se-
tauket,  L.  I.,  26  Nov.,  1807 ;  d.  there,  19  Nov.,  |
1868.  Until  the  age  of  seventeen  he  was,  as  he
has  said,  a  "  hard-working  farmer's-boy."  At  that  j
time  he  went  to  New  York,  where  he  became  asso
ciated  with  his  elder  brother,  Henry  S.  Mount,  as  :
a  sign-painter ;  but  his  capacity  for  a  higher  order
of  art  soon  became  evident,  and  he  was  enrolled  as
a  student  at  the  National  academy  of  design  in
1826.  His  first  picture,  a  portrait  of  himself,  was
painted  in  1828,  and  a  year  later  he  established
himself  as  a  portrait-painter  in  New  York.  He
was  elected  an  associate  in  1831  and  academician
in  1832.  The  first  painting  that  he  exhibited  was
'•  The  Daughter  of  Jairus,"  which  was  followed  by
other  works  of  a  similar  character.  He  soon  after
ward  returned  to  Setauket  and  devoted  himself  al
most  wholly  to  genre  painting.  "  A  Rustic  Dance,"
his  first  picture  of  this  class,  had  been  exhibited
in  1830.  Among  his  subsequent  works  are  "  Men
Husking  Corn";  "Walking  the  Crack";  "The
Courtship  "  ;  •'  Sportsman's  Last  Visit  "  (1835) ;
"  Farmers  Nooning"  (1837);  "The  Raffle"  (1837);
"  Bargaining  for  a  Horse"  and  "  The  Truant  Gam
blers,"  in  the  New  York  historical  society :  "  Wring
ing  the  Pigs  "  ;  "  The  Lucky  Throw  "  ;  "  Boys  Trap
ping  "  (1839) ;  "  Dance  of  the  Haymakers  "  (1845) :


"Power  of  Music"  (1847):  "Music  is  Conta
gious  "  ;  "  Raffling  for  a  Goose  "  ;  "  Turn  of  the
Leaf  "  (1849) :  "  Cider- Making  on  Long  Island  " ;
"  Who'll  turn  the  Grindstone  f  "  (1851) ;  "  Fortune-
Teller  " ;  "  California  News  "  ;  "  Banjo  -  Player  "
(1858) ;  "  Right  and  Left " ;  "  Just  in  Time  "  (1860);
"  Early  Impressions  are  Lasting "  (1864) ;  and
"  Mutual  Respect  "  (1868).  Many  of  these  were  en
graved  and  lithographed  by  Goupil  and  others  in
Europe.  His  portraits  include  those  of  James
Rivington.  Jeremiah  Johnson,  and  Gen.  Francis  B.
Spinola.  Mount  was  successful  in  depicting  the
humorous  side  of  American  rustic  life,  and  he  was
one  of  the  first  of  American  artists  to  make  a
study  of  negro  physiognomy  and  character.  He
was  a  good  draughtsman,  an  accomplished  colorist,
and  painted  in  a  firm  and  decided  manner,  which
gave  a  certain  hardness  to  his  pictures  that  is  their
onlv  objection. — His  brother,  Henry  Smith,  b.  in
Setauket.  L.  I.,  9  Oct.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Stony  Brook,
L.  I.,  10  Jan..  1841,  though  by  profession  a  sign-
painter,  executed  some  creditable  pictures  of  still-
life.  He  exhibited  frequently  at  the  National
academy,  and  was  elected  one  of  its  associates  in
1832. — Another  brother,  Shepard  Alonzo.  b.  in
Setauket,  L.  L,  7  July,  1804 ;  d.  in  Stony  Brook,
L.  I.,  18  Sept.,  1868,  became  known  as  a  success
ful  portrait-painter  and  exhibited  numerous  land
scapes  and  pieces  of  still-life  at  the  National  acade
my.  He  was  elected  an  associate  in  1833  and
academician  in  1842.  Among  the  portraits  that  he
painted  is  one  of  his  brother,  William  S.  Mount.

MOUNTAIN",  Jacob,  Canadian  Anglican  bish
op,  b.  at  Thwaite  Hall.  Norfolk,  England,  in  1750;
d.  near  Quebec.  Canada,  16  June,  1825.  His
grandfather,  'who  was  a  great-grandson  of  the
French  essayist,  Montaigne,  was  exiled  froir>
France  after  the  revocation  of  the  edict  of  Nantes,
Mountain  was  graduated  at  Cambridge  in  1774,
became  a  fellow  in  1779,  and,  taking  holy  orders,
held  several  important  livings  and  a  stall  in  Lin
coln  cathedral.  These  he  owed  to  the  friendship
of  William  Pitt,  who  also  procured  his  appoint
ment  in  1793  as  the  first  Protestant  bishop  of  Que
bec.  At  that  time  there  were  only  nine  clergy
men  of  the  Church  of  England  in  Canada,  and
Quebec  had  no  ecclesiastical  edifice,  no  episcopal
residence,  and  no  parsonage.  During  the  thirty-
two  years  that  elapsed  before  his  death  he  raised
the  church  to  the  flourishing  condition  to  which
it  afterward  attained.  He  promoted  the  forma
tion  of  missions,  and  the  erection  of  church  edi
fices  in  all  the  more  populous  townships.  These
latter  he  visited  regularly,  even  when  age  and  in
firmity  rendered  so  vast  and  fatiguing  a  circuit  a
painful  undertaking.  He  served  on  several  im
portant  occasions  as  a  member,  ex  officio,  of  both
the  executive  and  legislative  councils  of  the  prov
ince,  sat  frequently  in  the  court  of  appeals,  and
was  a  faithful  and  laborious  servant  of  the  public
and  of  the  crown.  He  attained  note  as  a  pulpit
orator,  and  his  self-sacrificing  ministrations  to  the
poor  will  long  be  remembered.  He  is  the  author
of  "Poetical  Reveries"  (London,  1777). — His  son,
(ieorare  Jehoshaphat,  Canadian  Anglican  bishop,
b.  in  Norwich,  England,  27  July.  1789;  d.  in  Que
bec,  Canada,  8  Jan.,  1863,  was  graduated  at  Trin
ity  college,  Cambridge,  in  1810,  studied  theology
and  was  ordained  a  priest  in  1813.  His  first  ap
pointment  was  that  of  evening  lecturer  at  the  ca
thedral  in  Quebec,  which  he  held  till  1814.  In
that  year  he  was  made  rector  of  Fredericton,  in
New  Brunswick,  and  continued  there  until  1817,
when  he  became  rector  of  Quebec  and  bishop's
official.  He  was  nineteen  vears  rector  before  he


448


MOUNTAIN


MOURAILLE


was  consecrated  bishop.  In  the  midst  of  his  labors
came  the  cholera  in  18532.  and  again  in  1834,  when
he  was  active  in  his  ministrations  to  the  sick  and
dying.  In  1821  he  was  made  archdeacon  of  Que
bec,  and  in  1825  de
puted  to  go  to  Eng
land  on  church  busi
ness.  On  14  Feb.,  1830,
he  was  consecrated

bishop,  with the title

'&J&&  <>f  bishop  of  Montreal,

(^•.  ^ w^mj&L*-  and  entered  on  his  du

ties  in  the  latter  part
of  that  year.  He  had
been  about  ten  days  in
Quebec  when  Bishop
Stewart  was  obliged  to
retire  from  Canada,  and
the  charge  of  the  whole
province  devolved  upon
Bishop  Mountain.  The
latter  continued,  under
the  title  of  bishop  of
Montreal,  to  adminis
ter  this  enormous  dio
cese  (which  has  since

been  divided  into  six)  until  1839,  when  Upper
Canada  was  made  a  separate  see.  The  whole  of
Lower  Canada  remained  under  his  supervision
until  1850.  In  that  year  the  see  of  Montreal  was
erected  entirely  through  Ids  exertions,  and  Bishop
Mountain  was  elected  to  continue  in  charge  of  the
poorer  and  by  far  more  laborious  part  of  his  late
field  of  labor,  the  present  diocese  of  Quebec.  Pre
viously,  in  1844,  at  the  request  of  the  Church  mis
sionary  society,  he  had  made  a  visit  of  three
months  to  the  Red  river  settlement.  On  his  re
turn  his  journal  was  published  by  the  Church  mis
sionary  society,  and  through  the  facts  thus  brought
to  notice,  and"  also  through  the  bishop's  own  ear
nest  and  repeated  representations,  the  Red  river
settlement  was  erected  into  an  episcopal  see  in  1840,
under  the  name  of  the  diocese  of  Rupert's  Land.
In  1842,  by  his  exertions,  the  Church  society  was
established.  In  1844  he  founded  the  Lower  Can
ada  church  university,  Bishop's  college,  Lennox-
ville.  This  he  always  considered  as  the  great
work  of  his  life,  and  he  anxiously  watched  over  its

Brogress.  Besides  many  sermons  and  addresses,
ishop  Mountain  published  ''A  Journal  of  a
Northwest  American  Mission"  (London,  1843), and
"  Songs  of  the  Wilderness,"  being  a  description  of
his  Red  river  journey  (1846).  See  a  "Memoir"  of
him  written  by  his  son,  Armine  Wale  (Montreal,
1860). — Another  son  of  Jacob,  Armine  Simcoc
Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Quebec,  Canada,  4  Feb.,
1797;  d.  in  India,  8  Feb.,  1854,  studied  military
science  in  Germany,  and  also  became  an  expert
linguist,  speaking  and  writing  most  of  the  Euro
pean  and  several  of  the  oriental  tongues.  He
went  to  India  as  military  secretary  to  Sir  Colin
Halkett,  served  as  adjutant-general  in  the  Chinese
war,  where  he  received  three  balls  in  his  body,  and
afterward  returned  to  India  in  the  capacity  of
aide  to  Lord  Dalhousie,  then  governor-general.
At  Chillianvallah  he  had  charge  of  a  brigade  and
received  the  thanks  of  Lord  Gough  for  a  brilliant
attack  which  secured  the  victory.  After  the  suc
cess  at  Gujerat  he  was  promoted  to  the  command
of  a  division.  He  was  taken  ill  of  fever  on  the
march  from  Cawnpore  to  Futtyghur,  and  died  when
in  camp  at  the  latter  place.'  He  had  previously
been  made  knight-commander  of  the  bath.  See
"Memoir  and  Letters,"  by  his  widow  (London,
1857 ;  3d  ed.,  same  year,  with  additions). — George


Jehoshaphat's  son,  Armine  Wale,  Canadian  cler
gyman,  b.  in  Quebec,  Canada,  2  July,  1823;  d.  in
Stony  Stratford,  Buckinghamshire,  England,  31
Jan.,  1885,  was  graduated  at  University  college
and  ordained  by  his  father  in  1846.  Like  him  he
devoted  himself  to  the  care  of  the  poor  in  the  sub
urbs  of  Quebec,  while  filling  the  ollice  of  evening
lecturer  in  the  cathedral,  and  acting  as  chaplain  and
secretary  to  the  bishop.  In  1855  he  became  rec
tor  of  St.  Michael's  Sillery,  which  was  built  through
his  exertions.  In  1869  he  left  Canada  for  Eng
land,  at  once  taking  the  rectorship  of  St.  Marv's,
Stony  Stratford,  where  he  remained  until  his  death.
At  the  request  of  the  diocese  of  Quebec,  he  wrote
a  "  Memoir  "  of  his  father  (Montreal,  18(56).

MOUNTCASTLE,  Clara  H.,  Canadian  author,
b.  in  Clinton,  Out.,  26  Nov.,  1837.  She  was  edu
cated  at  Mount  Pleasant,  the  family  residence,  and
studied  art,  under  John  G.  Howard,  at  Toronto.
She  was  a  teacher  of  drawing  and  painting  from
1871  till  1884.  Miss  Mountcastle  has  received  ten
prizes  for  paintings  in  water-colors  at  exhibitions
in  Toronto,  Hamilton,  London,  and  Guelph.  Her
principal  works  are  "  The  First  of  September"  and
"  Wads  worth's  Lake."  An  accident,  which  pre
vented  her  from  teaching  for  four  months,  in
1878.  turned  her  attention  to  literature,  and  she
has  since  been  a  prolific  and  successful  writer  of
poetry  and  prose,  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Caris
Sima."  She  has  published  "  The  Mission  of  Love,"
"  Lost,"  and  other  poems  (Toronto,  1882) ;  "  A  Mys
tery  "  (1886) ;  and  has  now  (1888)  in  preparation
"Crow's  Hollow,"  a  Canadian  novel.

MOUNTFOKI),  William,  author,  b.  in  Kid
derminster,  England,  31  May,  1810;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  20  April,  1885.  He  studied  at  Manchester
college.  York,  became  a  Unitarian  preacher  in
1838,  and  removed  to  the  United  States  in  1849.
Us  was  settled  for  a  time  in  Gloucester,  Mass.,
l>iit  subsequently  retired  from  the  ministry  and
resided  in  Cambridge.  He  was  an  early  convert
to  spiritualism.  He  published  "Christianity  the
Deliverance  of  the  Soul  and  its  Life  "  (London,
1846;  Boston,  1847);  "  Martyria :  a  Legend"
(London,  1846) ;  "  Euthanasy,  or  Happy  Talks  to
ward  the  End  of  Life"  (Boston,  1850);'  "  Beauties
of  Channing  "  ;  "  Thorpe  :  a  Quiet  English  Town
and  Life  Therein  "  (Boston,  1852) ;  and  •'  Miracles
Past  and  Present"  (1870).

MOURA,  Francisco  de  (mow'-oo-rah),  Bra
zilian  soldier,  b.  in  Pernambuco  in  1580 ;  d.  in
Lisbon,  Portugal,  in  1057.  He  adopted  a  military
career  and  served  with  credit  in  India,  Flanders,
and  Brazil.  When  the  Dutch  conquered  Bahia  in
1024  he  was  sent,  on  30  Nov.  of  that  year,  as  gov
ernor-general  to  organize  forces,  and  after  the
arrival  of  the  Spanish-Portuguese  fleet  in  March,
1025,  he  attacked  Bahia,  and  forced  the  Dutch  to
evacuate  it,  continuing  to  rule  the  country  till
1020.  His  services  were  rewarded  with  numerous
gifts  from  the  king,  among  others  the  fee-simple
of  Graciosa  island  in  the  Azores,  and  the  appoint
ment  of  councillor  of  state.

MOURAILLE,  Theodore  Oustave  (moo-ri),
Flemish  explorer,  b.  in  Charleroi,  Belgium,  in
1594;  d.  in  Bahia,  Brazil,  in  1051.  He  became  a
Jesuit,  was  employed  for  several  years  in  the  Pe
ruvian  missions,  and  in  1(531  began  a  voyage  of
exploration  through  the  then  unknown  countries
that  are  watered  by  the  Amazon.  Crossing  the
Andes  to  the  head- waters  of  that  river,  he  descended
it  as  far  as  the  Napo,  and,  turning  southward,  ad
vanced  about  500  miles  into  the  interior.  Return
ing  to  Quito  in  1038.  he  joined  the  expedition  of
Pedro  Texeira,  guiding  him  in  territories  that


MOUSSE


MOWATT


449


he  had  been  the  first  to  explore.  Drifting  down
the  Amazon  river,  they  reached  Para  in  the  autumn
of  1639.  Cristobal  d'Acunha  went  immediately
to  Cadiz  to  publish  the  relation  of  the  expedition,
while  Mouraille  returned  to  Quito  across  the  con
tinent  with  only  two  negroes  and  four  Indians.
He  went  afterward  to  Bahia,  where  he  became
rector  of  the  college  of  the  Jesuits,  and  at  his  death
was  provincial  of  the  order.  He  published  "  De-
scribimiento  de  las  Provincias  del  Rio  de  las  Ama-
zonas  "  (Quito.  1647).

MOUSSE,  John  de  la,  French  missionary.  He
was  a  missionary  in  South  America  from  1(584  till
1691.  Most  of  this  time  was  spent  in  French
Guiana,  where  his  zeal  was  indefatigable  and
where  he  braved  innumerable  dangers,  being  at
tacked  almost  every  year  by  the  fever  of  the  coun
try,  which  is  generally  fatal.  His  works,  most  of
which  are  preserved  in  manuscript  in  the  library
of  Lyons,  are  "  Relation  du  second  voyage  du  P.
Jean  de  la  Mousse,  chez  les  Indiens  de  la  riviere  de
Sinamary  en  1684  "  :  "  Relation  du  troisieme  voy
age  du  meme,  chez  lesGalibis,  en  1686"  ;  "  Lettres
ecrites  de  Cayenne,  en  1686  "  :  and  "  Relation  du
voyage  du  P.  Jean  de  la  Mousse,  dans  les  isles  de
FAmerique  et  dans  la  terre-ferme,  pendant  les
annees  1688,  1689,  1690,  et  1691."

MOUSSEAU,  Joseph  Alfred,  Canadian  states
man,  b.  in  Lower  Canada  in  July,  1838.  He  was
educated  at  Berthier  academy,  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1860,  and  created  a  Queen's
counsel  in  1873.  He  was  elected  for  Bagot  to
the  Dominion  parliament  in  1874,  re-elected  in
1878,  and  again  in  1882.  He  was  sworn  of  the
privy  council,  became  its  president  in  November,

1880.  and  was  appointed  secretary  of  state,  20  May,

1881.  He  resigned  his  seat  in  the  Dominion  par
liament,  29  July,  1882,  to  become  premier  of  Que
bec,  and  was  appointed  attorney-general,  31  July,

1882.  He  was  elected  for  Bagot  to  the  provincial
parliament,  26  Aug.,  1882. He  declined  a  judge-
ship  in  Manitoba  in  1871,. He  is  a  writer  for  the
press,  and  was  one  of  the  founders  of  "  Le  coloni-
sateur "  newspaper  in 1862,  and  of  "  L'Opinion
publique "  in 1870. He  published  "Cardinal  et
Duquet,  victiraes  de 1837- '8" (Montreal, 1861),
and  a  pamphlet  in  defence  of  confederation  (1867).

MOUTON,  Alexander  (moo-ton),  senator,  b.  in
Attakapas  (now  Lafayette)  parish.  La.,  19  Nov..
1804 ;  d.  near  Lafayette,  La.,  12  Feb.,  1885.  He
was  graduated  at  Georgetown  college,  D.  C.,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1825,  and  began  to
practise  in  his  native  parish.  The  following  year
he  was  elected  to  the  lower  branch  of  the  state
legislature,  and  he  was  re-elected  for  three  con
secutive  terms.  In  1831-'2  he  was  speaker  of  that
body.  He  was  chosen  presidential  elector  in  1828,
1832,  and  1836,  and  was  again  sent  to  the  legisla
ture  in  the  latter  year.  In  January,  1837,  he  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused
by  the  resignation  of  Alexander  Porter,  and  he
was  subsequently  chosen  for  the  full  term  of  six
years.  On  1  March,  1842.  he  resigned  to  accept
the  nomination  of  governor  of  Louisiana,  to  which
office  he  was  elected,  discharging  its  duties  till
1846.  He  was  president  of  the  Southwestern  rail
road  convention  in  January,  1853,  and  delegate  to
the  National  Democratic  conventions  of  1856  and

1860,  and  to  the  Louisiana  secession  convention  of  I

1861.  of  which  latter  body  he  was  chosen  president,  i
At  an  election  held  to  choose  two  senators  to  the  \
Confederate  senate,  29  Nov.,  1861,  he  was  defeated,
and  he  then  retired  to  his  plantation,  where  he  af
terward  resided. — His  son.  Jean  Jacques  Alex-  ]
andre  Alfred,  soldier,  b.  in  Opelousas,  St.  Landry  ;

VOL.  IT. — 29


parish,  La.,  18  Feb.,  1829:  d.  in  Mansfield,  DeSoto
parish,  La.,  8  April,  1864.  was  graduated  at  the
TJ.  S.  military  academy,  1  July,  1850,  but  resigned
in  the  following  September.  Returning  to  Louisi
ana,  he  was  assistant  engineer  of  the  New  Orleans,
Opelousas  and  Great  Western  railroad,  1852-'3,  and
brigadier-general  of  Louisiana  militia,  1850-'61.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  recruited  a
company  among  the  farmers  of  Lafayette  parish,
where  lie  was  then  residing,  and  soon  afterward
accepted  the  colonelcy  of  the  18th  Louisiana  regi
ment.  He  commanded  it  at  the  battle  of  Shiloh,
and  was  severely  wounded.  He  also  took  part  in
the  expedition  that  captured  Berwick  Bay,  La.,  in
1863,  was  in  the  engagement  at  Bisland  on  the
Teche,  and  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Mansfield,
La.,  where  he  was  in  command  of  a  division,  when
leading  his  men  in  an  attack.  He  had  been  suc
cessively  promoted  brigadier-  and  major-general  in
the  Confederate  service.

MOWAT,  Oliver,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Kingston,  Ont,,  22  July,  1820.  His  father,  John
Mowat,  a  native  of  Cart h ness-shire,  Scotland,  served
through  the  peninsular  war,  and  came  to  Canada
in  1816.  Oliver  was  educated  in  Kingston,  subse
quently  studied  law,  was  called  to  the  bar  of
Upper  Canada  in  1841,  and  was  created  a  Queen's
counsel  in  1856.  He  established  himself  in  Toronto,
and  obtained  an  extensive  chancery  practice.  He
represented  South  Ontario  in  the  Canada  assembly
from  1857  till  1864,  and  unsuccessfully  opposed
John  A.  Macdonald  for  Kingston  in  1861.  He
was  provincial  secretary  in  the  Brown-Dorion  ad
ministration  from  2  to  6  Aug.,  1858,  postmaster-
general  in  the  Sandfield  Macdonald- Dorion  govern
ment  from  May,  1863,  till  March,  1864,  and  held
the  same  office  in  the  coalition  government  from
June,  1864,  till  14  Nov.,  the  same  year.  He  was
then  appointed  vice-chancellor  of  Upper  Canada,
which  post  he  resigned,  25  Oct.,  1872,  and  formed
a  new  administration  in  Ontario,  becoming  premier
and  attorney-general  of  that  province,  which
places  he  sti'll  (1888)  holds.  He  was  elected  by
acclamation  for  North  Oxford  to  the  Ontario  par
liament  in  November,  1872,  and  re-elected  in  1879,
1883,  and  1886.  Mr.  Mowat  is  a  bencher  ex-officio
of  the  Law  society  of  Ontario,  was  a  commissioner
for  consolidating  the  general  statutes  for  Canada
and  Upper  Canada,  respectively,  in  1856,  and
was  a  delegate  to  the  Quebec  union  conference
in  1864.  As  vice-chancellor  he  was  one  of  the
judicial  officers  that  were  appointed  to  report  upon
estate  bills  in  the  Ontario  assembly.  He  has  been
president  of  the  Evangelical  alliance  of  Ontario
since  1867,  a  member  of  the  senate,  and  has  re
ceived  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Toronto  univer
sity.  Mr.  Mowat  is  the  author  of  many  important
legislative  measures  in  the  provincial  parliament,
among  which  is  the  judicature  bill,  an  act  for  the
fusion  of  law  and  equity  in  the  courts  of  Ontario.
He  is  a  Liberal  in  politics,  an  effective  public  speak
er,  and  has  been  a  cautious,  intelligent,  and  success
ful  administrator  of  the  government  of  his  native
province,  in  which  his  popularity  is  very  great. —
His  brother,  John  Bower,  Canadian  educator,  b.
in  Kingston,  8  June,  1825,  was  graduated  in  arts
in  1845,  and  studied  theology  for  two  sessions  at
Queen's  university,  Kingston,  and  for  a  similar
period  in  Edinburgh.  After  holding  pastorates
he  was  appointed  in  1857  professor  of  Hebrew,
Chaldee,  and  Old  Testament  exegesis  at  Queen's
university,  Kingston.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Glasgow  university  in  1883.

MOWATT,  Anna  Cora,  author,  b.  in  Bordeaux.
France,  in  1819;  d.  near  London,  England,  28


450


MO  WATT


MOWRY


July,  1870.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Samuel
Gouverneur  Ogden,  a  New  York  merchant,  who,
having  speculated  unsuccessfully,  was  at  the  time
of  her  birth  residing  temporarily  in  France.  Cora
was  the  tenth  of  a
family  of  seventeen
children.  Her  life
until  the  age  of  eight
years  was  passed  at
u  chateau  in  the
neighborhood  of  Bor
deaux.  On  her  fa
ther's  return  to  New
York  in  1826,  Cora
attended  school,  and
at  the  early  age  of
fourteen  attracted,  by
her  precocity,  the  at
tention  of  James
Mowatt,  a  young  law-

ycr  of  p%\ cit/. who

persuaded  her  to  con
sent to marry him

that  he  might  superintend  her  studies.  Her  parents
gave  their  approval,  with  the  proviso  that  the  union
should  be  postponed  till  Cora  had  reached  the  age
of  seventeen.  The  young  people  were  secretly  mar
ried,  but  soon  afterward  obtained  parental  forgive
ness.  The  succeeding  two  years  Mrs.  Mowatt  prose
cuted  her  studies  with  great  diligence  and  pub
lished,  under  the  name  of  "  Isabel,"  "  Pelayo,  or
the  Cavern  of  Covadonga  "  (New  York,  183(5).  This
poetical  romance  eliciting  some  adverse  criticism,
the  author  responded,  still  using  her  pen-name,
with  a  satirical  effusion  entitled  "  Reviewers  Re
viewed  "  (1837).  Her  health  failing,  she  spent  a
year  and  a  half  in  Europe,  during  which  time  she
wrote,  for  private  performance,  "  Gulzara,  the
Persian  Slave"  (1840),  which  was  first  played  after
her  return.  Meantime  Mr.  Mowatt  had  suffered
business  reverses,  and  his  wife,  to  aid  him,  pro
posed  to  give  a  series  of  dramatic  readings.  She
began  in  Boston  on  28  Oct.,  1841,  afterward  visit
ing  Providence  and  New  York.  The  tacit  op
position  of  her  friends,  and  impaired  health,
compelled  her  to  abandon  the  undertaking,  al
though  it  had  been  entirely  successful.  Mr.
Mowatt  having  again  entered  into  business,  this
time  as  a  publisher,  she  returned  to  literature  and
wrote  a  series  of  stories  for  the  magazines,  under
the  signature  of  "Helen  Berkley."  These  attained
immediate  popularity,  were  translated  into  Ger
man,  and  republished  in  London.  She  also  wrote
"Fashion,  a  Comedy "  (Boston),  which  met  with
approval  when  it  was" produced  at  the  Park  theatre,
New  York,  in  March,  1845.  Mr.  Mowatt  having
failed  in  his  new  venture,  his  wife  was  emboldened
by  the  success  of  her  play  and  the  advice  of  certain
of  her  friends,  to  try  her  fortune  upon  the  stage,
and  made  her  debut  at  the  Park  theatre,  on  13  June
of  the  same  year,  as  Pauline  in  the  "Lady  of
Lyons."  She  played  several  nights  with  such  com
mendation  that  engagements  in  other  cities  fol
lowed.  In  1847  she  wrote  another  play,  "  Armand  ;
or,  The  Peer  and  the  Peasant"  (New  York),  which
was  also  well  received.  Going  to  England  in  com
pany  with  Edward  L.  Davenport,  3he  made  her
first  appearance  in  London,  5  Jan.,  1848,  in  the
"  Hunchback."  Returning  to  this  country  in  1851,
in  which  year  her  husband  died,  she  continued  to
act  until  3  June,  1854,  when  she  took  leave  of  the
stage  at  a  farewell  performance  at  Niblo's  Garden,
New  York.  She  married,  four  days  afterward,
William  F.  Ritchie,  of  Richmond,  Ya.  In  1860
she  was  recalled  to  New  York  by  the  fatal  illness


of  her  father.  His  death  left  her  with  health  so
impaired  through  constant  nursing  that  she  re
turned  to  Europe,  living  with  relatives  in  Paris,
Rome,  and  Florence.  After  the  death  of  her  sec
ond  husband  in  1868  she  returned  to  London.
Besides  the  works  mentioned  above  and  several  com
pilations.  Mrs.  Mowatt  wrote  "  The  Fortune-Hunter,
a  Novel,"  using  the  pen-name  of  "  Helen  Berkley  "
(Philadelphia.  1842);  "Evelyn:  or,  A  Heart  Un
masked  :  A  Tale  of  Domestic  Life  "  (2  vols.,  Phila
delphia.  1845;  London.  1850);  "The  Autobiogra
phy  of  an  Actress ;  or,  Eight  Years  on  the  Stage  "
(Boston,  1854);  "Mimic  Life;  or,  Before  and  Be
hind  the  Curtain  "' (1855) ;  "Twin  Roses  "  (1857);
"  Fairy  Fingers,  a  Novel  "  (New  York,  1865) ;  "  The
Mute  'Singer,  a  Novel  "  (1866);  and  "The  Clergy
man's  Wife,  and  Other  Sketches"  (1867).

MOWER,  Joseph  Anthony,  soldier,  b.  in  Wood
stock,  Vt..  22  Aug.,  1827;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La,,
6  Jan.,  1870.  He  received  a  common-school  educa
tion  and  became  a  carpenter.  lie  enlisted  as  a  pri
vate  in  a  company  of  engineers  during  the  Mexi
can  war,  was  commissioned  2d  lieutenant  in  the
1st  U.  S.  infantry,  18  June,  1855,  and  became  cap
tain,  9  Sept.,  1861.  He  was  engaged  at  the  siege
and  capture  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  and  at  Corinth,
Miss.,  where  he  was  severely  wounded,  and  was
for  a  time  a  prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the  Confeder
ates.  He  had  been  elected  colonel  of  the  llth  Mis
souri  volunteers  in  May,  1862,  and  for  his  gallant
defence  of  Milliken's  bend  was  promoted  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  in  November  of  the  same
year.  He  led  a  brigade  in  the  attack  on  Vicksburg
in  May,  1863,  was  at  the  head  of  a  division  under
Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks  in  Louisiana  in  April,
18(54,  and  the  following  August  was  made  major-
general  of  volunteers.  lie  was  with  Gen.  Sherman
in  the  Georgia  and  Carolina  campaigns,  and  rose
to  the  command  of  the  20th  army  corps.  He  was
brevetted  major,  lieutenant-colonel,  colonel,  briga
dier-general,  and  major-general  in  the  regular
army  for  gallantry  at,  the  battles  of  Farmington,
luka,  and  Jackson,  Miss..  Fort  de  Russy,  La.,  and
Salkehatchie,  Ga,,  respectively.  He  was  transferred
to  the  25th  infantry  in  1868,  then  to  the  39th,  and
at  his  death  commanded  the  Department  of  Lou
isiana,  comprising  that  state  and  Arkansas.

MOWRY,  Daniel,  lawyer,  son  of  Daniel  Mowry,
b.  in  Smithfield  R,  I.  He  studied  law,  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  in  his  native  town.
He  sat  as  a  member  of  the  Colonial  general  assem
bly  during  the  session  when  an  act  was  passed  that
renounced  allegiance  to  the  king,  and  took  an  ac
tive  part  in  all  the  popular  movements  that  pre
ceded  the  Revolution.  He  served  as  judge  of  the
court  of  common  pleas  of  Rhode  Island,  and  was
elected  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress,
serving  from  1780  till  1782.

MOWRY,  Sylvester,  explorer,  1).  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  in  1830;  d.in  London.  England.  16  Oct.,  1871.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1852,  and  after  a  year  of  frontier  duty  in  Cali
fornia  was  assigned  to  exploring  work  for  the  Pa
cific  railroad  in  1853-'4.  He  marched  through
Utah  to  California  in  1854-'5,  and  served  at  Bene-
cia  and  Fort  Yuma  till  1857.  He  was  1st  lieu
tenant,  3  March,  1855,  and  resigned  from  the  army.
31  July.  1858.  He  then  became  interested  in
mining  in  Arizona,  and  was  elected  as  delegate  to
the  35th  congress  in  1856,  but  the  bill  creating  a
territorial  government  did  not  become  a  law,  and
he  did  not  take  his  seat.  In  1860  he  was  appointed
by  President  Buchanan  a  commissioner  to  establish
the  boundary-line  between  California  and  Nevada,
but  he  was  removed  in  1861  on  political  grounds.


MOYA DE  COXTRERAS


MOZIER


451


He  was  arrested  and  imprisoned  at  Fort  Ytnna  on
a  charge  of  disloyalty,  but  established  his  inno
cence.  He  went  to  England  subsequently  for  his
health,  and  died  there.  He  wrote  on  subjects  con
nected  with  the  far  west  in  magazines  and  other
periodicals,  and  published  "  The  Geography  and
Resources  of  Arizona  and  Sonora"  (3d  ed'.,  en
larged.  New  York.  1864).

MOYA  DE  COXTRERAS,  Pedro  (mo'-yah).
Mexican  archbishop,  h.  in  Cordova,  Spain,  about
1520:  d.  in  Madrid  in  December.  151)1.  He  studied
in  the  University  of  Salamanca,  where  he  was
graduated  as  doctor  of  theology  and  appointed
canon  of  the  cathedral  of  the  Canary  islands.
Afterward  he  was  for  some  time  inquisitor  of
Murcia.  and  in  1570  he  was  sent  as  first  inquisi
tor  to  Mexico,  where  he  established  his  tribunal
in  1571.  He  was  nominated  archbishop  on  15
June,  1573,  and  installed,  8  Dec.,  1574.  In  1583
he  was  appointed  visitor  of  New  Spain,  and  after
the  death  of  the  viceroy,  the  Count  of  Coruiia,  he
was  in  charge  of  the  executive  from  25  Sept.,  1584,
until  17  Oct.,  1585,  when  he  delivered  the  govern
ment  to  the  new  viceroy,  the  Marquis  of  Villa-
manrique.  During  this  time  he  convened  and  pre
sided  over  the  third  council  of  the  bishops  of
Mexico.  In  1590  he  was  appointed  president  of  the
council  of  the  Indies,  and  returned  to  Madrid,  tak
ing  possession  of  his  office,  8  Jan.,  1591,  but  died
shortly  afterward.  He  wrote  "  Annotationes  ad
libros  Doctoris  Francisci  Hernandez,  de  Christiana
methodo  que  loca  explicant  paulo  difficiliora."
which  were  printed  in  the  fifth  volume  of  the  work
of  that  naturalist  (Madrid,  1790).

MOYLAX,  Stephen,  soldier,  b.  in  Ireland  in
1734:  d.  in  Philadelphia,  11  April.  1811.  He  re
ceived  a  good  education,  afterward  resided  in  Eng
land,  and  then  came  to  America,  where  he  travelled
extensively,  and  finally  settled  as  a  merchant  in
Philadelphia.  He  was  among  the  earliest  to  enlist
in  the  cause  of  the  colonies,  and  hurried  to  join
the  army  before  Boston  in  1775,  when,  upon  the
recommendation  of  John  Dickinson,  he  was  placed
in  the  commissariat  department.  His  face  and
manner  attracted  the  attention  of  Gen.  Washing
ton,  who,  in  March,  177G,  appointed  him  one  of  his
aides-de-camp.  In  June  of  the  same  year,  on  the
recommendation  of  Washington,  he  was  chosen  by
congress  quartermaster- general,  which  office  he
resigned  in  the  following  October.  He  then  raised
the  1st  Pennsylvania  regiment  of  cavalry,  an  inde
pendent  organization,  with  which  he  was,  in  the
winter  of  1777-'8,  at  Valley  Forge,  in  1779  on
Hudson  river  and  in  Connecticut,  in  1780  accom
panied  Wayne  on  the  expedition  to  Bull's  Ferry,
and  subsequently  was  in  the  southern  campaign.
He  served  until  the  close  of  the  war,  and  before
his  retirement  was  commissioned  brigadier-gen
eral.  He  resumed  mercantile  business  at  Phila
delphia,  where  for  several  years  prior  to  his  death
he  held  the  office  of  U.  S.  commissioner  of  loans.
He  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the  Friendly  sons
of  St.  Patrick  in  Philadelphia  in  1771,  and  if s  first
president.  One  of  his  brothers  was  Roman  Catho
lic  bishop  of  Cork,  Ireland,  another,  JASPER,  was
a  lawyer  in  Philadelphia,  and  another,  JOHX,  a
merchant  of  that  city,  was  U.  S.  clothier-general
during  the  Revolution.  See  the  Marquis  de  Chas-
tellux's  "  Travels  in  America"  (Paris,  1786).

MOYSE,  Charles  Ebeuezer,  Canadian  educa
tor,  b.  in  Torquay,  Devonshire,  England,  9  March.
1852.  He  wa-s  educated  at  the  Independent  col
lege,  Taunton,  and  at  University  college,  London,
and  graduated  at  the  University  of  London  in
1874.  He  taught  in  various  schools  in  England


until  1878.  when  he  was  appointed  professor  of
history  and  associate  professor  of  the  English
language  and  literature  in  McGill  university,
Montreal.  This  chair  he  relinquished  in  1886  to
become  professor  of  the  English  language  and
literature  and  lecturer  in  history  in  the  same  insti
tution.  Prof.  Moyse  has  contributed  much  to
Canadian  periodicals.  He  is  the  author  of  "  The
Dramatic  Art  of  Shakespeare"  (Montreal,  1879)
and  '•  Poetry  as  a  Fine  Art  "  (London.  1883).

MOYSE,  Hyacinthe  (moiz),  Haytian  soldier,  b.
in  Hericourt,  Santo  Domingo,  in  17G9;  d.  in  Port
an  Prince.  25  Dec.,  1801.  He  was  a  negro  slave,  the
nephew  of  Toussaint  L'Ouverture  (q.  v.),  and  among
the  first  negroes  who  rebelled  in  1790,  joining  one
of  those  bands  that,  under  Lempereur  (q.  r.)  and
Jean  Francois,  committed  depredations  through
out  the  country.  He  soon  became  a  chief,  and  his
courage  won  him  many  followers.  On  28  March,
1792,  he  attacked  at  La  Croix  du  Bouquet  the  whites
under  Breton  de  la  Villaudrie.  and  obliged  them
to  re-enter  Port  au  Prince.  This  success  caused
a  general  uprising  in  the  counties  in  the  west  and
south.  The  army  of  Moyse  increased  every  day,
and  he  was  preparing  to  march  against  Port  au
Prince,  when  Gov.  Blanchelande,  resorting  to  di
plomacy  to  quell  the  insurrection,  decreed  the  en
franchisement  of  all  the  negroes  that  held  a  com
mand  in  the  insurgent  parties,  provided  they
should  dismiss  their  followers.  Many  chiefs  sent
in  their  allegiance,  but  Moyse  refused  to  disarm,
and  joined  the  forces  of  Jean  Fran9ois,  who  ap
pointed  him  to  the  command  of  the  county  of  Du
Dondon,  where  the  negroes,  headed  by  Father  La
Have,  had  risen.  Moyse  took  an  active  part  in  the
rebellion  for  several  years,  but  always  showed  him
self  greatly  superior  to  his  followers  and  to  most  of
the  other  negro  chiefs.  In  1793  he  learned  to  read
and  "write.  In  1794  he  separated  from  Jean  Fran
cois,  and,  joining  Toussaint  L'Ouverture,  fought
for  the  French  cause  against  the  English  invaders,
whom  he  drove  from  the  western  counties,  defeated
in  the  battle  of  Vallieres  in  1796,  and  finally  com
pelled  to  leave  the  island  in  December,  1798.  When
Toussaint  invaded  the  Spanish  part  of  Santo  Do
mingo.  Moyse  was  appointed  to  the  command  of
the  right  wing  of  the  army.  He  defeated  the
Spanish  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Xissa,  and  en
tered  Santo  Domingo  with  Toussaint,  2  Jan.,  1801,
but  the  latter  relieved  him  from  the  government
of  that  city,  and  sent  him  as  general  inspector  of
agriculture  to  northern  Hayti.  It  has  been  said
that  Toussaint  was  jealous  of  the  popularity  of
Moyse  among  the  troops,  and  sought  a  pretext  to
disgrace  him.  Moyse  submitted  at  first,  but  later
opened  negotiations  with  Jean  Francois  against
Toussaint.  A  new  rebellion  began  on  21  Dec.,
1801.  in  northern  Hayti,  and,  accusing  Moyse  of  in
stigating  it,  Toussaint  ordered  his  arrest,  and  con
demned  him  to  death  without  a  trial.  Moyse  was
executed  with  twenty-three  of  his  followers.

MOZIER,  Joseph,  sculptor,  b.  in  Burlington,
Vt.,  22  Aug.,  1812  ;  d.  in  Faids,  Switzerland,  in  Oc
tober,  1870.  In  1831  he  removed  to  Xew  York,
where  he  passed  some  fourteen  years  in  mercantile
pursuits.  He  retired  from  business  about  1845,  and
shortly  afterward  went  to  Europe,  studying  sculp
ture  for  several  years  in  Florence,  after  which  he
went  to  Rome.  His  principal  works  are  "  Poca-
hontas"  (1848);  "The  Wept  of  the  Wish-ton-
Wish,"  which  he  repeated  several  times;  "Truth,"
"  Silence,"  both  in  the  Mercantile  library.  Xew  York
(1855);  "Rebecca  at  the  Well";  "Esther":  "In
dian  Girl  at  the  Grave  of  her  Lover"  ;  "  Jephthah's
Daughter  "  ;  "  The  Peri  "  ;  and  "  Rizpah."


452


MRAK


MUDGE


MRAK,  Iirnalius.  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Polland,
Carniola.  Austria,  10  Oct.,  1810.  He  finished  his
theological  studies  in  183?  and  was  ordained  priest
the  same  year.  After  spending  several  years  in
missionary  labors  in  Carniola,  he  came  to  the
United  States  in  1845  and  was  stationed  at  Arbre
Croche,  at  the  same  time  attending  to  the  Ottawa
and  Chippewa  Indians  at  Manistee,  La  Croix,  Mid-
dleton,  and  Castor  island.  In  1855  he  was  trans
ferred  to  Eagle  Town,  on  Grand  Traverse  bay.
where  he  established  a  school  for  the  Indians,  and
he  also  attended  ten  other  Indian  mission  stations.
He  was  appointed  vicar-general  of  the  diocese  of
Sault  Sainte  Marie  in  1860,  and  on  the  death  of
Bishop  Baraga  was  nominated  for  the  see  of  Mar-
quette  and  Sault  Sainte  Marie.  He  was  conse
crated  by  Archbishop  Purcell  on  7  Feb.,  1869.  Al
though  his  health  began  to  fail,  he  continued  the
discharge  of  his  duties  until  his  infirmities  com
pelled  him  to  resign  his  see  in  1878.  In  1881  he
was  made  bishop  of  Antince  in  parfibus.

MUDGE,  Enoch,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lynn,  Mass.,
28  J  une.  1776 ;  d.  there,  2  April,  1850.  'He  was  de
scended  from  an  old  New  England  family,  the  first
member  of  which  mentioned  in  local  annals  is
Goodman  Mudge,  who  in  1649,  as  appears  by  an
old  deed,  purchased  a  house  and  five  acres  of  land
in  New  London,  Conn.,  for  "  five  bushels  of  wheat
and  a  dog."  He  entered  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  in  1793,  and  travelled  as  an  itinerant  min
ister  in  Maine,  enduring  great  hardships,  imder
which  his  health  gave  way,  and  he  was  compelled
in  1799  to  ask  for  a  location  in  order  that  he  might
recuperate.  He  was  therefore  settled  at  Orrington,
Me.,  where  he  labored  until  1816.  During  this  pe
riod  he  was  twice  chosen  to  the  legislature,  the  first
time  to  obtain  a  repeal  of  the  law  that  imposed  a
tax  on  other  denominations  for  the  support  of  the
Congregational  church,  in  which  effort  he  was  suc
cessful.  In  1816  he  again  became  an  itinerant,
and  was  stationed  successively  at  Boston,  Lynn,
Portsmouth,  N.  II.,  Newport,  R.  I.,  and  other
places.  In  1832  he  was  transferred  to  the  Sea
man's  chapel  at  New  Bedford,  where  he  spent  the
remainder  of  his  active  life,  returning  to  Lynn  in
1844.  While  residing  at  the  latter  place  in  1819  he
was  elected  a  member  of  the  convention  that  revised
the  constitution  of  Massachusetts.  He  was  the
author  of  a  "  Camp-Meeting  Hymn-Book  "  (1818) ;
"Notes  on  the  Parables"  (1828);  "  Lynn,"  a  poem
(1830) ;  "  The  Parables  of  Our  Lord  "  (1831) ;  "  Lec
tures  to  Seamen  "  (1836);  "The  Juvenile  Exposi
tor,"  published  in  seventy  numbers  of  "  Zion's  Her
ald  "  ;  and  many  other  lectures  and  occasional  dis
courses.  He  was  a  frequent  contributor  to  the
press  of  both  prose  and  poetry. — His  son,  Enoch
Redins*ton,  merchant,  b.  in 'Orrington,  Me.,  22
March,  1812 ;  d.  in  Swampscot,  Mass.,  1  Oct.,  1881,
left  home  at  fifteen  years  of  age,  went  to  Port-
laud,  Me.,  and  entered  a  banking-house.  On  the
failure  of  the  firm  he  engaged  in  business  for  him
self,  and  as  a  result  of  land  speculations  failed  in
1835  for  $20,000,  which  was  then  considered  a  large
capital.  Going  to  New  York  city,  he  had  the
general  management  for  four  years  of  the  Astor
house.  In  1840  he  went  to  New  Orleans  and  opened
the  St.  Charles  hotel,  where  he  made  $150.000  and
paid  the  debts  he  had  previously  incurred.  Re
turning  to  New  York  city  in  1845,  he  became  in
terested  in  manufacturing,  and  in  1846  built  the
Saratoga  Victory  cotton-mills,1  thirty  miles  from
Cohoes,  N.  Y.  He  was  engaged  for  'the  next  ten
years  in  various  commercial  enterprises,  and  in
1857  became  an  agent  for  the  sale  of  the  products
of  several  New  England  woollen  and  cotton  mills.


His  sales  gradually  increased,  until  in  1865  they
amounted  to  between  $8,000,000  and  $9.000,000.
In  1866-'7  Mr.  Mudge  was  a  member  of  the  Massa
chusetts  senate.  He  built  St.  Stephen's  Episcopal
church  at  Lynn.  Mass.,  as  a  memorial  of  his  de
ceased  children,  Fanny  Olive  and  Charles  Reding-
ton,  a  graduate  of  Harvard,  who  was  killed  at
the  battle  of  Gettysburg. — Enoch's  nephew,  Al
fred,  printer,  son  of  Samuel  Mudge,  b.  in  Ports
mouth,  N.  II.,  25  April,  1809;  d.  in  Hull,  Mass.,
14  Aug.,  1882,  was  compelled  to  earn  his  own  living
at  fourteen, but  soon  afterward  apprenticed  himself
to  a  printer.  In  1825  he  went  to  Boston,  where  he
completed  his  apprenticeship  with  Samuel  H.
Parker.  Six  years  afterward  he  began  business
for  himself  on  a  very  slender  capital,  and  in  1834
lost  by  fire  what  little  he  had  accumulated.  He
then  removed  to  School  street  in  the  same  city,
where  he  became  firmly  established.  Mr.  Mudge
was  the  pioneer  job  printer  of  New  England,  there
having  been  before  his  time  no  office  where  orders
for  commercial  work  could  be  well  and  promptly
executed.  Among  his  achievements  was  the  set
ting  up  and  printing,  in  nine  working-days,  of  an
octavo  volume  of  524  pages  which  contained  but
one  typographical  error.  He  printed,  among  other
specimens  of  fine  work,"  History  of  the  City  Hall,"
published  by  the  city  authorities  of  Boston,  a  gen
ealogical  record  of  the  descendants  of  Hugh  C'lark,
of  Watertown,  and  the  "  Mudge  Memorials,"  being
an  account  of  the  Mudge  family. — Another  nephew
of  Enoch,  Zachariah  Atwell,  author,  son  of
James  Mudge,  b.  in  Orrington,  Penobscot  co.,  Me.,
2  July,  1813,  was  educated  at  Lynn,  Mass.,  acade
my  and  Wesleyan  university,  but  was  not  gradu
ated.  After  teaching  in  Massachusetts  and  Mis
sissippi  he  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church  in  1840,  and  has  since  been  sta
tioned  at  various  places  in  Massachusetts.  In  1854
he  received  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  from
Wesleyan  university.  From  1859  till  1862  he  was
editor  of  "The  Guide  to  Holiness."  During  his
pastoral  labors,  extending  over  forty-five  years,
Mr.  Mudge  has  found  time  to  prepare  for  publica
tion  a  large  number  of  works  of  fiction  for  Sunday-
school  libraries.  He  has  also  issued  "  Sketches  of
Mission  Life  among  the  Indians  of  Oregon"  (New
York,  1854);  "The  Christian  Statesman,  a  Por
traiture  of  Sir  Thomas  Fowell  Bnxton  "  (1865);
•'  Witch  Hill,  a  History  of  Salem  Witchcraft "
(1870) ;  "Arctic  Heroes  "'(1874) ;  "  North-Pole  Voy
ages  "(1875);  "History  of  Suffolk  County,  Mass."
(1879) ;  "  Fur-clad  Adventurers  "  (1880) ;  and  others
of  a  similar  character.  —  Zachariah's  brother,
Thomas  Hicks,  educator,  b.  in  Orrington,  Penob
scot  co.,  Me.,  27  Sept.,  1815;  d.  in  Baldwin  City,
Douglas  co.,  Kan.,  24  July,  1862,  was  graduated  at
Wesleyan  university  in  1840,  studied  three  years
in  Union  theological  seminary,  New  York  city,
and  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist  Episco
pal  church.  In  1857- '8  he  was  professor  of  sacred
literature  in  McKendree  college,  Lebanon,  III,  and
he  afterward  preached  in  Missouri  until  he  was
compelled  to  leave  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war.  In  1862  he  was  appointed  professor  of  an
cient  languages  and  biblical  literature  in  Baker
university,  Baldwin  City,  Kan.,  where  he  remained
until  his  death.  —  Another  brother,  Benjamin
Franklin,  educator,  b.  in  Orrington,  Penobscot
co.,  Me.,  11  Aug.,  1817;  d.  in  Manhattan,  Riley
co.,  Kan.,  21  Nov.,  1879,  was  graduated  at  Wes
leyan  university  in  1840,  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  practised  in  Lynn,  Mass.,  from
1844  till  1859,  being  elected  mayor  in  1852.  He
settled  in  Kansas  in  1862,  and  in  1864-'5  was  state


MUENSTER


MUHLENBEEQ


453


geologist.  From  1865  till  1873  he  was  professor  of
natural  sciences  and  the  higher  mathematics  in  the
State  agricultural  college.  While  connected  with
this  institution  he  employed  his  vacations  in  ex
ploring  the  cretaceous  formation  in  western  Kan
sas,  and  thus  discovered  forty-five  new  species  of
fossils,  including  Ichthyornis  dispar,  a  bird  with
biconcave  vertebrae.  He  was  president  of  the  Kan
sas  state  teachers'  association  in  1867,  and  of  the
Kansas  academy  of  sciences  in  1868-'79.  From
1873  till  1879  he  was  lecturer  on  geology  in  the
state  university  at  Lawrence.  Prof.  Mudge  was  a
frequent  contributor,  1873-'80,  to  the  "  Transac
tions  ''  of  the  Kansas  academy  of  sciences  and  other
societies.  He  also  published  "  First  Annual  Report
on  the  Geology  of  Kansas  "  (Lawrence,  1866).

MUEXSTER,  Paul,  clergyman,  b.  in  Zanch-
tenthal,  Moravia.  25  July,  1716;  d.  in  Bethlehem,
Pa.,  14  Oct.,  1792.  He  was  a  direct  descendant  of
members  of  the  Ancient  brethren's  church,  and
his  parents  were  persecuted  with  such  severity  as
to  cause  his  father's  death.  In  1729  he  and  his
mother,  led  by  his  brother,  who  had  previously  es
caped  but  returned  in  order  to  assist  them,  made
their  way  safely  to  Herrnhut,  in  Saxony,  Paul
carrying  strapped  to  his  back  a  copy  of  the  hym
nal  of  the  Ancient  brethren,  which  he  deemed  to
be  his  greatest  treasure.  The  volume  is  now  in
the  archives  of  the  Moravian  church  at  Bethlehem.
He  entered  the  ministry  in  1747,  and,  after  labor
ing  for  fourteen  years  in  England,  came  to  this
country  in  1761,  having  received  an  appointment
as  senior  minister  at  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  which  post
he  filled  for  thirty-one  years.

MUHLENBERG, Henry Melchior, clergy
man,  b.  in  Kimbeck,  Hanover,  Germany,  6  Sept.,
1  Til ;  d.  in  Trappe,  Montgomery  co.,  Pa.,  7  Oct..
1787. His  parents  were  Nicholaus  Melchior  and
Anna  Maria  Muhlenberg. His  father  was  a  mem-  '
ber  of  the  council  of  Eimbeck,  and  his  mother  was  [
the  daughter  of  a  retired  officer. In  early  life  he  i
attended  school  in  his  native  place,  but  his  father  i
died  when  Henry  was  twelve  years  old,  and  his  |
studies  were  interrupted  for  some  time. At the  |
age  of  twenty-one  he  was  enabled  to  resume  them
in  private,  and  in  1735  he  entered  the  University  j
of  Gottingen,  which  had  been  established  in  that
year. Here  he  became  identified  with  the  ortho-  |
dox  pietism  of  Spener  and  Francke. In  1736  he  |
united  with  several  students  of  theology  in  giving  j
instruction  to  poor  and  neglected  children,  from
which  resulted  in  a  very  short  time  the  establish-  i
ment  of  an  institution  for  such  children,  which  is  !
still  in  existence. In  1737  he  began  his  theological
course  at  Gottingen.  and  in  1738  he  went  to  Halle
to  finish  his  course,  where  he  was  also  at  the  same
time  employed  as  a  teacher  in  Francke's  orphan
home. In  1739,  after  his  ordination,  he  was  called
to  the  office  of  deacon  or  assistant  in  the  church  !
at  Gross-Hennersdorf,  in  Upper  Lusatia,  and  in
spector  of  the  orphan house  at that  place. He  !
labored  here  with  much  success  until  1741,  when  j
he  accepted  a  call  in  the  name  of  several  congre-  j
gations  of  German  Lutherans  in  Pennsylvania  to  |
go  there  as  a  missionary. Three  imperfectly  or
ganized  Lutheran  congregations  in  Pennsylvania,
located  respectively  at  New  Hanover,  New  Provi
dence  (now  Trappe),  and  Philadelphia,  had  already,
in  1733,  sent  three  delegates  to  England,  Holland,
and  Germany  to  solicit  gifts  for  the  erection  of
churches  and  school-houses,  and  to  ask  for  a  pastor
for themselves and other Lutherans scattered
throughout  the  provinces  in  the  New  World. The
delegates  were  kindly  received,  money  was  collect
ed,  and  now  the  first  missionary  was  called,  6  Sept.,


1741.  In  the  beginning  of  the  following  year
Muhlenberg  began  the  journey  to  his  new  field  of
labor;  he  spent  some  time  in  London,  and  on  13
June,  1742,  embarked  on  a  packet  that  was  going
to  Georgia  with  provisions  for  Gen.  Oglethorpe's
colony.  During  the  voyage  he  took  much  interest
in  the  spiritual  welfare  of  passengers  and  sailors,
and  preached  to  them  in  the  English  language.
He  arrived  at  Charleston.  S.  C.,  on  22  Sept.,  1742,
and  on  25  Nov.  he  reached  Philadelphia  and  en
tered  at  once  upon  his  work.  He  labored  with
great  zeal  and  under  many  difficulties  among  the
three  congregations  that  had  called  him.  but  soon
extended  his  labors  to  other  places  in  Pennsylva
nia  and  the  adjacent  provinces.  In  the  early  part
of  the  18th  century  German  Lutherans  had  settled
in  various  parts  of  the  New  World,  and  these  he
carefully  sought  out,  ministered  to  their  spiritual
wants,  and  organized  congregations  among  them.
As  his  field  of  labor  enlarged  he  petitioned  his  pa
trons  in  Germany  for  one  or  more  pastors.  In
1745  Rev.  Peter  Brunnholtz  and  two  theological
students  arrived  in  Pennsylvania.  Mr.  Brunnholtz
was  placed  in  Philadelphia  and  the  students  at
New  Hanover  and  Philadelphia  as  teachers  and
assistants.  Later  others  were  sent  over  from
Halle  in  order  to  take  up  the  work  where  Muhlen
berg  had  made  a  beginning,  and  previous  to  the
Revolutionary  war  there  were  already  a  respect
able  number  of  co-laborers  sent  out  from  Halle.
Muhlenberg  was  married,  23  April,  1745,  to  a
daughter  of  J.  Conrad  Weiser,  of  Tulpehoken,  the
well-known  Indian  interpreter.  After  the  arrival
of  Brunnholtz  at  Philadelphia,  Muhlenberg  resided
at  Trappe.  With  the  arrival  of  more  laborers  the
field,  of  which  he  had  the  oversight,  extended  it
self  more  from  year  to  year,  so  that  about  the  mid
dle  of  the  18th  century  it  extended  from  Georgia,
through  the  Carolinas,  Maryland,  Pennsylvania,
and  New  Jersey,  to  New  York  city  and  the  shores
of  the  upper  Hudson.  In  1748  Muhlenberg  and
his  co-lalx)rers  organized  the  first  Lutheran  synod
on  the  basis  of  the  Lutheran  confessions.  This
synod  stood  in  very  friendly  relations  with  the
Swedish  Lutheran  ministers,  whose  settlement
along  the  Delaware  dated  from  1638.  Muhlenberg
was  eminently  qualified  for  his  task.  He  could
use  four  or  five  languages,  and  could  endure  any
amount  of  work.  During  the  summers  of  1751  and
1752  he  labored  among  the  Dutch  and  Germans  in
New  York  city,  and  he  repeated  his  visit  in  1759
and  1760,  serving  congregations  in  New  York  and
New  Jersey.  He  held  frequent  intercourse  with  the
Swedish  ministers,  delivered  addresses  in  Latin,
and  occasionally  preached  in  the  English  lan
guage.  The  first  church  in  Philadelphia  was  dedi
cated  in  1748.  Later,  in  1762,  he  reorganized  the
congregation  under  a  new  constitution,  which  has
become  the  model  for  most  subsequent  congrega
tions.  Some  part  of  the  years  1774-'5  Muhlen
berg  spent  in  Georgia  in  order  to  re-establish  peace
and  order  among  the  pastors  and  people  there,
and  he  succeeded  in  giving  them  a  new  constitu
tion  and  a  better  form  of  government.  During
the  Revolutionary  war  he  endured  many  trials,
owing  to  the  fact  that  he  and  his  family  cast  their
lot  with  the  Americans.  In  1776  he  removed  to
his  home  at  Trappe.  where  he  resided  during  the
remainder  of  his  life,  continuing  to  preach  as  cir
cumstances  demanded  and  his  failing  health  per
mitted,  and  assisting  the  pastors  and  congrega
tions  with  his  counsel  and  advice.  He  carried  on
an  extensive  correspondence  both  with  his  brethren
in  this  country  and  with  his  patrons  at  Halle  and
elsewhere  in  Germany.  The  result  of  his  vast  for-


454


MUHLENBERG


MUHLENBERG


oign  correspondence  is  given  in  the  "  Halle'sche
Nachrichten,"  published  from  time  to  time  at
Halle,  beginning  with  the  year  1744\  and  later  col
lected  in  one  large  volume  (Halle,  1787).  In  1784
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  conferred  on  him
the  degree  of  D.  1).  Dr.  Muhlenberg  accepted  the
symbolical  books  of  the  Lutheran  church,  and  on
this  basis  organized  congregations  and  synods,
though  the  rigor  of  his  doctrinal  position  was
modified  by  the  orthodox  pietism  of  Halle.  On
7  Oct.,  1887,  the  centennial  of  his  death,  exercises
were  held  at  his  grave  in  Trappe,  Pa.  See  "  Bio
graphical  Sketch  of  II.  M.  Muhlenberg,"  by  J.  G.
Christian  Ilelmuth.  added  to  a  eulogy  pronounced
at  his  funeral  (Philadelphia,  1788);  "Memoir  of
the  Life  and  Times  of  H.  M.  Muhlenberg,  I).  I).."
by  Martin  L.  Stoever,  I).  D.  (185(5) ;  "Early  His
tory  of  the  Lutheran  Church  in  America,"  by
Charles  W.  Schaeffer,  D.I).  (1857);  "Autobiogra
phy  of  II.  M.  Muhlenberg.  D.  D.,  tip  to  the  Year
1743,"  found  in  his  own  handwriting  in  the  ar
chives  at  Halle,  bv  William  Germann,  I).  D.  (Al-
lentown,  Pa,,  1881) ;  "  Halle'sche  Nachrichten,"
new  ed.,  wiih  annotations  (Allentown,  Pa.,  and
Halle,  Germany,  1886) ;  and  "  Life  and  Times  of
Henry  Melchior  Muhlenberg,"  by  William  J.
Mann,  I).  D.  (Philadelphia,  1887).'  Dr.  Muhlen
berg  was  the  father  of  eleven  children. — His  son,
J  oil  n  Peter  Gabriel,  patriot,  b.  in  Trappe,  Pa.,
1  Oct.,  174(5:  d.  near  Philadelphia,  Pa,,  1  Oct.,  1807,
was  sent  when  he  was  sixteen  years  of  age,  with
his  two  brothers,  to  be  educated  in  Germany.

While  at  Halle
he  enlisted  in  a
regiment  of  dra
goons,  but  was
released  through
the  intervention
of  friends,  re
turned  to  this
country  in  176(5,
studied  theology,
and  was  for  a
time  past  or  of  Lu
theran  churches
in  New  German-
town  and  Bed-
minster,  N.  J.  In
1772  he  removed
to  Woodstock,
Va,,  where  many
Germans  from  the
middle  states  had
settled.  In  or
der  that  he  might
enforce  the  pay
ment  of  tithes,  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  re
ceive  Episcopal  ordination,  and  to  secure  this  he
went  to  England,  where  he  was  ordained  priest.
He  continued  to  labor  in  Virginia  until  1775.  when
his  ardent  patriotism  and  military  spirit  induced
him,  at  the  solicitation  of  Gen.  Washington,  with
whom  he  was  acquainted,  to  accept  a  colonel's
commission.  After  he  had  received  his  appoint
ment  he  took  leave  of  his  congregation  in  a  ser
mon  in  which,  after  eloquently  depicting  the
wrongs  this  country  had  suffered  from  Great  Brit
ain,  he  exclaimed:  "There  is  a  time  for  all  things
— a  time  to  preach  and  a  time  to  pray ;  but  there
is  also  a  time  to  fight,  and  that  time  has  now
come."  Then,  pronouncing  the  benediction,  he
threw  off  his  gown,  displaying  a  full  military  uni
form.  Proceeding  to  the 'door  of  the  church,  he
ordered  the  drums  to  beat  for  recruits,  and  nearly
300  of  his  congregation  responded  to  the  appeal.


To  a  relative,  who  subsequently  complained  that
he  had  abandoned  the  church  for  the  army,  he
said :  "  1  am  a  clergyman,  it  is  true,  but  I  am  a
member  of  society  as  well  as  the  poorest  layman,
and  my  liberty  is  as  dear  to  me  as  to  any  man.
Shall  I  then  sit  still  and  enjoy  myself  at  home
when  the  best  blood  of  the  continent  is  spilling  1?
....  Do  you  think  if  America  should  be  con
quered  I  should  be  safe?  Far  from  it.  And
would  you  not  sooner  fight  like  a  man  than  die
like  a  dog?"  Muhlenberg  at  once  marched  with
his  men  to  the  relief  of  Charleston,  S.  C.,  and  his
"  German  regiment,"  the  8th  Virginia,  gained  a
reputation  for  discipline  and  bravery.  He  was
present  at  the  battle  of  Sullivan's  Island,  and,  af
ter  taking  part  in  the  southern  campaigns,  was  pro
moted  brigadier-general  in  1777.  After  being  en
gaged  at  the  Brandy  wine,  Germantown,  M  on  mouth,
Stony  Point,  and  Yorktown,  where  he  commanded
the  1st  brigade  of  light  infantry,  he  was  made
major-general  at  the  close  of  the  war,  before  the
army 'was  disbanded.  He  had  been  in  1774  chair
man  of  the  committee  of  safety  of  his  county,  a
member  of  the  house  of  burgesses,  and  in  1776  lie
was  a  delegate  to  the  State  convention.  On  return
ing  to  civil  pursuits  he  was  at  once  elected  a  mem
ber  of  the  Pennsylvania  council,  was  in  1785
chosen  vice-president  of  that  state,  with  Benjamin
Franklin  as  president,  and  served  as  presidential
elector  in  1797.  He  was  elected  a  member  of
the  1st  congress,  and  re-elected  to  the  2d  and
3d,  serving  from  4  March,  1789,  till  3  March,
1795.  He  was  again  elected  afterward,  and  served
from  2  Dec.,  1799,  till  3  March,  1801,  in  which
year  he  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Demo
crat,  but  resigned  before  congress  met,  having  been
appointed  by  President  Jefferson  supervisor  of  the
revenue  for  the  district  of  Pennsylvania.  In  1803
he  was  made  collector  of  the  port  of  Philadelphia.
A  statue  of  Gen.  Muhlenberg.  by  Blanche  Nevin.
has  been  placed  in  the  capitol  at  Washington,
D.  C.  See  "Life  of  Major-General  Peter  Muhlen
berg,"  by  his  great-nephew,  Henry  A.  Muhlenberg
(Philadelphia,  1849).  —  Another  son,  Frederick
Augustus  Conrad,  b.  in  Trappe,  Pa..  1  Jan.,  1750;
d.  4  June,  1801,  was  also  educated  at  Halle,  Ger
many.  On  22  Sept.,  1770,  he  and  his  brother,
Henry  Ernest,  returned  from  Germany.  He  was
ordained  to  the  ministry  on  25  Oct.,  and  became
his  father's  assistant.  In  1773-'6  he  was  pastor  of
Christ  German  Lutheran  congregation  in  New
York  city,  where  he  was  very  successful  and  high
ly  esteemed,  but,  on  account  of  his  sympathies  with
the  patriots  during  the  Revolution,  he  was  com
pelled  to  leave  New  York,  and  resided  for  a  time
with  his  father  at  Trappe.  In  1777  he  moved  with
his  family  to  New  Hanover  to  take  pastoral  charge
of  that  part  of  his  father's  field  of  labor,  and  soon
afterward  of  the  congregations  at  Oley  and  New
Goshenhoppen.  He  was  well  known  to  the  British
as  a  supporter  of  the  American  cause,  and  on  that
account  suffered  a  great  deal,  but  his  friends  ex
erted  themselves  in  his  behalf.  The  necessity  was
felt  at  this  time  that  the  Germans  should  have  a
representative  in  congress,  and.  as  he  seemed  to  be
peculiarly  qualified  for  this  post,  he  was  elected,  2
March,  1779.  In  August  of  the  same  year  he
laid  aside  his  pastoral  office  and  entered  on  a  politi
cal  career,  in  which  he  was  eminently  successful.
Until  the  end  of  his  life  he  was  called  on  various
occasions  to  the  highest  posts  of  honor  and  re
sponsibility,  being  a  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  twice  speaker  of  the  Pennsylvania  legis
lature,  and  twice  speaker  of  the  U.  S.  house  of  rep
resentatives. — Another  son,  Gotthilf  Henry  Er°


MUHLENBERG


MUHLEXBERG


455


nest,  b.  in  Trappe,  Pa.,  17  Nov.,  1753:  d.  in  Lan-  |
caster.  Pa.,  23  May,  1815,  was  educated  at  Halle,  !
Germany,  with  his  brothers,  and  returned  to  his
native  country  in  1770.  In  October  of  the  same  j
year,  though  not  quite  seventeen  years  of  age,  he
was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the  Lutheran
church,  and  for  several  years  he  was  his  father's
assistant  in  Philadelphia.  From  January  till
April,  1772,  he  labored  among  the  Lutherans  in
New  Jersey,  and  he  then  returned  to  Philadelphia.
In  1773  he  accepted  a  formal  call  from  the  Xew
Jersey  congregations  and  labored  successfully
among  them  for  a  year,  when  he  was  recalled  to
Philadelphia  as  third  pastor  in  the  large  congrega
tion  in  that  city,  and  served  in  that  capacity  until
April,  1779.  In  the  latter  year  he  accepted  a  call
from  the  congregation  at  Lancaster,  which  he
served  until  his  death.  Though  conscientious  in
the  performance  of  his  pastoral  duties,  he  devoted
his  leisure  hours  to  the  study  of  the  natural  sci
ences,  especially  botany,  in  which  he  excelled,  be
ing  acknowledged  by  scientists  in  America  and
Europe  as  maintaining  the  highest  rank.  Various
plants,  discovered  and  classified  by  him,  were
named  in  his  honor.  He  corresponded  with  the
highest  authorities  in  this  and  other  sciences,  and
was  visited,  among  others,  by  Alexander  von
Humboldt  and  Aime  Bonpland.  He  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  American  philosophical  society,  of  the
philosophical  and  physical  societies  of  Gcttingen
and  Berlin,  and  other  scientific  societies  in  Germany,
Sweden,  and  other  countries.  His  works  are  re
garded  as  standards  by  scientists.  Among  his
publications  are  "Catalogus  Plantarum  America1
Septentrionalis"  (Lancaster,  1813);  "Reduction
of  all  the  Genera  of  Plants  contained  in  the  '  Cata
logus  Plantarum '  of  Muhlenberg  to  the  Xatural
Families  of  De  Jussieu's  System"  (Philadelphia.
1815) ;  and  "  Descriptio  uberior  Granimum  et
Plantarum  Calamariarum  Americae  Septentriona
lis  Indignarum  et  Circurum  "  (1817).  See  "  Gott-
hilf  Heinrich  Ernst  Muhlenberg  als  Botaniker,"
by  Prof.  John  M.  Maisch  (Xew  York,  1886).— Gott-
hilf's  son,  Henry  Augustus,  clergyman,  b.  in
Lancaster.  Pa.,  13  May,  1782:  d.  in  Reading.  Pa.,
12  Aug.,  1844.  was  educated  chiefly  by  his  father,
studied  theology,  and  was  ordained  pastor  of  Trini
ty  Lutheran  church,  Reading.  Pa.,  in  1802.  Here  |
he  remained  until  1828,  when  he  was  compelled  to  j
give  up  his  charge  on  account  of  impaired  health,
and  retired  to  a  farm.  He  then  entered  public
life  and  was  elected  and  four  times  re-elected  to
congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  7  Dec..
1829.  till  9  Feb.,  1838,  when  he  resigned.  In  1835
he  was  the  unsuccessful  Democratic  candidate  for
governor  of  Pennsylvania.  He  declined  the  secre
taryship  of  the  navy  and  the  mission  to  St  Peters
burg,  which  were  offered  him  by  President  Van
Buren,  but  was  made  minister  to  Austria,  and  held
the  office  from  8  Feb.,  1838,  till  18  Sept.,  1840.
[n  1844  he  was  again  nominated  as  the  Democratic
candidate  for  governor  of  his  native  state,  but
died  before  the  election  took  place. — John  Peter
Gabriel's  son.  Francis  Samuel,  lawyer,  b.  in
Philadelphia.  Pa.,  22  April.  1795:  d.  in  Pickaway
county,  Ohio,  in  1832.  received  an  academical  edu
cation,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
After  serving  as  the  private  secretary  of  Gov.  Jo
seph  H tester,  of  Pennsylvania,  in  1820-'3.  he  re
moved  to  Pickaway  county.  Ohio,  where  he  was
chosen  a  member  of  the  legislature.  He  was  sub
sequently  elected  to  congress  to  fill  out  an  unex-
nired  term,  and  served  from  19  Dec..  1828.  till  3
March.  1829. — Frederick  Augustus  Conrad's  grand
son,  William  Augustus,  clergyman,  b.  in  Phila-  i


delphia,  Pa..  16  Sept.,  1796;  d.  in  Xe%v  York  city,
8  April,  1877,  was  the  son  of  Henry  William  Muh
lenberg. He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania in 1814, studied theology uiider
Bishop  White,  was
made deacon, 18
Sept., 1817, and
became assistant
in Christ church,
Philadelphia, of
which the bishop
was rector. He
was  ordained  pres
byter, 22 Oct.,
1802,  and  soon  af
terward  accepted  a
call  to  take  charge
of St. James's
church.  Lancaster,
Pa.,  where  he  re- /A i  , •

mained  six  vears.  H"  I  Of  1  \  \  x
Here  he  was  in-  W.U^W
strumental  in  es
tablishing  the  first  public  school  in  the  state  out  of
Philadelphia.  He  also  founded,  in  1828,  a  school  at
Flushing.  L.  I.,  which  was  merged  in  1838  in  St.
Paul's  college,  in  the  vicinity,  and  for  nearly  twen
ty  years  was  its  principal.  In  1846  he  became  rector
of  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Communion,  Xew  York
city,  which  had  been  erected  by  his  sister,  and  was
the  earliest  free  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  Xot
long  afterward  he  began  his  efforts  to  secure  the
founding  of  St.  Luke's  hospital,  at  Fifth  avenue
and  54th  street,  which  was  opened  in  1859.  Dr.
Muhlenberg  becoming  its  first  pastor  and  super
intendent,  which  office  he  held  until  his  death.
In  1852  he  organized  the  first  Protestant  sister
hood  in  the  United  States,  and  the  ladies  of  this
association  afterward  took  charge  of  St.  Luke's
hospital.  He  also,  in  1866,  made  an  effective  be
ginning  toward  establishing  an  industrial  Chris
tian  settlement  at  St.  Johnland,  L.  I.,  about  forty-
five  miles  from  Xew  York.  He  received  the
degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Columbia  in  1834.  Dr.
Muhlenberg  was  largely  concerned  in  extending
and  improving  the  hymnology  of  his  denomina
tion,  serving  on  a  committee  appointed  for  that
purpose,  besides  writing  such  general  favorites  as
"  I  would  not  live  alway,"  "  Like  Xoah's  weary
dove,"  "Saviour,  who  thy  flock  art  feeding."  and
"  Shout  the  glad  tidings."  He  also  originated
the  "  Memorial "  movement  in  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church,  and  wrote  much  on  evangelical
union,  of  which  he  was  a  strenuous  advocate.  His
career  was  one  of  busy  benevolence,  the  necessi
ties  of  his  four  great  undertakings — school,  church,
hospital,  and  industrial  settlement — entirely  ab
sorbing  his  energies.  He  had  great  personal'mag-
netism  and  much  kindliness  of  manner,  which  es
pecially  fitted  him  for  the  educational  work  that
occupied  so  large  a  part  of  his  life,  and  for  his  in
tercourse  with  the  poor.  Besides  many  tracts,  es
says,  and  occasional  poems  and  sermons,  he  pub
lished  "Church  Poetry,  being  Portions  of  the
Psalms  in  Verse,  and  Hymns  suited  to  the  Fes
tivals  and  Fasts,  from  Various  Authors"  (Xew
York,  1823) :  "  Christian  Education  ''  (1831) ;  "  Mu
sic  of  the  Church."  in  conjunction  with  Bishop
Wainwright.  and  "The  People's  Psalter"  (1847) ;
"Letters  on  Protestant  Sisterhoods"  (1853);
"Family  Prayers"  (1861):  "St.  Johnland:  Ideal
and  Actual""  (1867):  "Christ  and  the  Bible"
(1869):  "  The  Woman  and  her  Accusers,"  a  ser
mon  (1870) ;  "  '  I  Would  not  Live  Alway.'  with  the
Story  of  the  Hymn"  (1871);  and  "Evangelical


456


MUIR


MULGRAVE


Catholic  Papers,  Addresses,  Lectures,  and  Ser
mons  "  (2  vols.,  1875-'7).  See  "  The  Life  and
Work  of  William  Augustus  Muhlenberg,"  by
Anne  Ayres  (Xew  York,  1880).— Gotthilf  s  grand
son,  Frederick  Augustus,  educator,  son  of  Fred
erick  A.  Muhlenberg,  M.  D.,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,
25  Aug.,  1818,  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  college
in  1836,  and  at  Princeton  theological  seminary  in
1838.  He  was  licensed  in  1854  by  the  Lutheran
ministeriuni  of  Pennsylvania  and  ordained  in
1855.  In  18(57  Pennsylvania  college.  Gettysburg,
Pa.,  conferred  on  him' the  degree  of  D.  I).,  and  in
1887  he  received  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Muhlenberg
college,  Allentown,  Pa.,  and  Franklin  and  Mar
shall  college.  He  has  been  professor  in  Franklin
college  from  1838  till  1850,  of  Greek  in  Pennsyl
vania  college  from  1850  till  1807,  first  president  of
Muhlenberg  college,  Pa.,  from  18(57  till  1876,  and
professor  of  the  Greek  language  and  literature  in  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  since  1876.  As  a  Greek
scholar  and  instructor,  Prof.  Muhlenberg  takes  a
deservedly  high  rank.  He  is  a  frequent  contributor
to  the  periodicals  of  his  church,  having  translated
various  articles  from  the  German  for  the  Gettysburg
'•  Evangelical  Review,"  and  written  many  valu
able  papers  for  the  "Lutheran"  and  "Lutheran
Church  Review,"  Philadelphia.  He  has  published
h>s  "  Inaugural  Address  "  as  president  of  Muhlen
berg  college  (Allentown,  Pa.,  1867) :  "  Semi-Cen-
tennial  Address''  at  Pennsylvania  college  (Gettys
burg.  Pa.,  1882) ;  and  other  addresses.

MUIR,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cumnock.
Scotland,  12  April,  1757;  d.  in  Alexandria,  Va..  8
Aug.,  1820.  lie  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Glasgow  in  1776,  studied  theology  at  Edin
burgh,  and  was  licensed  as  a  dissenting  minister
in  London  in  1779,  after  which  he  taught.  In
1781  he  was  ordained  an  evangelist  at  the  Scots
church  in  London,  and  accepted  a  call  from  a
company  of  Scotch  Presbyterians  in  Bermuda,
where  he  remained  for  eight  years,  acting  also  as
principal  of  an  academy.  In  1788  he  came  to  New
York,  and  in  1789  he  was  called  to  the  Presbyte
rian  church  of  Alexandria,  Va.,  which  charge  he
held  until  his  death.  In  1791  he  received  the  de
gree  of  D.  D.  from  Yale.  Dr.  Muir  was  the  author
of  "  An  Examination  of  the  Principles  contained
in  the  '  Age  of  Reason ' :  In  Ten  Discourses  "  (1795)
and  a  volume  of  ten  sermons  preached  on  special
occasions  (1812). — His  son,  Samuel  C.,  physician,
b.  in  the  District  of  Columbia  about  1785  ;  d.  about
1832,  was  educated  at  Edinburgh,  and  joined  the
U.  S.  army  as  a  surgeon  on  7  April,  1813,  but  re
signed  his  commission,  1  April,  1818,  married  the
daughter  of  a  chief  of  the  Sac  or  Fox  Indians,  and
was  regarded  as  one  of  the  greatest  men  of  the
nation.  About  three  years  before  his  death  he
practised  medicine  in  Galena,  111.,  and  during  the
Black  Hawk  war  he  volunteered  to  stay  the  ravages
of  a  cholera  epidemic  in  the  army,  but.  after  sav
ing  many  soldiers,  fell  a  victim  to  the  disease.

MULCASTER,  Sir  William  Howe,  British  na
val  officer,  b.  in  1785 ;  d.  in  Dover,  England,  2
March,  1837.  He  was  a  son  of  Maj.-Gen.  Mulcas-
ter,  of  the  royal  engineers,  and  was  made  a  lieu
tenant  in  the  navy  early  in  1800.  He  served
against  the  Spanish,  and  i'n  January,  1809,  at  the
capture  of  Cayenne  in  the  "  Confiance,"  receiving
for  his  service  a  gold  sword  from  the  prince-regent
of  Portugal.  He  became  commander,  13  May,
1809,  and  was  appointed  to  the  "Emulous"  slodp
on  the  Halifax  station  about  October,  1810.  He
captured  '•  L'Adele,"  letter  of  marque,  26  Aug.,
1811,  and  the  "Gossamer,"  an  American  privateer.
30  July,  1812,  and  on  3  Aug.  of  that  year  the


"Emulous"  was  wrecked  on  Sable  island.  In
March,  1813,  Capt.  Mulcaster  was  appointed  to  the
"  Princess  Charlotte,"  then  building  on  Lake  On
tario,  and  on  29  Dec.,  1813,  he  was  promoted  to
post  rank.  On  G  May,  1814,  soon  after  the  launch
ing  of  this  vessel,  he  received,  when  storming  Fort
Oswego,  a  dangerous  wound,  from  which  lie  never
recovered.  He  received  a  pension  of  £300  and  was
nominated  a  companion  of  the  bath.

MULFORD,  Elisha,  clergyman,  b.  in  Montrose,
Pa.,  19  Nov.,  1833  ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  9  Dec,,
1885.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1855,  began
the  study  of  theology  in  Union  theological  semi
nary,  New  York  city,  and  subsequently  continued  it
in  Halle  and  Heidelberg,  Germany.  He  was  or
dained  deacon  in  1859,  and  priest  in  1862.  He  was
occupied  in  ministerial  labors,  first  in  Darien,
Conn.,  in  1861,  then  in  South  Orange,  N.  J.,  in
1861-'4,  and,  after  an  interval  of  thirteen  years,  in
Friendsville,  Pa.,  in  1877-'81.  From  1864  till  1877
he  resided  in  his  native  town  without  parochial
charge,  but  after  1881  he  made  his  home  in  Cam
bridge,  Mass.,  where  he  served  as  lecturer  on  apolo
getics  in  the  Episcopal  theological  school.  He
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Yale  in  1872.
Dr.  Mulford  belonged  to  the  school  of  Coleridge
and  Maurice  in  theological  sentiment  and  expres
sion,  and  is  very  much  admired  by  those  who  sym
pathize  with  what  is  termed  "  the  union  of  'the
utmost  liberty  of  philosophic  thought  with  Chris
tian  dogmas."  His  reputation  is  based  on  two
publications,  which  have  gone  through  numerous
editions,  "The  Nation,  the  Foundation  of  Civil
Order  and  Political  Life  in  the  United  States"
(New  York,  1870),  and  "  The  Republic  of  God,  an
Institute  of  Theology  "  (1881).

MULdrRAVE,  Constant! ne  John  Phipps,
Baron,  English  navigator,  b.  in  England  in  1744;
d.  there  in  1792.  lie  early  entered  the  British
navy,  commanded  a  northeast  arctic  exploring
expedition  in  1773.  and  returned  in  the  same  year,
after  reaching  latitude  80°  41'  N.,  beyond  which
lay  an  impenetrable  field  of  ice.  Subsequently  he
became  commissioner  of  the  admiralty,  held  other
important  offices,  and  was  made  Baron  Mulgrave,
16  June,  1790.  At  his  death  the  English  barony
became  extinct,  but  his  Irish  barony  devolved  upon
his  brother. — His  brother,  Henry  Fliipps,  soldier,
b.  in  England,  4  Feb.,  1755  ;  d.  there,  7  April,  1831.
was  colonel  of  the  31st  regiment  of  foot,  governor
of  Scarborough,  and  lord-lieutenant  and  custos
rotulorum  of  the  East  Riding  in  York  county.  He
served  in  the  British  army  during  the  Revolution
ary  war,  and  was  afterward  a  member  of  William
Pitt's  cabinet,  and  was  first  lord  of  the  admiralty
in  1807.  He  was  a  bitter  opponent  of  Catholic
emancipation.  On  7  Sept.,  1812,  he  was  raised  to
the  rank  of  Viscount  Norman  by  and  Earl  of  Mul
grave. — Henry's  son,  Constantine  Henry,  first
Marquis  of  Normanby,  British  statesman,  b.  in
Mulgrave  castle,  York.  15  May.  1797;  d.  in  Hamil
ton  Lodge,  South  Kensington,  28  July,  1863.  He
was  educated  at  Harrow,  and  at  Trinity  college,
Cambridge,  where  he  took  his  degree  of  M.  A.  in
1818.  He  entered  parliament  as  a  member  for
Scarborough  in  that  year,  and  made  his  first  speech
in  the  house  of  commons  in  1819  in  favor  of  the
Roman  Catholic  claims.  He  shortly  -afterward
resigned  his  seat  and  retired  to  Italy.  In  1822  he
was  elected  member  for  Higham  Ferrars.  and  in
1826  he  was  chosen  representative  of  the  borough
of  Malton,  and  gave  his  support  to  Mr.  Canning's
administration.  He  was  then  a  Liberal,  and  a
popular  member  of  the  lower  house.  He  succeeded
his  father  as  Earl  Mulgrave  in  April,  1831,  and  ill


MULLANY


MULLEN


457


1832  was  appointed  captain-general  and  governor
of  Jamaica.  During  his  administration  he  carried
into  effect  the  recent  legislation  for  the  abolition
of  slavery,  and  succeeded  in  suppressing  a  danger
ous  military  revolt  without  bloodshed.  He  became
lord  privy  seal  in  1833,  was  lord-lieutenant  of
Ireland  in  1835-'9,  and  was  created  Marquis  of
Normanby,  25  June,  1838.  He  was  afterward  secre
tary  of  state  for  the  colonies  in  1839,  home  secretary
in  1839-'41,  ambassador  at  Paris  in  1846-'o2,  and
from  1854  till  1858  held  the  same  post  at  Florence.
He  was  made  a  knight  of  the  garter  in  1851.  Lord
Normanby  constantly  opposed  the  foreign  policy
of  Lord  Palmerston.  He  was  the  author  of  some
political  pamphlets;  "A  Year  of  Revolution,"
from  his  journal  in  Paris  (2  vols.,  1851) ;  and  several
novels,  among  them  "Matilda"  (1825)  and  "Yes
and  No ''  (1827). — Constantino  Henry's  son,  George
Augustus  Coustantiue  Phipps,  second  Marquis
of  Normanby,  b.  23  July,  1819,  entered  the  Scots
fusilier  guards  in  1838,  and  was  comptroller,  and
subsequently  treasurer,  of  the  Queen's  household
from  1853  till  1858,  when  he  was  appointed  governor
of  Nova  Scotia.  He  retained  this  office  till  his
succession  to  his  father's  title,  28  July,  1863,  when
he  resigned.  He  was  nominated  governor  of
Queensland,  8  April,  1871,  governor  of  New  Zea
land  in  1874,  and  in  December,  1878,  governor  of
Victoria.  He  was  member  of  parliament  for  Scar
borough  for  nine  years,  and  was  sworn  a  privy
councillor  in  1851.

MULLANY,  James  Robert  Madison,  naval
officer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  20  Oct.,  1818 ;  d.  in
Bryn  Mawr,  Montgomery  co.,  Pa.,  17  Sept.,  1887.
He  was  a  son  of  Col.  James  R.  Mullany,  quarter
master-general,  U.  S.  army,  and  entered  the  navy
as  midshipman  from  New  Jersey,  7  Jan.,  1832.  He
was  promoted  passed  midshipman.  23  June,  1838,
and  lieutenant,  29  Feb.,  1844.  He  was  actively
engaged  in  the  Mexican  war,  and  took  part  in  the
capture  of  the  city  of  Tobasco  in  June,  1847.
Prior  to  the  civil  war  he  saw  much  service  at  sea
in  almost  every  quarter  of  the  globe.  From  Janu
ary  till  March,  1801,  he  served  on  the  frigate  "Sa-
bine "  in  the  protection  of  Fort  Pickens,  and  in
April  and  May  of  that  year,  in  command  of  the
gun-boat  "  Wyandotte,"  occupied  a  position  in  the
harbor  of  Pensacola,  in  rear  of  Fort  Pickens,  which
was  then  threatened  by  an  attack  from  the  enemy,
and  he  assisted  in  re-enforcing  that  fort  on  12
April,  1861.  He  was  commissioned  commander,
18  Oct.,  1801,  and  assigned  to  the  steamer  "  Bien-
ville  "  in  the  North  Atlantic  and  West  Gulf  squad
rons,  where  he  remained  from  April,  1862,  till
May,  1865,  except  for  a  short  time,  including  the
battle  of  Mobile  Bay,  being  frequently  under  the
enemy's  fire.  Having  volunteered  his  services  for
the  battle  of  Mobile  Bay,  and  the  "  Bienville  "  not
being  considered  by  Admiral  Farragut  as  fit  to  en
gage  the  forts,  he  was  in  the  action  of  5  Aug.,
1804,  in  command  of  the  "  Oneida."  This  ship,
lashed  to  the  "  Galena,"  was  on  the  side  toward
Fort  Morgan  and  in  the  rear  of  the  line  of  battle,
and  exposed  to  a  very  destructive  fire  from  that
fort.  Later  the  "Oneida"  was  attacked  by  the
ram  "  Tennessee,"  which  was  enabled  to  rake  her.
One  shot  inflicted  severe  loss  on  his  ship  and
wounded  Commander  Mullany  in  several  places,
one  wound  rendering  amputation  of  the  left  arm
necessary.  Until  this  moment  he  had  directed  the
movements  of  both  ships,  and,  stationed  in  a  con
spicuous  place,  encouraged  his  men  as  well  by  his
example  as  by  his  words.  After  this  the  engage
ment,  so  far  as  the  "  Oneida  "  was  concerned,  was
at  an  end.  From  April  till  September,  1863,  he


commanded  a  division  of  the  West  Gulf  squadron,
and  during  the  course  of  the  war  he  captured
eleven  blockade-runners  of  a  great  aggregate  value,
and  in  addition  cut  out,  with  boats,  two  schooners
laden  with  cotton  in  the  harbor  of  Galveston,  Tex.
From  May,  1805,  till  May,  1808,  he  was  inspector
in  charge  of  ordnance  in  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard.
He  was  commissioned  captain  in  1806,  was  one  of
the  board  of  visitors  to  the  naval  academy  in  1868,
and  commanded  the  sloop  "  Richmond "  in  the
European  squadron  from  December,  1868,  till  No
vember,  1871.  He  was  commissioned  commodore,
15  Aug.,  1870,  and  was  in  charge  of  the  Mediter
ranean  squadron  from  October,  1870,  till  Novem
ber,  1871,  and  of  the  Philadelphia  navy-yard  in
1872-'4.  After  receiving  his  rear-admiral's  com
mission,  5  June,  1874,  he  commanded  the  North
Atlantic  squadron  till  February,  1876,  during  a
part  of  which  time  he  co-operated  efficiently  with
Gen.  William  H.  Emory  and  Gen.  Philip  H.  Sheri
dan,  who  were  successively  in  command  at  New
Orleans.  He  was  governor  of  the  Naval  asylum,
Philadelphia,  from  1876  till  1879,  when  he  was  re
tired  from  active  service,  and  he  made,  to  the  close
of  his  life,  his  home  in  the  last-named  city,  dying
at  one  of  its  suburban  summer  resorts.  "  No  gov
ernment  or  people,"  says  one  who  knew  him  inti
mately  and  well,  "  ever  had  a  more  gallant  or  faith
ful  public  servant ;  and  he  was  as  modest,  as  genial,
as  gentle,  and  as  kind  as  he  was  faithful  and  brave."

MULLANY,  Patrick  Francis,  educator,  b.  in
County  Tipperary,  Ireland,  29  June,  1847.  He
came  to  this  country  in  his  early  years,  and  at  the
age  of  fifteen  joined  the  brothers  of  the  Christian
schools.  In  i860  he  was  appointed  professor  of
mathematics  and  English  literature  at  Rock  Hill
college,  Ellicott  city,  Md.,  of  which  he  became
president  in  1878,  and  which  post  he  now  (1888)
holds.  He  has  frequently  contributed  to  the
"  American  Catholic  Quarterly  Review,"  and  has
delivered  many  lectures,  including  one  on  the
"Psychological  Aspects  of  Education"  before  the
International  congress  of  education  at  the  New
Orleans  exposition,  and  his  papers  upon  "Dante"
and  "  Aristotle  "  have  been  read  before  the  Con
cord  school  of  philosophy.  He  writes  under  the
pen-name  of  "  Brother  Azarias,"  and  has  published
"  Philosophy  of  Literature  "  (Philadelphia,  1874) ;
"  Development  of  English  Literature  "  (New  York,
1880);  "Address  on  Thinking"  (1883);  "Culture
of  the  Spiritual  Sense  "  (1887) :  "  Aristotle  and  the
Christian  Church"  (London,  1887);  and  numerous
papers  on  education.

MULLEN,  Tobias,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  County
Tyrone,  Ireland,  in  1818.  After  a  preparatory
course  in  classics  in  Castlefin  school,  he  was  entered
at  Maynooth  college,  where  he  studied  theology
and  received  minor  orders.  He  came  to  the  United
States  with  Bishop  O'Connor  of  Pittsburg,  in
1843,  finished  his  theological  studies,  and  was  or
dained  priest,  1  Sept.,  1844.  After  holding  various
charges  he  was  transferred  to  the  rectorship  of  St.
Peter's,  Alleghany,  Pa.,  in  1854,  and  in  1864  he
was  appointed  vicar-general  of  the  diocese.  He  was
consecrated  bishop  of  Erie,  2  Aug.,  1808.  During
the  administration  of  Bishop  Mullen  the  Roman
Catholic  population  has  increased  from  30,000  to
about  60,000,  and  the  churches  from  55  to  99.
The  number  of  priests  has  risen  from  35  to  73.
Under  his  auspices  a  college  was  built  at  North
west,  and  is  conducted  by  the  congregation  of  the
Most  Holy  Redeemer.  Academies  for  young  ladies
were  also  built  and  given  in  charge  of  the  Bene
dictine  nuns  and  Sisters  of  St.  Joseph,  and  there
are  fifty-eight  parochial  schools.


458


MULLER


MUNDE


MULLER,  Albert  A.,  poet,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C.,  about  180U.  lie  was  educated  in  his  native
city,  entered  the  ministry,  and  after  1825  went  to
the  southwest,  where  all  traces  of  him  have  been
lost.  One  of  his  poems  was  largely  copied  in  the
newspapers  and  appeared  as  the  first  piece  in  the
early  American  editions  of  Moore's  "  Sacred  Melo
dies."  He  published  a  volume  of  poems,  which  at
tracted  much  attention  (Charleston,  1825).

MULLER.  Nikolans,  German  poet,  b.  in  Lan-
genau.  near  Ulm,  Germany,  in  1809 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  14  Aug.,  1875.  In  1823  he  was  appren
ticed  to  a  printer,  and  after  learning  this  trade
thoroughly  settled  in  Stuttgart.  Many  of  his  poems
appeared  in  1834-'7,  entitled  "Lieder  eines  Auto-
didakten,"  and  a  collection  was  published  in  1837.
He  took  part  in  the  revolutionary  movements  of
1848,  was  forced  to  flee  to  Switzerland,  and  in  1853
came  to  New  York,  where  he  bought  a  printing-
office.  In  the  period  of  the  civil  war  he  published
"  Zehu  gepanzerte  Sonette"  (New  York.  1802).  and
a  volume  of  poems  entitled  "  Neuere  Gedichte  "
(1867).  During  the  Franco-German  war  he  pub
lished  a  collection  of  patriotic  poems,  "  Frische
Blatter  auf  die  Wunden  deutscher  Krieger."  In
1874  he  retired  from  the  printing  business.  At  the
time  of  his  death  he  was  preparing  a  complete  edi
tion  of  his  poems.  See  "  Aus  der  transatlantischen
Gescllschaft."  by  Karl  Knortz  (Leipsic,  1882).

MULLETT,  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Whittingham.
Vt.,  17  Oct.,  1784;  d.  10  Sept.,  1858.  His  father,
a  tailor,  removed  to  Darien.  N.  Y..  about  1800.
apprenticed  his  son  to  a  joiner  and  millwright,  and
assisted  in  constructing  a  saw-mill  on  original
mechanical  principles.  In  1810  the  son  became  a
clerk  in  Fredonia,  N.  Y.,  and  during  his  service
tried  a  suit  for  his  employers,  having  studied  law
during  his  leisure.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1814,  and  in  1823  was  elected  to  the  legisla
ture,  serving  two  terms.  In  1841  he  removed  to
Buffalo,  N.  Y.  In  1846  he  was  made  attorney  for
Buffalo,  and  in  1847  he  became  justice  of  the
supreme  court  of  New  York.

MULLIGAN.  James  A.,  soldier,  b.  in  Utica,  N.
Y..  25  June,  1830;  d.  in  Winchester,  Va.,  26  July,
1864.  His  parents  were  Irish,  and  removed  to
Chicago  in  1836.  He  was  the  first  graduate,  in
1850,  of  the  University  of  St.  Mary's  of  the  Lake,
and  in  that  year  began  to  study  law.  He  accom
panied  John  Lloyd  Stephens  on  his  expedition  to
Panama  in  1851,  and,  returning  to  Chicago  in  the
following  year,  resumed  the  study  of  law,  and
edited  a  weekly  Roman  Catholic  paper  entitled  the
"  Western  Tablet."  He  was  soon  admitted  to  the
bar,  and,  after  practising  in  Chicago,  became,  in
1857,  a  clerk  in  the  department  of  the  interior  in
Washington.  At  the  opening  of  the  civil  war  he
raised  the  so-called  Irish  brigade,  which  consisted
of  but  one  regiment,  the  23d  Illinois,  of  which  he
was  made  colonel.  He  conducted  the  defence  of
Lexington,  Mo.,  from  July  till  September,  1861,
holding  the  town  for  nine  days  against  an  over
whelming  force  under  Gen.  Sterling  Price,  was
captured  on  20  Sept.,  exchanged  on  25  Nov..  1861,
and  returned  to  Chicago  as  the  hero  of  Lexington.
He  reorganized  his  regiment,  and  after  a  short
lecturing  tour  in  the  eastern  states  took  command
of  Camp  Douglas  and  participated  in  several  -en
gagements  in  Virginia.  Col.  Mulligan  was  offered
the  commission  of  brigadier-general,  which  he  de
clined,  preferring  to  remain  with  his  regiment.  He
was  fatally  wounded  during  a  charge  on  the  Con
federate  lines  at  the  battle  of  Winchester.  His
men  attempted  to  carry  him  from  the  field,  but,
seeing  that  the  colors'  of  the  brigade  were  en


dangered,  he  exclaimed,  "Lay  me  down,  and  save
the  flag  !  "  repeating  the  order  when  they  hesitated.
They  obeyed,  but  before  their  return  he  was  borne
away  by  the  enemy,  and  died  in  their  hands.

MULLOCK.  John  Thomas,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Ireland  in  1806 ;  d.  in  St.  John's,  N.  F..  29  March,
1869.  He  was  nominated  bishop  of  Thaumacus,
and  coadjutor  to  the  bishop  of  St.  John's,  N.  F..  in
1847,  and  succeeded  him  as  bishop  in  1850.  He
edited  and  translated  Alfonso  Maria  Liguori's
"  History  of  Heresies  and  their  Refutation "  (2
vols..  Dublin,  1847).

MULOCH,  William,  Canadian  member  of  par
liament,  b.  in  Bond  Head,  Simcoe  co.,  Out..  19  Jan.,
1843.  He  was  educated  at  the  University  of  To
ronto,  where  he  was  gold  medallist  in  modern  lan
guages,  and  was  graduated  in  1863.  lie  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Ontario  in  1868,
and  was  for  four  years  an  examiner  in  the  Law  so
ciety  at  Toronto,  and  one  of  its  lecturers  on  equity.
In  1873  he  .was  elected  a  member  of  the  senate  of
Toronto  university,  retaining  a  seat  on  that,  board
till  1878,  and  in  1881,  1882,  and  1884  he  was  chosen
vice-chancellor  of  the  university.  He  was  elected
to  the  Dominion  parliament  for  North  York  as  a
Liberal  in  1882,  and  was  re-elected  in  1887.  Mr.
Muloch  is  president  of  the  Farmers'  loan  and  trust
company  and  director  of  various  other  financial
institutions.

MULVANY,  Charles  Pelham,  Canadian  cler
gyman,  b.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  20  May,  1835:  d.  in
Toronto,  Canada,  31  May,  1885.  He  was  graduated
at  Trinity  college,  Dublin,  and  served  several  years
in  the  English  navy  as  surgeon.  He  then  was
made  deacon  in  the  Church  of  England  in  1868.  and
ordained  priest  by  the  bishop  of  Ontario  in  1872.
For  some  time  he  was  assistant  professor  of  classics
in  Lenoxville,  where  he  conducted  the  "  Students'
Monthly."  Subsequently  he  was  curate  in  various
parishes.  The  latter  years  of  his  life  were  given  to
literature.  He  contributed  prose  and  verse  to
magazines  and  was  the  author  of  "  Lyrics  of  History
and  Life  "  (1880) ;  "  History  of  the  County  of  Brant,
Ontario  "  (Brantford,  1883) ;  "  Toronto — Past  and
Present,"  a  hand-book  of  the  city  (Toronto,  1884);
and  "  The  History  of  the  Northwest  Rebellion  of
1885"  (1885).  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was
preparing  a  "  History  of  Liberalism  in  Canada."

MUN1)E,  Paul  Fortunatus,  physician,  b.  in
Dresden,  Saxony,  7  Sept.,  1846.  lie  was  brought
by  his  parents  to  this  country  in  1849,  and  gradu
ated  in  medicine  at  Harvard  in  1866,  after  serving
as  acting  medical  cadet  in  the  U.  S.  army  in  1864.
He  then  entered  the  Bavarian  army  as  a'volunteer
assistant  surgeon,  and  served  through  the  war  of
1866,  after  which  he  was  an  assistant  in  hospitals  in
Wiirzburg.  He  was  a  battalion  surgeon  of  Bava
rian  troops  in  the  Franco-German  war,  took  the
degree  of  master  in  obstetrics  at  Vienna  university
in  December,  1871,  and  in  October  1872  returned
to  New  York,  where  he  has  since  practised,  mak
ing  a  specialty  of  gynecology.  For  several  years
after  1880  he  was  professor  of  that  branch  at  Dart
mouth,  and  he  now  (1888)  holds  the  same  chair  in
the  New  York  Polyclinic.  Dr.  Munde  has  been
connected  with  various  hospitals,  and  is  a  member
of  many  medical  societies  in  this  country  and
Europe.  He  has  invented  numerous  instruments
connected  with  the  practice  of  his  specialty.  Since
1873  he  has  edited  the  '•American  Journal  of  Ob
stetrics,"  and  besides  more  than  fifty  contributions
to  current  medical  literature,  in  English  and  Ger
man,  h.e  has  published  "  Obstetric  Palpation  "  (New
York.  1880),  and  "Minor  Surgical  Gynecology"
(1880  ;  2d  ed.,  revised  and  enlarged,  1885).


MUNECAS


MUNN


459


MUXECAS,  Ildefonso  de  las  (moon-yay'-casX
Bolivian  patriot,  b.  in  Cochabainba,  15  Aug.,  1776:
d.  near  Desaguadero.  7  July,  1816.  He  studied
theology  in  La  Paz,  and,  after  being  ordained  priest,
travelled  for  some  time  in  the  Argentine  provinces,
and  afterward  in  Europe,  whence  he  returned  as
chaplain  to  a  high  official  that  had  been  sent  to  the
viceroyalty  of  Peru.  Soon  afterward  he  was  ap
pointed  to  the  parish  of  the  cathedral  in  Cuzco.
He  corresponded  with  his  political  friends  in  Bo
livia,  and  when  the  first  revolution  of  Chuquisaea
and  La  Paz  began,  he  decided  to  prepare  for  a
general  uprising  in  Peru.  He  secretly  informed
his  friends  and  parishioners  of  his  plans,  and  for
warded  arms  and  ammunition  to  the  insurgents  in
upper  Peru,  but  was  discovered  and  arrested.  His
trial  for  treason  had  begun  in  1813,  when  he  es
caped  and  joined  the  cacique  Pumakahua  (q.  v.),
who  possessed  great  influence  among  the  natives.
Mufiecas  persuaded  him  to  declare  for  independ
ence,  and  an  uprising  of  the  Indians  followed.
While  Pumakahua  with  his  native  army  invested
Arequipa,  Munecas  gathered  400  resolute  followers
and  marched  toward  upper  Peru,  fomenting  on  his
march  the  insurrection  in  the  provinces  that  he
passed.  After  defeating  the  Spanish  forces  at  De-
saguadero,  he  provided  his  followers  with  the  cap
tured  arms,  and  attacked  La  Paz,  which  he  took
after  a  protracted  fight  on  24  Sept.,  1814.  When
the  Spaniards  received  re-enforcements  from  Peru
they  soon  recovered  La  Paz  and  other  cities,  but
Munecas  continued  a  guerilla  warfare  and  soon
became  a  terror  to  the  royalists  in  the  provinces
that  he  occupied.  At  last  he  thought  himself
strong  enough  to  give  battle  to  the  Spaniards,  but
after  a  desperate  fight  he  was  totally  routed  by  Col.
Gamarra  in  Colola  and  taken  prisoner  with  many
of  his  followers,  who  were  immediately  executed.
It  was  intended  to  send  him  to  La  Paz  to  be  de
graded  and  then  hanged,  but  on  the  way,  near  the
scene  of  his  former  triumph,  he  was  assassinated,
according  to  the  patriots,  or,  according  to  the
Spaniards,  killed  by  the  accidental  discharge  of  a
gun.  A  province  in  Bolivia  was  named  in  his  honor.

MUNFORD,  William,  author,  b.  in  Mecklen
burg  county,  Va.,  15  Aug.,  1775;  d.  in  Richmond.
Va.,  21  June,  1825.  His  father,  Col.  Robert  Mun-
ford,  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution,  was  the  author  of
two  dramatic  compositions,  "  The  Candidate  "  and
"  The  Patriots,"  published  at  Petersburg,  Va.,  in
1798,  and  a  spirited  song  of  the  Revolution.  The
son  was  educated  at  William  and  Mary,  studied
law  under  George  Wythe,  and  was  in  1797-1801  a
member  of  the  Virginia  house  of  delegates.  He
was  in  the  state  senate  in  1801-'5.  in  the  privy
council  till  1811,  and  clerk  of  the  house  of  delegates
during  the  remainder  of  his  life.  He  was  also  for
several  years  the  reporter  of  the  decisions  of  the
supreme  court  of  appeals  of  Virginia,  of  which  four
volumes  (18U6-'9)  were  prepared  in  conjunction
with  William  W.  Hening,  and  six  volumes,  from
1810  till  1820,  were  from  his  own  pen.  In  1819  he
assisted  in  revising  the  statute  laws  of  Virginia.
He  was  also  the  author  of  an  early  volume  of
poems,  and  other  literary  matter  (Richmond,  1798),
and  a  translation  of  the  "  Iliad  "  into  blank  verse,
which  was  published  in  1846.  In  1806  he  delivered
a  eulogy  on  his  friend,  Chancellor  Wythe,  in  the
capitol  at  Richmond.

MUNGrER,  Theodoi'e  Thornton,  clergyman,
b.  in  Bainbridge.  Chenango  co.,  N.  Y..  5  March,
1830.  Pie  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1851,  and  at
the  theological  seminary  in  1855.  He  was  pastor
of  Congregational  churches  at  Dorchester,  Mass.,
in  1856-'60;  Haverhill,  1802-70;  and  Lawrence,


1870-'5.  He  was  stationed  at  San  Jose,  Cal.,  for  a
time,  established  a  Congregational  church  there
in  1875-'6,  was  pastor  at  North  Adams,  Mass.,  from
that  time  till  1885.  and  has  since  had  charge  of  the
United  church.  New  Haven,  Conn.  In  1887  he
was  chosen  a  fellow  of  Yale  university.  Illinois
college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1883.  He
is  the  author  of  "  On  the  Threshold  "  (Boston,  1881) ;
"  The  Freedom  of  the  Faith  "  (1883) :  "  Lamps  and
Paths  "  (1885) :  and  "  The  Appeal  to  Life  "  (1887).

MUNK,  Hans,  Danish  navigator,  b.  in  Elsinore
in  1589  ;  d.  in  the  Arctic  ocean,  3  June,  1628.  He
followed  his  father's  calling,  that  of  a  pilot,  and
had  acquired  great  reputation,  making  yearly  voy
ages  from  Denmark  and  Norway  to  the  northern
shores  of  America  when  King  Christian  IV.,  in
1619.  sent  him  to  find  the  northwestern  route  to
the  Indies,  whose  existence  the  recent  discoveries
of  Hudson  and  Baffin  were  supposed  to  prove  be
yond  doubt.  Sailing  from  Elsinore,  on  16  May,
1619,  with  two  ships  and  644  men,  Munk  sighted
Cape  Farewell  on  20  June,  and  penetrated  Davis
strait,  advancing  as  far  north  as  69°.  Returning
southward  when  the  ice-fields  began  to  make  navi
gation  dangerous,  he  entered  Chesterfield  inlet,  in
New  Wales,  which  he  named  Munk's  Vinterhavn.
He  had  given  new  names  to  Hudson  and  Baffin
bay,  calling  the  former  Mare  Christianeum,  and
the  latter  Mare  Novum.  On  his  charts  Davis  strait
is  designated  as  Fretum  Christianeum,  and  all
the  fiords  and  islets  of  the  southern  coast  of
Greenland  bear  Latin  names.  Cold  and  famine
gradually  lessened  the  number  of  the  explorers,  and
in  the  spring  of  1620  Munk  and  two  of  his  crew
were  the  only  survivors.  Their  situation  was  des
perate,  yet  they  managed  to  repair  the  smaller
ship,  and  taking  as  provisions  the  frozen  bodies  of
their  dead  comrades,  they  made  sail,  and  after  sixty
days  sighted  again  the  coast  of  Norway,  on  25
Sept.,  1620.  The  adventures  of  Munk  excited  uni
versal  interest.  Subscription-lists  were  circulated
and  the  money  for  a  second  expedition  was  soon
raised.  Munk  set  out  again  in  March,  1621,  ad
vanced  as  far  as  75°  north  latitude,  and  said,  on
his  return  to  Elsinore  in  June,  1623,  that  he  had
seen,  farther  north,  an  open  sea,  which  the  ice
bergs,  and  especially  the  want  of  provisions,  pre
vented  his  reaching.  This  assertion  was  then  dis
credited,  but  cannot  now  be  denied.  Munk  after
ward  resumed  his  trade,  made  voyages  froin  Den
mark  to  North  America,  and  died  at  sea  during  a
third  expedition  to  the  arctic  regions.  He  pub
lished  the  narrative  of  his  first  expedition  under
the  title  "  Efterretuing  af  navigationen  og  reisen
til  den  Nye  Danmark  af  Stvrmand  Hans  Munk"
(Copenhagen,  1623;  enlarged  ed.,  1627).  This  work
enjoyed  great  reputation  for  more  than  a  century,
and  "was  translated  into  German  (Frankfort,  1650);
Dutch  (Amsterdam,  1678) ;  French  (1680) ;  English
(London,  1685).  and  other  languages.

MUNN,  George  F.,  artist,  b.  in  Utica,  N.  Y..  in
1852.  He  first  studied  art  under  Charles  Cal  verly,  the
sculptor,  and  subsequently  at  the  schools  of  the
National  academy  of  design  at  New  York.  Later
he  entered  the  art-schools  at  South  Kensington,
England,  where  he  received  a  gold  medal,  the  first
that  was  awarded  to  an  American,  for  a  clay  model
of  -the  Farnese  Hercules.  He  received  a  silver
medal  for  life  drawing  in  the  schools  of  the  Royal
academy,  and  was  afterward  in  the  studio  of
George  F.  Watts  in  1876.  He  has  painted  and
sketched  in  Brittany,  and  has  exhibited  at  the  Dud
ley  gallery,  London,  at  Birmingham,  and  elsewhere.
Among  his  works  are  "  Wild  Flowers,"  "  Roses,"
''Meadow-Sweet,"  and  "A  Sunny  Day,  Brittany,"


460


MUNN


MUNOZ-GAMERO


MUNN,  Orson  Desaix,  publisher,  b.  in  Monson,
Mass.,  11  June,  1824.  He  received  his  education
at  the  academy  in  his  native  town,  and,  deciding
on  a  business  career,  entered  a  book-store  in  Spring
field.  After  two  years  of  this  experience  he  re
turned  to  accept  a  more  important  commercial
trust  in  Monson,  but  soon  found  his  way  to  New
York.  In  1846,  with  Alfred  E.  Beach,  son  of  Moses
Y.  Beach  (q.  v.),  he  bought  the  "  Scientific  Ameri
can,"  then  in  the  first  six  months  of  its  existence.
The  purchase  price  of  this  property  was  less  than
$1,000,  and  it  included  a  subscription-list  of  200
names.  Its  founder,  Ruf  us  Porter,  was  continued  as
editor.and  the  enterprise,  placed  on  a  sound  business
basis,  at  once  proved  a  success.  It  was  the  first
popular  scientific  journal  in  the  United  States,  and
it  is  now  the  oldest,  having  a  recognized  standing
throughout  the  civilized  world.  Its  function  has
been  the  publication  of  the  record  of  the  progress
of  art  and  science  both  at  home  and  abroad.  In
187(5  the  demand  upon  its  space  was  so  great,  ow
ing  to  the  increased  interest  that  resulted  from
the  World's  fair  in  Philadelphia,  that  a  "Scien
tific  American  Supplement "  was  successfully  be
gun,  and  has  since  steadily  grown  in  circulation.
An  "  Architect  and  Builders'  "  edition,  published
monthly,  was  established  in  1885.  Among  the
earliest  requests  made  to  the  publishers  of  the
"Scientific  American"  was  for  advice  concerning
the  procuring  of  letters-patent  for  new  inventions,
there  being  at  that  time  no  professional  patent
solicitors.  This  department  of  the  business  devel
oped  with  great  rapidity,  and  a  branch  office  for  it
was  soon  opened  in  Washington,  D.  0.  For  many
years  Munn  and  Co.  enjoyed  a  virtual  monopoly  of
this  class  of  business,  and  upward  of  100,000  appli
cations  for  patents  have  been  made  by  this  house.
Mr.  Munn  has  strictly  adhered  to  a  principle  that
he  laid  down  early  in  life,  never  to  invest  a  pen
ny  in  any  patented  invention.

MUXO/,  Juan  Bantista  (moon-yoth),  Spanish
historian,  b.  in  Museros.  near  Valencia,  in  1745  ;
d.  in  Madrid  in  1799.  He  studied  rhetoric  and
mathematics  in  Valencia,  and  in  1770  WPS  appoint
ed  cosmographer  of  the  council  of  the  Indies.  In
1779  King  Charles  III.  commanded  him  to  write  a
general  history  of  America,  but  the  council  of  the
Indies  opened  their  archives  reluctantly,  and  the
viceroys  of  South  America  refused  to  communicate
official  documents  that  proved  frequent  abuses  of
authority  over  the  Indians,  which  it  was  to  their
interest  to  conceal.  Mufioz  tried  his  best  to  over
come  all  difficulties  and  made  several  voyages  to
South  America  for  that  purpose.  He  composed
only  the  first  part  of  his  intended  work,  the  publi
cation  of  which  was  prohibited  by  the  council  of
the  Indies,  but  Charles  IV.  interposed  his  authority
and  the  work  was  printed.  It  is  entitled  "  Historia
general  de  las  Indias  6  Nuevo  Mundo  "  (Madrid,
1793).  The  University  of  Valencia  bought  his
other  manuscripts,  but'  they  were  burned  with  the
library  during  the  French  bombardment  of  1812.

MUXqZ-CABRERA,  Ramon,  Bolivian  jour
nalist,  b.  in  Cochabamba  in  1819 ;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,
in  1869.  He  was  studying  in  the  University  of
Buenos  Ayres,  when,  'on  account  of  discussing
publicly  the  conduct  of  the  dictator  Rosas,  he  was
forced  to  flee  to  Montevideo,  where  he  was  employed
as  clerk  in  the  department  of  the  interior.  "He
returned  afterward  to  his  country  and  was  pro
tected  by  Gen.  Belzu,  who,  when  he  overthrew  the
government  of  Velasco  in  1848,  appointed  Mufioz
minister  to  the  Argentine  Republic  He  was  re
fused  recognition  by  Rosas,  and  retired  to  Chili,
where  he  issued  a  protest.  While  he  was  in  Chili


he  edited  the  "  Mercurio  "  in  Valparaiso.  Return
ing,  after  Rosas's  downfall,  to  the  Argentine  Re
public,  he  was  editor  of  "  La  Tribuna"  and  "La
Cronica "  of  Buenos  Ayres,  and  "  El  Constitu
tional,"  of  Mendoza.  In  1858  lie  returned  to  Chili
and  resumed  the  direction  of  the  "Mercurio"  till
the  end  of  1859,  when  he  went  to  Bolivia.  He  was
appointed  prefect  of  Cobija  in  1861,  but  in  1804
returned  to  La  Paz  and  resumed  his  journalistic
labors.  In  1865  he  was  appointed  minister  to
Chili,  and  as  such  adhered  to  the  treaty  of  alliance
against  Spain.  On  his  return  to  his  country  he
was  appointed  inspector  of  guano  in  Mejillones,
and  afterward  elected  deputy  for  Cobija.  But  his
opposition  against  Melgarejo's  government  soon
obliged  him  to  take  refuge  in  Peru,  where  he  died.
He  published  "  Cienfuegos,"  an  historical  poem
(Montevideo,  1840) ;  "  La  guerra  de  los  quince
afios  en  el  Alto  Peru"  (Lima,  1868);  and  "La  vida
y  escritos  de  Bernardo  Monteagudo"  (1869).

MUNOZ  I)E  (OLLANTES,  Juan  Miguel
Lopez,  Spanish  adventurer,  1).  in  Burgos  in  14U9  ;
d.  in  New  Granada  in  1542.  He  served  in  Italy,
and  was  a  captain  when,  in  1528,  he  accompanied
to  South  America,  Garcia  de  Lerma,  governor  of
the  province  of  Santa  Marta.  who  sent  him  in  1580
to  conquer  the  district  of  Bonda.  Mnfioz  after
ward  explored  the  valley  of  Baritica,  where  he  dis
covered  gold,  crossed  the  Andes,  and  advanced  to
Pesigueyca.  capital  of  the  Taironas,  who  repelled
the  invaders.  In  the  following  year  he  set  out
again  for  Pesigueyca,  but  was  again  driven  back.
In  a  third  expedition  in  1532  Mufioz  captured  the
city,  but,  being  unable  to  hold  it,  burned  it  and
began  a  difficult  retreat,  in  which  the  Spaniards
suffered  great  losses.  In  the  division  of  the  country
Mufioz  received  for  his  share  the  district  of  Eupari,
which  he  conquered  in  1535,  and,  continuing  his
march  toward  the  southwest,  founded  in  1536.  on
the  banks  of  Cauca  river,  the  city  of  Santiago  de
Cali.  Joining  afterward  Sebastian  de  Benalcazar,
he  conquered  for  the  latter  the  province  of  Arma,
where  he  founded  in  1539  the  city  of  Santiago
de  Arma.  When  Felipe  de  Urre  set  out  in  1541
for  the  discovery  of  the  fabulous  El  Dorado,
which  legends  placed  in  the  west  of  New  Granada,
Munoz  accompanied  the  expedition  as  commander
of  the  cavalry,  and  died  on  the  journey.

MUNOZ-GAMERO,  Benjamin  '(moon-yoth-
gah-may'-ro),  Chilian  naval  officer,  b.  in  Santiago  in
1820;  d.  in  Punta  Arenas,  2  Dec:,  1851.  He
entered  the  navy  in  1836  as  midshipman,  and
served  in  the  first  and  second  campaigns  against
the  Peru-Bolivian  confederation.  On  his  return  he
was  promoted  lieutenant,  and  in  1842  ordered  by
the  government  to  serve  for  instruction  in  the
British  navy.  In  April,  1844,  he  re-entered  the
Chilian  navy  and  commanded  successively  the
"  Magallanes  "  and  "Janequeo."  In  1849  he  was
commissioned  to  survey  the  southern  parts  of  the
republic,  and  thoroughly  explored  the  lakes  Llan-
quihue,  Todos  Santos,  and  Coyutue,  and  the
Petrohue,  Coyutue,  and  Peulla  rivers.  He  was
promoted  captain  in  1850.  and  in  January,  1851,
appointed  governor  of  the  Chilian  colony  of  Magal
lanes.  He  studied  the  Indian  language,  and  began
to  make  a  Patagonian  dictionary,  but  it  remained
unfinished  at  his  death.  On  21  Nov.,  1851,  there
was  a  mutiny  at  Punta  Arenas,  but  Munoz.  with
the  chaplain  and  a  few  loyal  followers,  escaped  in  a
boat.  It  was  driven  by  a  storm  on  the  coast  of
Tierra  del  Fuego,  and  the  party,  being  attacked  by
the  Indians,  had  to  return  to  the  main-land,  where
they  were  discovered  and  pursued  by  the  insur
gents.  At  last,  driven  by  hunger  near  the  fort,


MUNRO


MUXSELL


Munoz  was  captured  and  shot,  and  his  body  was
burned.  He  published  a  useful  "  Diecionario
Xautico''  (Santiago,  1850).

MUNRO,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Inverness,
Scotland,  in  1730;  d.  in  Edinburgh,  30  May,  1801.
He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  St.  An
drews,  studied  divinity  at  Edinburgh  university,
and  in  1757  was  ordained,  and  appointed  chaplain
to  the  77th  Highlanders,  which  he  accompanied  in
Gen.  John  Forties's  expedition  to  Fort  Duquesne.
He  was  also  at  the  capture  of  Crown  Point,  Ticon-
deroga,  and  Montreal  in  1760,  and  preached  a
thanksgiving  sermon  to  the  victorious  army  on
the  hill  behind  the  last-named  city.  He  afterward
served  in  the  West  Indies,  but  returned  to  this
country  in  1762  and  settled  in  Princeton,  X.  J.
He  then  took  orders  in  the  Church  of  England,
and  in  the  year  1765  became  missionary  at  Yon-
kers,  where  Col.  Frederick  Philipse  had  built  a
church.  In  1768  he  became  rector  of  St.  Peter's.
Albany,  a?id  also  acted,  at  Sir  William  Johnson's
request,  as  missionary  to  the  Mohawk  Indians,
whose  language  he  spoke  and  whom  he  frequently
visited.  As  an  officer  in  the  old  French  war,  he
acquired  2,000  acres  of  bounty  land  in  Washing
ton  county,  X.  Y.,  and  attempted  to  settle  it,  but
the  Revolution  interfered,  and  it  was  subsequent
ly  sold  by  his  son.  Mr.  Munro's  church  was  closed
by  the  Albany  committee  of  safety  in  1777,  and  he
was  imprisoned,  but  escaped  to  the  British  lines,
ami  returned  to  Great  Britain  in  1778.  In  1782  the
University  of  St.  Andrews  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  He  married  in  1762  Miss  Stockton,  of  Xew
Jersey,  and,  after  her  death,  married,  in  1766,  Eve,
only  daughter  of  Peter  Jay,  who,  with  their  son,
remained  in  this  cduntry  after  Mr.  Munro's  flight
to  England. — Their  only  child.  Peter  Jay,  jurist,
b.  in  Rye.  X.  Y.,  10  Jan.,  1767;  d.  in  Mamaroneck,
X.  Y.,  23  Sept.,  1833.  was  educated  in  Xew  York,
under  the  direction  of  his  uncle,  John  Jay,  until
his  thirteenth  year,  when  he  accompanied  the

latter  to  Europe
on  his  appoint
ment  by  congress
to  the  mission  to
Spain,  landing  at
Cadiz  in  Xovem-
ber,  1779.  Mr.  Jay
remained  in  Spain,
although  not  for
mally  received  as
minister,  until
1782,  residing  at
Madrid.  During
this  time  Mr.
Munro's  education
was  carried  on  un
der  Spanish  mas
ters,  and  he  be
came  thoroughly
versed  in  Spanish
and  French.  In
/  June,  1782.  Mr.

Jay  left  Spain  with  his  family  and  went  to  Paris.
During  the  peace  negotiations,  as  well  as  after  his
trouble  with  Carmichael  and  Brockholst  Livingston,
his  official  secretaries,  Mr.  Jay  committed  many
matters  to  his  nephew  in  a  similar  capacity.  Mr.
Munro  returned  to  Xew  York  with  Mr.  Jay  on  24
July,  1784.  He  began  at  once  the  study  of  the
law,  and  after  a  brief  period  was  placed  as  a  stu
dent  in  the  office  of  Aaron  Burr,  whom  Mr.  Jay
deemed  the  best  practitioner  of  the  day,  and  in
due  time  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  soon  ac
quired  a  lucrative  practice,  and  from  1800  till  1826,


when  his  health  gave  way,  was  one  of  the  chief
lawyers  of  Xew  York.  In  1821,  with  his  cousin.
Peter  A.  Jay.  and  Jonathan  Ward,  he  was  elected
from  Westchester  county,  where  he  had  a  country-
seat,  to  represent  that  county  in  the  Constitutional
convention  of  that  year.  In  that  body  Mr.  Munro
took  an  active  part,  being,  by  the  appointment  of
its  president,  Gov.  Tompkins",  chairman  of  the  ju
diciary  committee.  In  1826,  while  he  was  engaged
in  active  practice,  Mr.  Munro  had  an  attack  of
paralysis,  and,  though  he  partially  recovered  and
lived  for  seven  years  afterward,  he  spent  the  resi
due  of  his  life  as  a  country  gentleman.

MUNROE,  Charles  Edward,  chemist,  b.  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,  24  May,  1849.  He  was  graduated
at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard  in
1871,  and,  after  acting  as  assistant  to  Prof.  Wolcott
Gibbs,  was  senior  assistant  in  chemistry  there  till
1874.  In  1872  he  conducted  the  summer  course  of
instruction  in  chemistry  for  teachers  at  Cambridge,
which  was  the  first  of  its  kind.  During  1873-'4
he  also  lectured  on  chemistry  at  Boston  dental
college,  and  in  1874  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of
chemistry  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  Annapolis,
where  he  remained  until  1886,  also  lecturing  in  St.
John's  college,  Annapolis,  in  1883-'4.  He  then
accepted  the  appointment  of  chemist  to  the  U.  S.
torpedo  corps  at  Xewport.  R.  I.,  where  he  still
(1888)  remains.  In  connection  with  his  appoint
ment  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  he  was  frequently
called  on  by  the  national  authorities  to  conduct
special  investigations,  principally  on  explosives.
These  researches  have  appeared  in  scientific  jour
nals  both  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  and
have  gained  for  him  a  reputation  as  the  authority
on  that  subject  in  this  country.  The  mineral
cabinet  at  the  naval  academy  was  created  by  him,
and  he  devised  and  carried  into  execution  a  course
of  post-graduate  instruction  for  naval  officers  at
the  Smithsonian  institution.  He  was  employed  by
the  U.  S.  coast  and  geodetic  survey  to  examine  the
oyster-bearing  waters  of  Chesapeake  bay.  and  in
1882  was  appointed  a  special  agent  by  'the  U.  S.
census  bureau  to  report  on  the  building  stones  of
Maryland  and  Virginia.  Prof.  Munroe  has  been
active  in  the  Naval  institute  from  its  inception,
and  has  held  the  offices  of  secretary,  treasurer,  and
corresponding  secretary.  He  is  a  member  of  the
chemical  societies  of  Berlin,  London,  and  Xew
York,  and  in  1887  was  elected  vice-president  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci
ence  for  the  chemical  section.  The  titles  of  his
scientific  papers  exceed  100  in  number,  and  his
"  Xotes  on  the  Literature  of  Explosives,"  issued
periodically,  now  include  fifteen  numbers.  He  has
also  published  an  "  Index  to  the  Literature  of  Ex
plosives"  (Baltimore,  1886).

MUNROE,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Scotland  about
1796;  d.  in  Xew  Brunswick.  X.  J.,  26  April,  1861.
He  was  .graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1814,  and  entered  the  army  as  3d  lieutenant  in
the  1st  artillery.  He  became  captain,  2  March,
1825,  was  brevetted  major,  15  Feb.,  1838,  for  ser
vices  against  the  Florida  Indians,  and  became
major  of  the  2d  artillery,  18  Aug.,  1846.  He  was
chief  of  artillery  to  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor  in  July,
1846,  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  .for  gallantry  at
Monterey,  and  colonel  for  Buena  Vista.  He  was
military  and  civil  governor  of  Xew  Mexico  from
October,  1849,  till  1850,  and  was  promoted  lieuten
ant-colonel  in  1856.

MUNSELL,  Joel,  printer,  b.  in  Xorthfield,
Mass.,  14  April,  1808;  d.  in  Albany,  X.  Y.,  15  Jan.,
1880.  He  established  himself  as  a  printer  in
Albany,  X.  Y.,  in  1827,  was  associate  editor  of  the


462


MUNSON


'•  Microscope  "  in  1834,  published  and  edited  the
'•  New  York  Mechanic  in  1841-'3,  and  subse
quently  published  "  The  Lady's  Magazine,"  the
"  Northern  Star  and  Freeman's  Advocate,"  "  The
Spectator,"  the  "  Unionist,"  the  "State  Register,"
the  "Guard."'  the  "Typographical  Miscellany,"
"  The  New  York  Teacher,"  the  "  Morning  Express,"
"Webster's  Almanac,"  "The  Daily  Statesman,"
and  for  three  years  the  "New  England  Historical
and  Genealogical  Register."  He  made  the  history
and  application  of  the  art  of  printing  a  special
study,  and  his  collection  of  works  on  that  subject,
the  largest  in  the  United  States,  was  in  part  pur
chased  by  the  New  York  state  library.  Among
his  services  to  American  historical  literature  is  the
"  Historical  Series  "  that  he  projected,  edited,  and
annotated.  Ho  was  a  member  of  many  learned
societies,  a  founder  of  the  Albany  institute,  and
for  many  years  published  its  proceedings.  Mr.
Munsell  is  the  author  of  "  Outlines  of  the  History
of  Printing"  (Albany,  N.  Y.,  1839);  "Annals  of
Albany,"  a  contribution  to  the  history  of  that  city
(10  vo'ls.,  1849-'59):  "  Every-Day  Book  of  History
and  Chronology  "  (New  York,  1856) ;  "  Chronology
of  Paper  and  "Paper-Making"  (Albany,  1857:  en
larged  ed.,  1864  and  1870);  and  "  A  Manual  of  the
1st  Lutheran  Church  of  Albany,  from  1670  till
1870''  (1871).  His  printing  and  publishing  busi
ness  is  continued  by  his  sons.

MUNSON,  JUneas,  physician,  b.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  24  June,  1734  ;  d.  there.  10  June.  1826.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1753,  and,  after  being  a
tutor  there  and  studying  divinity  under  President
Ezra  Stiles,  was  chaplain  in  the  army  on  Long
Island  in  1755.  He  studied  medicine  under  Dr.
John  Darby,  and  began  practice  at  Bedford,  N.  Y.,
in  1756,  and  in  1760  removed  to  New  Haven,  where
for  more  than  fifty  years  he  enjoyed  a  high  reputa
tion.  He  was  president  of  the  Medical  society  of
Connecticut,  and  was  a  professor  in  the  medical
school  of  Yale  from  its  organization  till  his  death.
During  the  Revolutionary  war  he  was  often  a
member  of  the  legislature.

MUNSON,  James  Eugene,  phonographer,  b.  in
Paris,  Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  12  May,  1835.  He  studied
for  a  time  at  Amherst,  but  was  not  graduated.
His  attention  was  early  directed  to  the  study  of
short-hand,  and  he  soon  became  an  expert.  Coin
ing  to  New  York  city  early  in  1857,  he  was  called
upon,  ten  days  after  his  arrival,  to  take  his  first
verbatim  report  on  the  occasion  of  the  Harvey
Burdell  murder  trial.  Soon  afterward,  in  connec
tion  with  other  reporters,  he  set  to  work  to  simplify
the  existing  systems  of  short-hand,  and  the  fruits
of  their  labor,  as  finally  shaped  and  put  into  prac
tice  by  Mr.  Munson,  were  presented  in  his  "  Com
plete  Phonographer"  (New  York,  1866),  to  the
preparation  of  which  he  had  devoted  three  years
of  labor,  and  tested  it  by  seven  years  of  practice.
This  was  followed  in  1874  by  a  "  Dictionary  of
Practical  Phonography,"  and  in  1877  a  revised
edition  of  the  "  Complete  Phonographer  "  appeared.
In  1879  Mr.  Munson  issued  "The  Phrase-Book  of
Practical  Phonography,"  the  "  phrases  "  being  taken
almost  entirely  from  illustrations  gathered  from
the  author's  notes  made  in  his  court  practice,  he
having  been  court  stenographer  in  New  York  city
for  more  than  twenty  years.  He  also  reported  the
Henry  Ward  Beecher  trial  for  the  New  York  "  Sun,"
without  assistance,  during  the  six  months  of  its
continuance.  On  two  days  of  the  trial  the  report
reached  seven  and  a  half  columns  of  agate  type
each  day.  He  is  now  (1888)  perfecting  a  type-set
ting  machine  that  he  has  invented,  which,  being
operated  by  means  of  a  prepared  ribbon  of  paper,


automatically  sets  a  column  of  corrected,  justified,
and  leaded  type.  He  has  also  invented  machines
by  which  the  ribbon  is  prepared,  and  a  telegraph,
also  operated  by  the  same  paper  ribbon,  which
causes  an  exact  fac-simile  of  the  ribbon  to  be  auto
matically  produced  at  a  distant  point,  ready  for
use  in  operating  a  similar  type-setting  machine.
These  inventions  are  based  on  his  "Selecting  De
vice,"  which  has  also  been  patented  by  him.

MURAT,  Napoleon  Achille,  author,  b.  in
Paris,  21  Jan.,  1801  ;  d  in  Wasceissa,  Jefferson  co.,
Fla.,  15  April,  1847.  He  was  the  son  of  Joachim
Murat.  king  of  Naples,  and  bore  in  his  youth  the
title  of  Prince  of  Two  Sicilies.  When  King  Joa
chim  lost  his  throne  in  1815,  young  Murat  sought
a  refuge  with  his  mother,  a  sister  of  Napoleon  1.,
in  the  castle  of  Frohsdorf,  in  Lower  Austria,  lie
received  there  a  fine  education,  but  in  1821  left
Europe  for  the  United  States,  where  he  afterward
resided.  On  his  arrival  in  New  York  he  made
immediate  application  for  naturalization,  and,  after
a  few  months  sojourn  in  that  city,  made  an  exten
sive  tour  through  the  United  States.  On  reaching
Florida,  lie  was  so  much  impressed  with  the  cli
mate  of  the  country  that  he  bought  a  large  estate
near  Tallahassee,  built  there  a  magnificent  home,
and  divided  his  time  between  farming,  cattle-
breeding,  hunting,  and  fishing.  He  was  elected
alderman  of  the  city  in  1824,  mayor  in  the  fol
lowing  year,  and  in  1826  appointed  postmaster,
which  office  he  held  till  1838.  When  Lafayette  re
visited  the  United  States,  Murat  joined  him  in
Baltimore,  and  accompanied  him  to  Washington,
and  during  most  of  his  journey  through  the  coun
try.  Lafayette  introduced  him  to  Catharina  Dud
ley,  a  grandniece  of  Washington,  and  Murat,  con
ceiving  an  attachment  for  her.  asked  for  her  hand.
Although  her  family  at  first  objected  to  the  union,
they  were  persuaded  through  the  personal  entreat
ies  of  Lafayette,  and  the  ceremony  took  place  at
Washington  on  30  July,  1826.  'Murat  and  his
bride  went  immediately  to  Wasceissa,  notwith
standing  the  entreaties  of  their  friends,  who  prom
ised  him  a  political  career  if  lie  would  settle  in
Virginia.  He  also  declined  in  1832  a  nomination
for  congress  that  was  tendered  him  by  the  Demo
crats  of  Richmond.  He  continued  to  live  quiet
ly  in  Florida,  devoting  his  large  fortune  to  aid
benevolent  institutions,  and  for  the  welfare  of  the
people.  As  early  as  1828  he  published  in  the
"  Revue  trimestrielle  "  of  Paris  letters  on  America,
in  which  he  gave  curious  and  interesting  details
concerning  political  parties  in  the  United  States,
and  the  new  states  of  the  Union,  that  were  the
means  of  giving  Europeans  more  accurate  informa
tion  of  this  country.  These  letters  were  afterward
published  under  the  following  title:  "Lettres  d'un
citoyen  des  Etats-Unis  a  ses  amis  d'Enrope  "  (Paris,
1830).  Murat  also  published  "  Esquisses  morales
et  politiques  sur  les  Etats-Unis  d'Amerique  "  (2
vols.,  Paris,  1838),  and  "  Exposition  des  principes
du  gouvernement  republicani  tel  qu'il  a  ete  perfec-
I  tionne  en  Amerique"  (1838).  This  last  work  en
joyed  a  great  reputation,  passed  through  more
than  fifty  editions,  and  is  still  the  manual  of  the
Democrats  in  western  Europe.  It  was  translated
into  English,  German,  Dutch,  and  other  languages,
and  its  publication  in  Italy  was  forbidden  by  the
Austrian  government,  as  many  believed  that,  in
spite  of  the  republican  principles  that  were  advo
cated  by  the  author,  he  was  a  pretender,  and  that
his  book  was  an  elaborate  and  able  manifesto.
Murat  died  childless,  leaving  large  sums  of  money
to  charitable  institutions.  His  wife  resided  on
her  plantation  till  her  death  on  6  Aug.,  18G7.


MURDOCH


MURDOCK


463


During  the  civil  war  her  estate  suffered  from  both
armies,  and  at  its  clo.se  she  received  from  Napo
leon  111.  a  life  annuity  of  20,000  francs.  Shortly
after  the  war  she  visited  France,  and  was  received
at  the  imperial  court  with  great  cordiality. — Napo
leon  Achille's  brother,  Napoleon  Lucieu  Charles
Joseph  Francois,  b.  in  Milan,  Italy,  10  May,
1803:  d.  in  Paris,  France,  11  April,  "1878,  lived
with  his  mother  and  brother  in  the  castle  of  Frohs-
dorf  from  1815  till  1822,  when  he  went  to  Venice,
but,  being  persecuted  by  the  Austrian  authorities,
he  took  passage  in  1824  for  the  United  States.
lie  was  shipwrecked  on  the  coast  of  Spain  and  de
tained  there  as  a  prisoner  for  several  months,  but
his  brother,  who  was  already  a  naturalized  Ameri
can  citizen,  invoked  the  protection  of  President
Monroe,  and.  through  the  U.  S.  minister,  young
Murat  was  set  at  liberty,  and  arrived  in  Boston  in
April,  1825.  lie  then  joined  his  uncle,  Joseph
Bonaparte,  who  was  living  in  Philadelphia  under
the  name  of  Count  of  Survilliers,  and,  by  advice  of
his  brother,  made  application  for  naturalization
papers.  He  went  afterward  to  live  with  the  latter
in  Florida,  and  also  travelled  through  the  coun
try  as  far  as  Texas  and  California.  In  1827  he
married,  in  Baltimore,  Carolina  Georgina,  daughter
of  Thomas  Frazer,  of  Bordcntown,  N.  J.,  and  lived
in  the  former  city  for  a  few  years.  Reverses  of
fortune  afterward  compelled  Murat  to  keep  a
boarding-house  in  1834,  but  his  wife  established
a  school  for  young  ladies,  which  became  fashion
able  and  enabled  him  to  give  up  this  pursuit.
They  lived  prosperously  for  a  few  years,  but  Murat
had  never  abandoned  the  idea  of  recovering  the
lost  throne  to  which  his  brother  had  relinquished
all  claims.  He  made  trips  to  France  in  1839  and
1844,  to  confer  with  his  adherents,  but  was  allowed
to  remain  only  five  weeks  at  a  time.  Nevertheless,
he  kept  up  a  daily  correspondence  with  the  sup-

Eorters  of  the  imperial  cause,  and  held  meetings  at
is  house  in  Baltimore.  After  the  fall  of  Louis
Philippe  in  1848,  he  returned  to  France  with  his
wife,  was  elected  a  deputy  to  the  constituent  as
sembly,  and  re-elected  in  1849,  being  also  appoint
ed  in  the  latter  year  minister  to  Turin.  In  1852
he  was  created  a  senator  and  given  the  rank  of
prince.  He  published  a  manifesto  in  1801,  in
which  he  claimed  the  throne  of  his  father,  but,  not
being  supported  by  Napoleon  III.,  he  withdrew  his
claim.  In  1870  he  was  shut  up  with  Marshal  Ba-
zaine  in  Metz,  and  after  the  fall  of  the  empire  he
revisited  the  United  States,  where  he  had  still  some
business  interests.  Madame  Murat  died  on  10
Feb.,  1879.  They  left  five  children.  CAROLINE  L^E-
TITIA,  b.  in  Baltimore  in  1832,  married  Baron  de
Chassiron,  who  died  in  1870,  and  she  married  in
1871  John  Garden,  a  wealthy  American ;  JOSEPH
JOACHIM,  b.  in  Baltimore  in  1834,  became  a  major-
general  in  the  French  army  ;  ANNA,  b.  in  Balti
more  in  1848.  married  the  Duke  de  Mouchy  ;  ACH-
ILLE  NAPOLEON,  b.  in  Baltimore  in  1847,  married
Princess  Dadiani  de  Mingrelia :  and  Louis  NAPO
LEON,  b.  in  Paris  in  1851,  married  Princess  Maria
Orbeliani.  Murat's  correspondence  while  he  was
in  the  United  States,  and  his  letters  concerning
this  country,  have  been  published  several  times.

MURDOCH,  James  Edward,  actor,  b.  in  Phil
adelphia,  Pa,,  25  Jan.,  1811.  He  learned  the  trade
of  a  bookbinder  with  his  father,  but  on  13  Oct.,
1829,  appeared  at  Arch  street  theatre,  Philadel
phia,  as  Frederick  in  Kotzebue's  play  of  "  Lover's
Vows,"  afterward  acting  for  many  years  in  most  of
the  large  cities  of  the  United  States.  In  1840  he
became  stage-manager  at  Chestnut  street  theatre
in  Philadelphia,  and  in  the  following  year  tem


porarily  withdrew  from  the  stage  to  lecture  on
Shakespeare  and  teach  elocution.  In  1845  Mur
doch  returned  to  the  drama,  beginning  an  engage
ment  at  the  Park  theatre  in  New  York  city  as
Hamlet,  and  then  visiting  other  cities,  Canada,  and
California.  In  1850  he  performed  at  the  Hay-
market  theatre,  London,  with  moderate  success,
and  in  1857  and  1858  he  settled  on  a  farm  near
Lebanon.  Ohio.  During  the  civil  war  he  nursed
sick  and  wounded  National  soldiers  in  hospitals,
gave  readings  from  the  poems  of  Thomas  Buchanan
Read  and  others  for  the  benefit  of  the  U.  S.  sani
tary  commission,  and  became  a  volunteer  aide  on
the  staff  of  Gen.  William  S.  Rosecrans.  Since  that
time  he  has  been  professor  of  elocution  at  the  Cin
cinnati  college  of  music.  Murdoch's  best  efforts
were  in  the  line  of  genteel  comedy  and  juvenile
tragedy ;  his  Romeo,  Charles  Surface  in  "  School
for  Scandal,"  and  Don  Felix  in  "  The  Wonder,"
had  many  admirers.  But  while  his  acting  satisfied
the  critics,  it  failed  to  charm  the  many,  rendering
his  "star"  engagements  unprofitable.  In  connec
tion  with  William  Russell  he  published  '•  Orthoph-
ony.  or  Culture  of  the  Voice  "  (Boston,  1845),  and
"The  Stage"  (Philadelphia,  1880).

MURDOCH,  William,  Canadian  poet,  b.  in
Paisley,  Scotland,  24  Feb..  1823;  d.  in  St.  John,-
New  Brunswick,  4  May,  1887.  He  was  the  son
of  a  Paisley  shoemaker,  and  learned  to  read  by
the  side  of"  his  father's  work-bench.  He  wrote
verses  when  very  young,  served  at  his  father's
trade,  improved  his  education  by  attending  a  night-
school,  and  continued  to  empjoy  his  leisure  in
rhyming.  In  1854  he  emigrated  to  New  Bruns
wick,  and  in  April,  1855,  he  was  appointed  to  take
charge  of  the  gas-works  on  Partridge  island.  In
1805  he  became  connected  with  the  editorial  staff
of  the  St.  John  "  Morning  News."  He  has  pub
lished  "  Poems  and  Songs,  by  William  Murdoch  "
(St.  John,  1800;  2d  ed.,  enlarged,  1872).  He  is
also  the  author  of  "  Discursory  Ruminations :  a
Fireside  Drama,"  and  other  pieces  (St.  John,  1870).

MURDOCK,  James,  author,  b.  in  Westbrook,
Conn.,  10  Feb.,  1770;  d.  in  Columbus,  Miss.,  10
Aug.,  1850.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  179.7,
and  became  successively  preceptor  of  Hopkins
grammar-school  at  New  Haven,  and  of  Oneida
academy  (now  Hamilton  college),  N.  Y.  He  studied
theology  under  Timothy  Dwight,  and  was  licensed
to  preach  as  a  Congregational  minister  in  January,
1801,  and  settled  as  pastor  of  the  church  at  Prince
ton,  Mass.,  in  June,  1802,  where  he  remained
thirteen  years.  In  1815  he  became  professor  of
ancient  languages  in  the  University  of  Vermont,
and  from  1819  till  1828  he  was  professor  of  sacred
rhetoric  and  ecclesiastical  history  in  Andover
theological  seminary.  In  1829  he  removed  to  New
Haven  and  devoted  the  rest  of  his  life  to  study,
principally  that  of  ecclesiastical  history,  the  orien
tal  languages,  and  philosophy.  He  was  president
of  the  Connecticut  academy  of  arts  and  sciences,
vice-president  of  the  philological  society  of  Con
necticut,  and  one  of  the  founders  of  the  American
oriental  society.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Harvard 'in  1819.  He  published  a  translation
from  the  German  of  Miinscher's  "  Elements  of
Dogmatic  History  "  (New  Haven,  1830) ;  a  transla
tion  of  Mosheim's  "  Institutes  of  Ecclesiastical
History,"  with  copious  notes  (3  vols.,  New  York,
1832) ;  an  edition  of  Milman's  "  History  of  Chris
tianity,"  with  preface  and  notes  (1841) ;  "Sketches
of  Modern  Philosophy,  especially  among  the  Ger
mans  "  (Hartford,  1842) ;  a  "  Literal  Translation  of
the  Whole  New  Testament  from  the  Ancient
Syriac  Version,"  with  a  preface  arid  marginal  notes


464


MURDOCK


MURILLO-TORO


(New  York,  1851);  and  a  translation  from  the
Latin  of  Mosheim's  "  Commentaries  on  the  Affairs
of  the  Christians  before  the  Time  of  Constantino
the  Great  "  (2  vols.,  1852).

MUROOCK,  John  Nelson,  clergyman,  b.  in
Oswego,  N.  Y.,  18  Dec.,  1820.  He  obtained  the
elements  of  a  pood  education,  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  but  abandoned  the  law  and
entered  the  ministry  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church.  In  1842  he  was  ordained  as  a  Baptist
minister  in  Watertown,  N.  Y.  After  holding  pas
torates  in  Waterville  and  Albion,  he  became  in
1848  pastor  of  the  South  Baptist  church  in  Hart
ford,  Conn.  In  1857  he  took  charge  of  the  Bow-
doin  square  church,  Boston,  continuing  in  this
relation  until  1803.  when  he  was  made  one  of  the
secretaries  of  the  American  Baptist  mission  union.
This  office  he  still  (1888)  holds.  From  1853  till
1856  he  was  joint  editor  with  Rev.  Dr.  Robert
Turnbull  of  the  "  Christian  Review."  The  honor
ary  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by
Rochester  university  in  1854.

MURDOCK,  William,  patriot,  b.  in  Scotland
about  1720;  d.  in  Maryland  about  1775.  His  fa
ther,  Rev.  George  Murdock,  was  appointed  rec
tor  of  Prince  George  county,  Md.,  by  Lord  Balti
more,  in  1720.  The  son  represented  that  county  in
the  lower  house  of  the  general  assembly  from  about
1745  until  1770.  This  house  Was  the  fortress  of
popular  rights  and  of  civil  liberty  during  the  whole
existence  of  the  colony.  Its  resolutions  and  mes
sages,  beginning  in  1733,  and  in  an  uninterrupted
chain  until  1775,  continually  declared  "that  it  is
the  peculiar  right  of  his  majesty's  subjects  not  to
be  liable  to  any  tax  or  other  imposition  but  what
is  laid  on  them  by  laws  to  which  they  themselves
are  a  party."  These  principles  were  asserted  in
what  were  called  the  standing  resolves  of  the  lower
house  on  31  May,  1750,  and  were  reiterated  and  re
corded  upon  the  journals  of  every  assembly  until
1771.  This  public  discussion  of  first  principles  was  of
the  greatest  importance  in  preparing  the  people  for
the  Revolution.  The  resolutions,  addresses,  and
messages  of  the  lower  house  during  this  period
discuss  with  remarkable  fulness  and  accuracy,  con
sidering  the  period  at  which  they  were  produced,
the  fundamental  principles  of  free  government,  and
most  of  them  emanated  from  William  Murdock,
who  was  one  of  the  leading  spirits  and  the  direct
ing  force  of  the  discussion.  "  A  very  able  and
elaborate  report,  made  in  17G5.  on  the  subject  of
the  proprietary's  title  to  these  fines  and  forfeitures,
by  William  Murdock,  a  delegate  from  Prince
George  county,"  says  John  V.  L.  McMahon,  '•  is  a
state  paper  which  would  reflect  honor  on  any  man
or  any  assembly."  He  led  in  resistance  to  the
stamp-act,  and  applying  the  principles  with  which
he  had  made  the  people  familiar  in  the  discussion
about  the  proprietary's  right  to  the  port  duties,
and  to  fines  and  forfeitures,  he  easily  united  them
in  solid  resistance  to  that  attempt  to  levy  taxes
and  imposts  without  their  consent. — His  son,
Oeorare,  b.  in  1742 ;  d.  in  1805,  was  a  member  of
the  committee  of  observation  and  correspondence
for  Frederick  county  in  1775,  and  during  the  Revo
lution  occupied  that  post  of  danger  and  responsi
bility  until  the  organization  of  the  state  govern
ment  in  March,  1777.

MURFREE,  Hardy,  soldier,  b.  in  Hertford
county,  X.  C.,  5  June,  1752 ;  d.  in  Williamson
county,  Tenn.,  6  July,  1809.  His  father,  William
Murfree,  was  a  member  from  Hartford  county  of
the  North  Carolina  congress  that  convened  at
Halifax,  12  Nov.,  1770,  and  framed  a  constitution
so  "  well  ordered  "  that  without  amendment  it  con


tinued  to  be  the  organic  law  of  the  state  from  1776
till  1835.  At  the  age  of  twenty-three  Hardy  was
appointed  captain  of  the  2d  regiment  of  the  Con
tinental  line  of  North  Carolina  by  the  Provincial
congress  that  met  at  Halifax,  21  Aug..  1775.  Dur
ing  the  first  part  of  the  war  his  regiment  served
with  the  main  body  of  the  army  under  Washing
ton.  At  the  capture  of  Stony  Point.  Murfree,  who
was  then  a  major,  commanded  the  North  Carolina
battalion  of  picked  men  that  took  position  imme
diately  in  front  of  the  fort  and  opened  fire  upon
the  enemy  to  attract  attention  from  the  storming
columns.  The  sword  that  he  wore  on  this  occasion
is  now  in  possession  of  the  Tennessee  historical
society.  The  next  year  Maj.  Murfree  and  his  com
mand  were  transferred  to  the  south,  and  we  hear
little  of  him  till  the  close  of  the  war.  His  descend
ants  have  the  sash  that  he  used  in  helping  bear
from  the  battle-field  Gen.  Francis  Nash,  who  was
mortally  wounded  in  the  battle  of  Gerrnantown.
It  still  shows  the  stains  of  his  blood.  After  the
war  Col.  Murfree  "  was  found  busy  with  his  plan
tation  "  on  the  banks  of  Meherrin  river,  near  the
town  of  Murfreesboro,  N.  C.  In  1807  he  emigrated
to  Tennessee,  where  he  owned  large  tracts  of  land,
and  settled  on  Murfree's  fork  of  West  Harpeth,  in
Williamson  county.  The  town  of  Murfreesboro  in
Tennessee  was  named  in  honor  of  him.  His  letters
and  memoranda  show  that  he  was  well  educated
and  possessed  of  great  native  intelligence. — His
great-granddaughter,  Mary  Noailles,  author,  b.
at  Grantlands  near  Murfreesborough,  Tcnn..  about
1850,  became  lame  early  in  life  from  a  stroke  of
paralysis,  and  thus,  prevented  from  indulging  in
the  ordinary  amusements  of  youth,  she  turned  to
books  and  became  a  hard  student.  The  civil  war
reduced  the  family  fortune,  and  they  removed  from
their  residence  in  Nashville  back  to  Grantlaud,
and  then  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.  Under  these  circum
stances  she  began  to  write  stories  of  life  in  the  Ten
nessee  mountains,  where  she  had  spent  much  time,
which,  under  the  pen-name  of  Charles  Egbert  C'rad-
dock,  she  sent  to  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly,"  in  which
they  appeared.  These  were  followed  by  longer
stories,  but  it  was  several  years  before  her  identity
was  known.  Her  published  wrorks  are  "  In  the
Tennessee  Mountains,"  a  volume  of  stories  (Boston,
1884);  "Where  the  Battle  was  Fought,"  (1884);
"  Down  the  Ravine"  (1885):  "The  Prophet  of  the
Great  Smoky  Jlountains  "  (1885) ;  "  In  the  Clouds  "
(1886):  "The  Story  of  Keedon  Bluffs"  (1887);  and
"The  Despot  of  Broomsedge  Cove"  (1888).

MURILLO-TORO,  Manuel  (moo-reel-yo-to'-ro),
Colombian  statesman,  b.  in  Chaparral,  Tolima,  in
1815 ;  d.  in  Bogota  in  December,  1880.  He  was
graduated  in  law  at  the  University  of  Bogota,  and
began  early  to  enter  politics.  His  articles  in  the
daily  press  attracted  attention  by  their  energetic
opposition  to  the  Conservative  government  of  Dr.
Marquez  in  1837-'40.  After  the  revolution  of  the
latter  year  he  became  editor  of  the  "  Gaceta  Mer-
cantil  de  Santa  Marta,"  which  exercised  a  great  in
fluence,  and  prepared  for  the  triumph  of  the  Lib
eral  party  in  the  elections  of  1849.  He  was  elected
to  the  chamber  of  representatives,  and  soon  at
tained  a  reputation  for  eloquence,  when  he  was
called  by  Gen.  Lopez  to  his  cabinet  as  secretary  of
state,  and  afterward  of  the  treasury.  In  the  latter
post  he  displayed  much  ability,  establishing  liberty
of  industry  and  the  decentralization  of  the  provin
cial  revenues,  and  thus  preparing  the  way  for  the
future  Federal  institutions.  At  the  same  time  he
defended  the  administration  in  the  press,  and  initi
ated  the  greater  part  of  the  progressive  reforms
that  were  established  by  it,  such  as  the  abolition  of


MURO Y SALAZAR


MURPHY


465


slavery,  of  the  death-penalty  for  political  crime?,  and
of  several  fiscal  monopolies,  the  liberty  of  the  press,
and  the  reform  of  the  civil  code.  In  1852  he  was
an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  the  vice-presidency
of  the  republic ;  but  when  the  Liberal  party  lost
power  he  returned  to  journalism,  and,  except  dur
ing  the  short  time  that  he  occupied  the  state  execu
tive  of  Santander,  he  sustained  an  energetic  oppo
sition  to  the  Conservative  government.  When
President  Ospina  was  overthrown,  and  the  federa
tion  proclaimed  by  the  constituent  convention  of
Rio  Xegro,  4  Feb.,  1863,  Murillo  was  appointed
minister  to  Europe,  and  afterward  to  the  United
States.  While  in  the  latter  country  he  was  elected
president  of  the  federation  for  the  term  of  1864-'6,
and  during  his  administration,  which  was  note
worthy  for  its  conciliatory  spirit  and  progress,
the  first  telegraph-lines  were  established.  He  was
elected  to  the  Federal  senate  after  his  term  as
president  had  expired,  and  for  his  constitutional
opposition  to  some  arbitrary  measures  of  President
Mosquera  he  was  arrested  with  others,  by  order  of
Mosquera.  on  the  dissolution  of  congress  in  March,
1867.  After  the  deposition  of  Mosquera,  25  May.
1867,  Murillo  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  of
Cundinamarca,  and  afterward  for  a  short  time
again  minister  to  the  United  States  and  judge  of
the  supreme  court,  and  in  all  these  posts  he  was
notable  for  his  consistent  adherence  to  the  doc
trines  that  he  had  proclaimed  as  a  journalist  and
legislator.  Pie  was  again  a  candidate  for  the  chief
executive,  and,  aided  by  part  of  the  Conservative
party,  was  elected  president  for  the  term  of  1872-'4.
His  successor.  Santiago  Perez,  although  belonging
to  the  opposite  party,  sent  him  as  minister  to  Vene
zuela  to  arrange  the  pending  question  of  boun
daries  according  to  the  proposal  of  Guzman  Blan
co.  As  Murillo  controverted  with  great  ability  on
all  the  points  that  were  brought  up  by  the  Vene
zuelan  commissioner,  no  treaty  could  be  agreed  on.
Murillo  was  again  elected  senator  in  1878.  and  occu
pied  his  seat  in  the  next  session  of  congress,  but
sickness  prevented  him  from  attending  in  1880,  and
he  died  in  the  same  year.

MURO  Y  SALAZAR.  Salvador  <le  (moo'-ro).
Marquis  of  Someruelos,  governor  of  Cuba,  b.  in
Madrid,  Spain,  in  1754;  d.  in  1813.  He  entered
the  army  when  he  was  very  young,  and  served  in
the  war  against  France  during  the  first  French  re
public.  In  1799  he  was  appointed  governor-gen
eral  of  Cuba.  During  his  term  of  office,  which
lasted  until  1812.  he  devoted  his  energy  to  the  wel
fare  of  the  country.  The  vaccine  virus  was  intro
duced,  the  practice  of  burying  in  the  churches  was
abolished,  the  establishment  of  public  cemeteries
on  the  island  was  carried  out,  many  new  towns
were  founded,  and  other  reforms  introduced.

MURPHEY,  Archibald  Debow,  jurist,  b.  in
Caswell  county,  X.  C..  in  1777;  d.  in  Hillsbo rough.
X.  C.,  3  Feb..  1832.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Xorth  Carolina  in  1799.  filled  the  chair
of  ancient  languages  in  that  institution  for  three
years,  and  then  studied  law.  was  admitted  to  the
bar.  and  obtained  a  large  practice.  He  was  a  judge
of  the  superior  court  in  1818-'20.  and  a  member  of
the  state  senate  in  1812-'18.  As  chairman  of  the
committee  on  public  education  he  recommended
in  1817  a  system  that  embraced  common  schools,
academies,  and  a  university.  He  also  advocated
extensive  internal  improvements,  and  published
"  A  Memoir  of  Improvements  Contemplated,  and
the  Resources  and  Finances  of  the  State  "  (Raleigh,
1819).  He  compiled  "  Reports  of  Cases  in  the  Su
preme  Court  of  Xorth  Carolina,  1804-'13  and
1818-'9"(3  vols.,  1821-6),  and  labored  for  many

VOL. IV. SO


years  on  a  history  of  the  state,  for  which  he  was
authorized  by  the  legislature  to  raise  money  by  a
lottery,  but  he  published  only  one  or  two  chapters
treating  of  the  Indians.

MURPHY.  Blanche  Elizabeth  Mary  Annun-
ciata  Noel,  author,  b.  in  Exton  Hall,  England,
about  1850;  d.  in  Xorth  Conway,  X.  H..  22  March.
1881.  She  was  the  eldest  daughter  of  the  Earl  of
Gainesborough,  and.  when  she  was  twenty-one
years  old,  married  Thomas  T.  Murphy,  a  young
Irishman,  her  father's  organist.  The  earl  opposed
the  match,  but  finally  allowed  the  marriage  to  take
place  from  his  house.  Lady  Blanche  then  went  to
London  with  her  husband,  and  afterward  came  to
the  United  States,  where  he  secured  a  placeas  organ
ist  in  a  church,  and  she  devoted  herself  to  litera
ture.  After  her  marriage  she  maintained  a  friend
ly  correspondence  with  her  father.  The  most  strik
ing  of  her  articles  were  a  series  of  essays  on  English
social  life  that  were  published  in  the  "Galaxy."
but  she  discontinued  them  upon  hearing  that  they
gave  offence  to  English  people.  To  the  "Catholic
World  "  she  contributed  articles  on  the  historical
aspects  of  the  Roman  question,  besides  many  short
stories  and  sketches,  which  have  been  collected  in
separate  volumes.  To  "  Lippincott's  Magazine"
*\\e  furnished  sketches  of  travel  that  were  after
ward  published  in  an  illustrated  volume.  She  also
wrote  for  other  periodicals,  and  at  the  time  of  her
death  was  preparing  a  series  of  articles  on  the
Greek  inscriptions  of  Mount  Athos.  See  a  letter
from  Cardinal  Manning  to  the  Earl  of  Gainesbor
ough  in  the  "Catholic  World"  for  October,  1887.

MURPHY,  Edward,  Canadian  reformer,  b.  in
County  Carlow,  Ireland,  26  May.  1818.  He  came  to
Canada  with  his  parents  in  1824,  and  settled  in
Montreal,  where  he  has  been  for  many  years  en
gaged  in  mercantile  pursuits.  In  1840  he  aided  in
establishing  in  Montreal  the  earliest  Irish  Roman
Catholic  temperance  society  in  Canada,  and  has
been  ever  since  one  of  the  chief  advocates  of  total
abstinence  in  the  Dominion.  He  was  commissioner
of  the  census  for  Montreal  in  1861,  director  of  the
city  and  district  savings  bank  in  1862-'76.  and  its
president  in  1877-'86.  In  1879  he  was  appointed
harbor  commissioner,  and  in  1882  he  became  cheva
lier  of  the  Order  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre.  He  has
taken  an  active  part  in  the  transactions  of  the  natu
ral  history  and  the  numismatic  and  antiquarian
societies  of  Montreal,  and  is  governor  of  the  Mon
treal  general  hospital  and  of  Xotre  Dame  hospital.
He  is  also  a  Roman  Catholic  school  commissioner
for  Montreal,  and  founded  the  Edward  Murphy
annual  prize  for  the  encouragement  of  commercial
education  in  that  city.

MURPHY,  Henry  Crnse,  lawyer,  b.  in  Brook
lyn,  X.  Y..  5  July,  1810;  d.  there,  1  Dec.,  1882.
He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1830,  and  while
studying  law  began  to  contribute  to  the  press.  He
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1833,  became  assistant
corporation  counsel  in  1834.  and  soon  afterward
city  attorney  and  counsel  to  the  corporation.  He
became  in  1835  a  partner  of  John  A.  Lott  and
soon  obtained  a  large  practice,  at  the  same  time
contributing  to  the  "  Democratic  "  and  the  "  Xorth
American "  reviews,  and  taking  an  active  part  in
state  politics  as  a  Democrat.  In  1841  he  became
a  proprietor  and  one  of  the  editors  of  the  Brook
lyn  "  Daily  Eagle,"  and  in  the  following  year  he
was  elected  mayor  of  the  city.  In  thnt  office  he
effected  important  retrenchments  in  the  financial
administration,  and  introduced  useful  public  im
provements,  especially  the  warehouse  system  on  the
water-front.  Before  the  end  of  his  term  he  was
elected  to  congress,  and,  taking  his  seat  in  that


466


MURPHY


MURPHY


body  on  4  Dec.,  1843,  took  part  in  the  debates  in
favor  of  free-trade,  and  in  opposition  to  changes
in  the  naturalization  laws  and  the  annexation  of
Texas.  In  1846  he  attended  the  convention  for  re
vising  the  state
constitution,  and
was  made  chair
man  of  the  com
mittee  on  corpo
rations.  The  same
year  he  was  again
sent  to  congress.
He  was  men
tioned  as  a  candi
date  for  the  presi
dency  in  1852,  was
Ibx  very  active  in  the
canvass  of  Frank
lin  Pierce,  and  in
that  of  James  Bu
chanan  in  1856,
and  on  1  June,
1857.  was  appoint
ed  U.  S.  minis
ter  to  the  Hague,
where  he  remained
until  he  was  recalled  by  the  succeeding  admin
istration,  leaving  on  8  'June,  1861.  On  his  re
turn  he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate,  where
he  served  six  successive  terms,  and  was  instru
mental  in  securing  the  repeal  of  the  law  on  eccle
siastical  tenures  and  the  establishment  of  isolated
quarantine.  During  the  civil  war  lie  supported
the  government  in  public  speeches  and  contribu
tions  to  the  press,  and  exerted  himself  to  pro
mote  enlistments.  In  1867  he  was  a  delegate
from  the  state  at  large  to  the  convention  for  re
modelling  the  state  constitution.  Mr.  Murphy
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  new  Long  Island
historical  society  and  of  the  Brooklyn  city  library,
and  was  president  of  the  East  River  bridge  com
pany.  He  was  interested  during  his  entire  life  in
literary  and  historical  subjects,  and  especially  in
ithe  period  of  Dutch  domination  in  New  York,
which  he  had  opportunities  to  study  during  his
residence  in  Holland.  A  list  of  the  valuable
books  that  he  collected  was  published  under  the
title  of  "A  Catalogue  of  an  American  Library,
Chronologically  Arranged"  (1853).  He  translated
and  annotated  "  Voyage  from  Holland  to  America,
A.  D.  1632-1644,"  "from  the  work  of  David  P.
De  Vries  (1853) ;  also  "  Broad  Advice  to  the  New
Netherlands,"  which  appeared  in  the  "  Collec
tions"  of  the  New  York  historical  society,  and
"The  First  Minister  of  the  Dutch  Reformed
Church  in  the  United  States,"  which  he  printed
privately  (The  Hague,  1857) ;  also  "  Henry  Hud
son  in  Holland :  An  Enquiry  into  the  Origin  and
Objects  of  the  Voyage  which  led  to  the  Discovery
of  the  Hudson  River"  (The  Hague,  1859).  His
"Anthology  of  the  New  Netherlands,  or  Trans
lations  from  the  Early  Dutch  Poets  of  New  York,
with  Memoirs  of  their  Lives,"  was  printed  for  the
Bradford  club  (New  York,  1865).  A  translation  of
the  "  Voyage  to  New  York "  of  Jasper  Dankers
and  Peter  Sluyter  was  published  by  the  Long
Island  historical  society  (Brooklyn.  1867).  He  was
the  author  also  of  a  monograph  on  "  The  Voyage
of  Verrazano"  (printed  privately,  Albany,  1875),
and  of  a  "  Memoir  of  Hermann  Ernst  Ludewig,"
printed  in  the  "  Memorial  Biographies"  of  the  New
England  historic-genealogical  society.

MURPHY,  John,  governor  of  Alabama,  b.  in
Columbia,  S.  C.,  in  1786:  d.  in  Clarke  county,  Ala.,
21  Sept.,  1841.  He  was  graduated  at  South  Caro-


lina  college  in  1808,  was  clerk  of  the  state  senate  in
1810-'17,  removed  to  Alabama  in  1818,  studied  Jaw,
was  admitted  to  the  bar.  and  soon  became  well
known  in  the  political  contests  of  the  state.  He
was  governor  from  1825  till  182!),  and  then  entered
into  an  animated  canvass  for  a  seat  in  congress,  as
a  representative  of  Unionist  principles,  with  Dixon
H.  Lewis,  who  was  an  extreme  milliner.  The  con
test  was  renewed  at  the  next  congressional  election,
and  in  the  following  one  he  was  elected  as  a  Union
Democrat  over  James  Delict,  a  Whig,  and  served
from  2  Dec..  1833,  till  3  March,  1835.

MURPHY,  John,  publisher,  b.  in  Omagh,
County  Tyrone,  Ireland,  12  March,  1812 ;  d.  in
Baltimore.  Md..  27  May,  1880.  When  he  was  ten
years  old  his  parents  emigrated  to  the  United  States
and  settled  at  New  Castle,  Del.,  where  he  attended
a  boys'  school  for  two  years,  and  then  became  a
clerk  in  a  country  store.'  Two  years  later  he  went
to  Philadelphia,  where,  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  he  ap
prenticed  himself  to  the  printing  business.  When
he  attained  his  majority  he  removed  to  Baltimore
and  worked  at  his  trade  until  1835,  when  he  opened
an  office  of  his  own.  which  soon  became  noted  for
the  excellence  of  his  work.  In  1840  he  combined
with  his  printing  business  a  book  and  stationery
store,  to  which  he  soon  added  a  publishing  depart
ment.  Within  a  few  years  he  was  known  as  one  of
the  chief  Roman  Catholic  publishers  in  this  coun
try.  In  1842  he  began  to  issue  the  "  United  States
Catholic  Magazine,"  which  was  continued  for  seven
years  under  the  editorship  of  the  Rev.  Charles
1.  White  and  Bishop  Spalding,  of  Louisville.  Ky.,
afterward  archbishop  of  Baltimore.  From  1853  till
1855)  he  published  the  "  Metropolitan  Magazine,"
which  was  not  a  pecuniary  success.  In  1855  he
printed  a  translation  of  the  "  Definition  of  the
Dogma  of  the  Immaculate  Conception,''  for  which
Pope  Pius  IX.  sent  him  a  gold  medal.  In  1866  he
issued  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  Second  Plenary
Council  of  Baltimore."  A  copy  of  this  work  was
sent  to  Pius  IX.,  who  conferred  upon  the  publisher
the  honorary  title  of  printer  to  the  pope,  a  distinc
tion  that  had  never  been  bestowed  on  a  resident
of  any  English-speaking  country.  For  more  than
a  quarter  of  a  century  he  printed  the  proceedings
of  the  Maryland  historical  society,  of  which  he  was
one  of  the  early  members.

MURPHY,  John  Francis,  landscape-painter,
b.  in  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  11  Dec..  1853.  He  came  to
New  York  city  in  1875  and  is  self-taught.  He  ex
hibited  first  at  the  National  academy  in  1876,  was
elected  an  associate  in  1885  and  academician  in
1887.  In  1885  he  received  the  second  Hallgarten
prize  for  his  painting  "  Tints  of  a  Vanished  Past,"
and  he  took  the  Webb  prize  at  the  Society  of
American  artists  in  1887.  He  is  a  member  of  the
Water-color  society  and  the  Society  of  American
artists.  His  studio  is  in  New  York  city.  Mr.
Murphy's  works  include  "Sunny  Slopes  ""(1879) ;
"Upland  Cornfield"  (1880):  "October";  "Late
Afternoon";  "April  Weather"  (1881);  "Wood
land"  (1882);  "Rocky  Slope"  (1883):  "Weedy
Brook  "  ;  "  Sultry  Season  " ;  "  Edge  of  a  Pond  "  :
"After  the  Frosts"  (1884);  "The  Yellow  Leaf"
(1885);  "Indian  Summer'';  "Sundown"  (1886);
and  "  Brooks  and  Fields"  (1887).

MURPHY,  John  McLeod,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Northcastle.  Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,  14  Feb.,  1827;
d.  in  New  York  city,  1  June,  1871.  He  entered
the  U.  S.  navy  as  midshipman,  18  Feb.,  1841,  was
promoted  passed  midshipman,  10  Aug.,  1847,  and
resigned,  10  May,  1852.  He  served  in  the  war  with
Mexico,  and  in  1851  was  detailed  as  hydrographic
assistant  on  Maj.  John  G.  Barnard's  survey  of  the


MURPHY


MURRAY


467


Isthmus  of  Tehuantcpec.  In  1853  he  visited  Mexi
co,  and  in  1855  he  was  surveyor  of  the  city  of  New
York.  He  was  constructing  engineer  of  the
Brooklyn  navy-yard  in  1856-7,  and  in  I860-'!  was
a  member  of  the  New  York  state  senate.  In  the  lat
ter  year  he  was  commissioned  colonel  of  New  York
engineers,  and  took  part  in  the  campaigns  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac  until  the  close  of  1862.  when
he  returned  to  the  navy  as  acting  lieutenant  and
was  in  command  of  the  "  Carondelet "  during  the
Vicksburg  campaign.  On  30  July,  1864,  he  again
resigned  and  resumed  his  profession  as  a  civil  en
gineer.  Lieut.  Murphy  was  a  frequent  contributor
to  the  newspaper  and  periodical  press  on  subjects
connected  with  his  specialty.

MURPHY,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Randals-
town,  County  Antrim,  Ireland,  6  Feb.,  1823.  He
came  to  the  United  States  in  1834  and  was  gradu
ated  at  Princeton  in  1845.  He  subsequently  com
pleted  a  three  years'  course  in  the  theological  semi-
Yiary,  was  licensed  to  preach,  and  ordained  pastor
of  the  Frankfonl  Presbyterian  church  of  Philadel
phia  in  1849.  He  was  a  member  of  the  board  of
publication  of  his  denomination  for  fourteen  years,
and  was  instrumental  in  originating  the  Sabbath-
school  work  of  that  organization.  In  1873,  as
delegate  to  the  general  assembly  of  the  Church  of
Ireland,  he  addressed  that  body  on  the  subject  of
'•  One  Federate  Council  for  all  the  Presbyterian
Churches  of  the  World."  The  resolution  that  was
subsequently  adopted  by  the  assembly  was  the
first  in  the  series  of  public  movements  to  this  end.
He  has  taken  a  conspicuous  part  in  organizing  sev
enteen  churches,  all  of  which,  with  one  exception,
have  been  successful.  In  1872  Mr.  Murphy  re
ceived  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Princeton.  Be
sides  fifteen  occasional  sermons  he  has  published
'•  A  History  of  the  Frankford  Presbvterian  Church  "
(Philadelphia,  1870);  "Pastoral  Theology"  (1877):
"Pastor  and  People"  (1886);  a  widely  circulated
tract  on  "  Duties  of  Church  -  Members "  and
"  Sketches  of  Pastoral  Experience,"  which  ap
peared  in  "  The  Presbyterian."

MURRAY,  Alexander,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Chestertown.  Md.,  in  1755;  d.  near  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  6  Oct.,  1821.  His  grandfather,  an  adherent  of
the  Pretender,  settled  in  Barbadoes,  and  his  father
was  a  physician  of  Chestertown,  Md.  The  son
went  to  sea  at  an  early  age.  commanded  a  vessel
in  the  European  trade  when  eighteen  years  old,
and  in  1776  was  appointed  lieutenant  in  the
American  navy;  but.  having  no  vessel,  served  in
the  1st  Maryland  regiment  in  the  battles  of  White
Plains  and  Flatbush,  and  was  promoted  captain.
About  the  time  of  the  evacuation  of  Xew  York  he
was  severely  wounded  by  the  bursting  of  a  piece
of  ordnance  in  a  battery  at  which  he  was  stationed.
He  was  placed  in  command  of  a  privateer  at  t]ie
close  of  1777,  was  captured  by  a  British  squadron,
and  after  his  exchange  volunteered  as  lieutenant
on  the  frigate  "  Trumbull "  and  was  again  taken
prisoner  after  an  engagement  off  the  capes  of
Delaware,  in  which  he  was  wounded.  On  his  ex
change  and  recovery  a  second  time  he  was  ap
pointed  1st  lieutenant  of  the  frigate  "  Alliance,"
and  at  the  termination  of  the  war  had  participated
in  thirteen  engagements  on  sea  and  shore.  On  the
organization  of  the  American  navy  in  1798  he  was
commissioned  captain,  commanded  the  corvette
••  Montezuma,"  of  twenty  guns,  and  subsequently
the  frigates  "  Insurgent  "  and  "  Constellation."
In  1820  he  was  sent  with  a  squadron  to  the  Medi
terranean,  where  with  his  ship  alone  he  fought  a
flotilla  of  seventeen  Tripolitan  gun-boats  and  drove
them  into  their  harbor.  His  last  appointment  was


the  command  of  the  Philadelphia  navy-yard,  and
at  his  death  he  was  the  senior  officer  of  the  U.  S.
navy. — His  son,  Alexander,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Philadelphia.  Pa.,  in  1816 :  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,
10  Nov.,  1884.  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  in  1835,  be
came  lieutenant  in  1847,  commander  in  1862,  cap
tain  in  1866,  commodore  in  1871.  and  rear-admiral
on  the  retired  list  in  1876.  He  was  in  service  on  the
east  coast  of  Mexico  in  1846-'7,  participated  in  the
capture  of  Alvarado,  where  he  was  wounded,  and
fought  at  Tampico.  Tobasco,  Tuspan,  and  Vera
Cruz.  He  commanded  the  steamer  '•  Louisiana,"
of  the  North  Atlantic  squadron,  in  1861-'2,  de
feated  the  Confederate  steamer  "  Yorktown  "  off
Newport  News,  fought  the  battle  of  Roanoke  Isl
and,  destroyed  the  Confederate  fleet  under  Capt.
William  F.  Lynch,  was  in  charge  of  the  naval
forces  at  Kingston.  N.  C.,  and  the  expedition  up
York  and  Pamunkey  rivers,  destroying  twenty-
seven  vessels  in  May,  1862.  He  was  on  duty  in  the
North  Carolina  sounds  in  1863,  and  on  special  ser
vice  in  1866-'7,  was  light-house  inspector  in  1873-'6,
and  after  retirement  served  on  the  naval  board.

MURRAY",  Alexander,  Canadian  geologist,  b.
in  Perthshire.  Scotland,  2  June,  1811;  d.  in  Janu
ary,  1885.  He  was  the  son  of  Anthony  Murray,  of
Crieff,  a  landed  gentleman,  was  educated  at  the
Royal  naval  college,  Portsmouth,  and  served  in
the  navy  from  1825  till  1835,  when  he  resigned.  In
1837  he  came  to  Canada,  served  during  the  rebel
lion,  and  in  1842  was  appointed  to  aid  Sir  William
Logan  in  his  geological  survey  of  that  country.
Mr.  Murray's  labors  in  connection  with  demon
strating  the  relations  of  the  Huron  series  of  rocks
to  the  formations  of  the  lower  Silurian  age  at
tracted  attention.  He  subsequently  conducted  a
geological  survey  of  Newfoundland  and  wrote  the
geology  and  mineralogy  of  that  island.
,  MURRAY,  David,  educator,  b.  in  Bovina.  N.  Y.,
15  Oct.,  1830.  His  parents  came  to  this  country
from  Scotland  in  1818.  The  son  was  graduated  at
Union  college  in  1852,  became  tutor  and  subse
quently  professor  of  mathematics,  and  in  1857
was  made  principal  of  Albany  academy.  From
1863  till  1873  he  was  professor  of  mathematics  and
astronomy  in  Rutgers  college.  By  appointment
of  the  Japanese  government  he  was  superintend
ent  of  schools  and  colleges  in  Tokio  from  1873  till
1879,  and  under  his  oversight  the  present  elabo
rate  system  of  public  education  was  established.
In  the  interests  of  the  department  of  education  he
visited  the  Centennial  exposition  at  Philadelphia,
and  collected  materials  for  the  museums  of  Japan.
On  his  return  from  the  East  by  way  of  Asia  and
Europe  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  the  board
of  regents  of  the  University  of  New  York  in  Al
bany,  which  post  he  still  (1888)  holds.  He  was
active  in  laying  before  congress  in  1875-'6  the
facts  in  regard  to  the  Japanese  indemnity,  which
was  ultimately  returned.  He  received  the  degree
of  Ph.  D.  from  the  board  of  regents  in  1863  and
that  of  LL.  D.  from  Rutgers  in  1873,  and  the
decoration  of  the  Rising  Sun  from  the  emperor
of  Japan  in  1878.  He  has  published  in  pamphlet-
form  various  antiquarian,  historical,  and  educa
tional  addresses,  edited  a  volume  on  "  Japanese
Education"  (New  York,  1876),  and  is  the  author
of  a  "  Manual  of  Land-Surveying  "  (1869).

MURRAY,  Eli  Houston,  governor  of  Utah,  b.
in  Breckinridge  county,  Ky.,  12  Sept.,  1844. He

;  entered  the  U.  S.  army  as  a  volunteer  at  seventeen
years  of  age,  commanded  a  brigade  in  Kentucky
in  1862-'3,  and  in  1865  received  the  brevet  of
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  for  services  during

i  the  civil  war. He  was  appointed  U.  S.  marshal


468


MURRAY


MURRAY


for  Kentucky  in  1866,  and  held  office  till  1876,
when  he  became  manager  of  the  Louisville,  Ky.,
"  Commercial."  He  was  appointed  governor  of
Utah  by  President  Hayes  in  1880,  reappointed  by
President  Arthur  in  1884  for  a  term  of  four  years,
but  resigned  before  its  completion.  Throughout  his
administration  he  opposed  the  encroachments  of
the  Mormon  church  and  the  advance  of  polygamy.

MURRAY,  Hannah  Limlley,  translator,  b.  in
New  York  city,  10  March,  1777;  d.  there,  3  July,
1836.  Her  father  was  a  native  of  Pennsylvania,
who  settled  in  New  York  before  the  Revolution
and  was  a  successful  merchant  of  that  city  for
more  than  fifty  years.  The  daughter  was  an  ac
complished  linguist,  and  with  her  sister  Mary
translated  Tasso's  "Jerusalem  Delivered,"  the
"  Fall  of  Phaeton  "  from  Ovid,  a  "  History  of  Hun
gary  "  from  the  French  of  M.  de  Sacy,  Massi  lion's
'•  Discourses,"  and  a  variety  of  operas  from  differ
ent  languages.  She  also  painted,  wrote  verses  and
hymns,  and,  aided  by  her  sister,  composed  a  poem
in  eight  books  on  the  "  Restoration  of  the  Jews."
None  of  her  writings  were  published  until  after
her  death,  when  a  few  of  her  miscellanies  were  in
cluded  in  a  "Memoir"  by  Rev.  Gardiner  Spring,
D.  D.  (New  York,  1849).

MURRAY,  James,  governor  of  Canada,  b.  in
Scotland  about  1712;  d.  in  Beau  port  House,  near
Battell,  Sussex,  8  June,  1794.  He  was  the  fourth
son  of  Alexander,  Lord  Klibank,  entered  the
army  at  an  early  age,  and  became  a  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  loth  foot,  5  Jan.,  1751.  He  served
with  Wolfe  in  the  expedition  against  Rochefort,
was  made  a  colonel,  5  Jan.,  1758,  and  led  the  2d
brigade  in  the  expedition  against  Louisburg.  He
was  junior  brigadier  under  Wolfe  at  Quebec  in
1759.  and  commanded  the  3d  brigade  at  the  Plains
of  Abraham.  After  the  death  of  Wolfe.  Murray
took  command  of  the  forces,  and  was  appointed
governor  of  Quebec,  23  Oct.,  1759.  During  the
winter  of  1759-?60  Gen.  Murray  established  twelve
redoubts  and  outposts  around  the  city,  and  took
every  precaution  to  place  it  in  a  thorough  state  of
defence  against  the  threatened  attack  of  the
French.  The  Duke  de  Levis,  the  French  com
mander,  landed  with  his  troops  at  Pointe-aux-
Trembles,  26  April,  1760,  marched  to  Lorette,  and
thence  to  Sainte  Foye  church,  threatening  Murray's
advance  posts.  The  latter,  in  consequence  of  this
movement,  was  compelled  to  post  some  of  his
forces  between  Sainte  Foye  and  Sillery,  so  as  to
prevent  the  advance  of  the  French,  and  on  28  April
marched  out  of  Quebec  with  the  rest  of  his  troops,
and  attacked  the  advance  guard  of  De  Levis's
army.  The  battle  soon  became  general,  and  the
British,  being  outnumbered  three  to  one,  were
finally  forced  to  retire  within  the  city  walls,  after
losing  about  300  killed.  The  French  loss  was
about  600.  De  Levis  then  besieged  the  city,  but
on  17  May  the  siege  was  raised,  and,  though  he  was
pursued  by  the  British,  De  Levis  succeeded  in
effecting  a  junction  with  Vaudreuil  at  Montreal,
where  a  final  stand  was  to  be  made  for  French  su
premacy  in  Canada.  Quebec  being  now  secure,
Gen.  Murray,  with  the  remnant  of  Wolfe's  divis
ion,  2,450  men,  marched  to  Montreal  on  14  June
to  aid  Gen.  Amherst  in  the  investment  of  that  city.
On  7  Sept.,  Gov.  Vaudreuil,  becoming  convinced  of
the  hopelessness  of  defending  Montreal  against
the  British,  sent  out  De  Bougainville  with  a  draft
of  articles  comprising  the  conditions  upon  which
he  was  willing  to  surrender  Canada.  These  condi
tions  having  been  modified  to  suit  the  British,  the
articles  of  capitulation  were  signed  by  both  parties
on  8  Sept.,  1760.  On  21  Nov.,  1763,' Gen.  Murray


was  appointed  governor  of  Canada,  and  com-
mander-in-chief  of  the  British  forces  there,  which
offices  he  retained  till  1760.  During  his  adminis
tration  the  form  of  government  and  the  laws  to  be
observed  in  the  new  colony  were  promulgated.
Everything  was  done  by  the  governor  to  alleviate
the  discontent  of  the  conquered  population,  but
with  only  partial  success.  Representatives  of  the
people  were  summoned  to  Quebec  by  the  governor
in  1765,  but  his  attempt  to  constitute  a  representa-.
tive  assembly  failed,  according  to  Francois  X.
Garneau,  the  historian,  owing  to  the  unwillingness
of  the  French  Roman  Catholics  to  take  the  test
oath  that  was  imposed  by  the  imperial  statute.  In
his  desire  to  conciliate  the  Canadians.  Gov.  Murray
provoked  the  wrath  of  the  British  residents,  who
petitioned  for  his  recall,  at  the  same  time  charging
him  with  pandering  to  French  prejudices  to  the
detriment  of  the  English-speaking  population,  an
imputation  of  which  he  was  honorably  acquitted  on
his  return  to  England.  During  his  administration
in  1763  the  Indian  uprising  under  Pontiac  (q.  r.)
took  place  in  the  west.  He  returned  to  England
in  1766  became  a  lieutenant-general  in  1772,  lien-
tenant-governor  of  Minorca  in  1774,  and  governor
in  1778.  He  was  made  general  in  1783,  governor  of
Hull  in  1785,  and  colonel  of  the  21st  fusiliers  on  5
June,  1789.  Gen.  Murray  made  a  gallant  but  unsuc
cessful  defence  of  Minorca  in  1781  against  the  Due
de  Crillon,  witli  a  large  French  and  Spanish  force,
and  rejected  the  French  general's  offer  of  a  bribe
of  £1,000,000  for  the  surrender  of  the  fortress.

MURRAY,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Rhode  Island
about  1765;  d.  in  Calcutta,  India,  in  1806.  In
consequence  of  a  quarrel  with  his  family,  he  went
to  sea  in  early  life,  changing  his  name  from  Lilli-
bridge  to  Murray.  He  entered  the  service  of
Holka,  the  Mahratta  chief,  in  1790,  and  soon  be
came  noted  for  his  brilliant  exploits  and  military
skill,  but  he  incurred  the  displeasure  of  his  chief
by  his  humanity  to  a  party  of  British  officers,  and
after  fifteen  years'  service  left  him  and,  raising  a
large  force,  occupied  an  extensive  district,  as  its
reigning  sovereign.  When  the  war  between  the
British  and  Scindia  began,  Murray  joined  Lord
Lake  with  7,000  cavalry,  and  was  employed  in
many  dangerous  and  important  services.  At  the
siege  of  Bhurtpore  he  was  continually  in  action,
and  he  was  considered  the  best  partisan  officer  in
the  army.  At  the  close  of  the  war,  having  accu
mulated  a  large  fortune,  he  determined  to  return
to  this  country.  At  a  splendid  entertainment  that
was  given  by  him  a  few  days  before  his  intended
departure  he  mounted  a  favorite  Arabian  horse
and  endeavored  to  leap  over  the  dining-table,  a
feat  that  he  had  frequently  performed  on  other
occasions  for  the  entertainment  of  his  guests.  But
tli£  animal  entangled  his  feet  in  the  carpet,  and
threw  his  rider,  who  died  from  the  injuries  that  he
received.  Murray  was  regarded  as  the  best  horse
man  in  India,  and  was  unrivalled  in  the  use  of  the
broad-sword.

MURRAY,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Scotland  about
1731;  d.  in  Dauphin  county,  Pa.,  3  Feb.,  1798.
He  emigrated  to  this  country  with  his  father,
William  Murray,  and  in  1766  purchased  land  near
the  town  of  Dauphin,  Pa.  He  was  an  ardent  patriot,
and  in  March,  1776,  was  the  first  to  be  appointed
to  command  a  company  in  Col.  Samuel  Miles's
"rifle  regiment."  In  March.  1777,  he  was  pro
moted  major  of  the  Pennsylvania  state  regiment,
and  in  December,  1778,  he  was  made  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  2d  Pennsylvania.  He  served  until
the  disbanding  of  the  army  in  1783,  participnting
in  the  battles  of  Long  Island,  White  Plains,  Tren-


MURRAY


MURRAY


469


ton,  Princeton,  Germantown,  and  the  Brandywine.
In  1791  he  was  commissioned  justice  of  the  peace,
the  only  political  office  he  ever  held. — His  brother,
JAMES,  filso  served  in  the  same  war.  as  captain  of
a  company  in  the  Pennsylvania  troops.

MURRAY,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Alton,  Hamp
shire,  England,  10  Dec.,  1741 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
3  Sept.,  181-5.  He  removed  with  his  parents  in  his
eleventh  year  to  Cork,  Ireland.  Under  the  influ
ence  of  George  Whitefield  and  the  Wesleys  he  be
came  a  convert  to  Methodism,  and  was  an  occa
sional  preacher  in  that  connection.  He  returned
to  England  in  1760,  adopted  the  doctrines  of  Uni-
versalism  as  taught  by  James  Relly,  and  was  excom
municated  at  Whiten" eld's  tabernacle  in  London.
He  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1770,  and  preached
in  Newport,  R.  I.,  Boston,  Mass.,  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,
and  several  other  New  England  cities,  in  some  of
which  his  peculiar  doctrines  subjected  him  to  op
position  and  occasionally  to  violence.  At  Glouces
ter.  Mass.,  where  he  settled  in  the  latter  part  of
1 774.  he  was  suspected  of  being  a  disguised  spy  of  the
British  government,  and  a  vote  was  passed  by  the
town  authorities  ordering  him  to  leave,  but  by  the
exertions  of  his  friends  he  was  permitted  to  remain
and  to  preach.  He  was  chaplain  to  the  Rhode  Island
brigade  that  was  encamped  before  Boston  in  1775,
and  was  on  intimate  terms  with  several  of  its
officers,  including  Xathanael  Greene  and  James
Varnum.  who  united  in  petitioning  Washington  to
permit  him  to  remain  in  that  capacity,  when  the
rest  of  the  chaplains  urged  his  removal.  This
connection  was  soon  severed  by  Murray's  delicate
health.  After  a  severe  illness  he  returned  to
Gloucester  and  established  a  Universalist  society.
In  1783  he  was  plaintiff  in  an  action  to  recover
property  belonging  to  persons  of  his  denomination
which  had  been  appropriated  to  the  expenses  of
the  original  parish  of  Gloucester  on  the  ground
that  the  Universalists  were  not  legally  vested  with
civil  and  corporate  powers.  The  decision  of  the
court  in  his  favor  established  an  important  princi
ple  in  the  constitution  of  religious  societies.  He
participated  in  the  proceedings  of  the  first  Uni
versalist  convention,  which  met  at  Oxford,  Mass.,
in  1785,  and  adopted  the  name  of  Independent
Christian  Universalists.  For  many  years  after
ward  he  was  a  delegate  to  similar  meetings.  He
made  a  brief  visit  to  England  in  1788,  and  from
1793  until  his  death  was  in  charge  of  a  society  in
Boston.  From  his  activity  in  disseminating' his
opinions  he  is  styled  the  "  father  of  Universalism
in  America,"  but  his  doctrines  differed  essentially
from  those  that  are  now  recognized  by  that  de
nomination.  He  accepted  the  doctrine  of  the
Trinity,  and  believed  in  God  as  one  "indivisible
first  cause."  in  a  personal  devil,  and  orders  of
angels.  His  fundamental  doctrine  as  a  UniverSal-
ist  was  that  Christ  literally  put  away  the  sin  of
the  whole  world,  but  he  distinguished  between
universal  salvation  and  universal  redemption  by
fixing  degrees  of  punishment  that  were  to  be  in
flicted  before  the  final  judgment,  after  which  all
the  world,  he  believed,  would  be  saved.  His  pub
lications  include  "Letters  and  Sketches'"  (3  vols.,
Boston,  1812)  and  an  "Autobiography"  (1813.
with  a  continuation  by  his  wife,  181(5 ;  8th  ed.,  with
additions.  18GO:  9th  ed..  with  notes  by  Rev.  George
L.  Demorest,  1870). — His  wife.  Judith  Sargent,
author,  b.  in  Cape  Ann,  Mass.,  in  1751 :  d.  in
Natchez,  Miss.,  6  June,  1820,  was  a  sister  of  Gov.
Winthrop  Sargent,  and  after  the  death  of  her  first
husband,  whose  name  was  Stevens,  married  Mr.
Murray  in  1788.  She  possessed  literary  ability,
contributed  to  the  "  Massachusetts  Magazine '"


and  the  "  Boston  Weekly  Magazine "  under  the
pen-name  of  "  Constantia,"  and  edited  the  "  Re
pository  and  Gleaner  "  (3  vols.,  Boston,  1798)  and
her  husband's  autobiography  (1816).

MURRAY,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Antrim,
Ireland,  22  May,  1742;  d.  in  Newburyport,  Mass.,
13  March,  1793.  He  was  educated  in  Edinburgh,
came  to  this  country  in  1763,  and  held  Presbyterian
pastorates  in  Philadelphia,  Boothbay,  Me.,  and
Newburyport,  Mass.  He  possessed  great  oratorical
powers,  which  he  used  in  the  patriot  cause,  and  on
one  occasion  raised  a  full  company  of  volunteers
for  the  Continental  army  in  a  few  hours.  He  also
exercised  much  influence  over  his  congregation  as
a  moralist,  was  an  acknowledged  political  power,
and  on  several  occasions  was  instrumental  in  effect
ing  the  exchange  of  prisoners.  He  published  "  Ser
mons  on  Justification"  (1780)  and  "Sermons  on
the  Original  Sin  Imputed  "  (1791).

MURRAY, John, British soldier, b. in St.
James,  Jamaica,  about  1774;  d.  in  Brighton,  Eng
land,  21  Feb.,  1862. He  entered  the  army  as  en
sign  of  the  37th  regiment  in  1792.  served  creditably
j  in  the  Netherlands,  and  was  wounded  and  taken
prisoner  at  Ostend. When  the  100th  regiment  was
\  raised  he  was  appointed  its  lieutenant-colonel,  and
|  was  sent  with  it  to  Canada,  where  he  became  in-
!  specting  field-officer  of  militia,  and  in  that  capaci-
,  ty  led  the  advance  corps  in  the  Niagara  district  to
;  keep  in  check  a  superior  force  of  Americans. He
I  subsequently  took  Fort  George,  cleared  the  penin
sula  of  the  enemy,  and  carried  Fort  Niagara  by
:  assault  in  December,  1813,  taking  the  commandant
and  the  greater  part  of  the  garrison  prisoners. In
I  1815  he  returned  to  England,  but  he  soon  removed
for  the  benefit  of  his  health  to  France,  where  he
remained  many  years.

MURRAY,  John  Clark,  Canadian  educator,  b.
in  Paisley,  Scotland,  19  March.  1836.  He  was  edu
cated  at  the  universities  of  Glasgow,  Edinburgh.
Heidelberg,  and  Gottingen,  and  contributed  to
"Chambers's  Cyclopaedia"  and  to  various  periodicals
in  Great  Britain.  In  1862  he  was  appointed  pro
fessor  of  mental  and  moral  philosophy  in  Queen's
university,  Kingston,  Canada,  and  in  1872  he  ac
cepted  the  same  chair  in  McGill  university,  Mont
real,  which  he  now  (1888)  fills.  He  has  published
"An  Outline  of  Sir  William  Hamilton's  Philoso
phy"  (Boston,  1870);  "The  Ballads  and  Songs
of  Scotland  "  (London,  1874) ;  "  Memoir  of  David
Murray"  (Paisley,  1881);  " Handbook  of  Psychol
ogy"  (London,  1885);  and  "Solomon  Maimon,  an
Autobiography,"  translated  from  the  German,  with
notes  and  additions  (1888).

MURRAY,  John  O'Kane,  historian,  b.  in  Glen-
ariffe,  County  Antrim,  Ireland,  12  Dec.,  1847 ;  d.  in
Chicago.  111.,"  30  July,  1885.  He  came  to  the  United
States  with  his  parents  in  June,  1856,  and  grad
uated  at  St.  John's  college,  Fordham,  N.  Y.  He
also  studied  medicine  in  the  University  of  the  city
of  New  York,  and,  until  his  health  failed,  practised
in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  He  contributed  largely  to
Roman  Catholic  periodicals,  and  seldom  allowed  a
public  attack  upon  his  church  or  her  institutions
to  go  unanswered.  He  did  much  to  have  objection
able  references  to  the  Roman  Catholic  church  ex
punged  from  many  popular  text-books.  For  years
he  devoted  from  twelve  to  sixteen  hours  a  day  in
study  and  writing,  and  this  was  more  than  he  could
endure.  The  last  five  years  of  his  life  were  spent
in  vain  endeavors  to  rid  himself  of  consumption,
which  he  had  contracted  from  severe  study  and
confinement,  fie  was  conversant  with  six  lan
guages,  and  possessed  scientific,  historical,  and  lit
erary  knowledge.  His  books  have  had  an  extensive


470


sale.  His  principal  work  was  a  "  Popular  History
of  the  Catholic  Church  in  the  United  States"
(1876).  which  was  received  with  great  favor.  Pope
Pius  IX.  sent  him  a  medal  and  a  personal  letter.
This  was  followed  by  "  The  Prose  and  Poetry  of
Ireland  "  (1877);  "The  Catholic  Heroes  and  Heroines
of  America"  (1878):  "Little  Lives  of  the  Great
Saints"  (1879) ; "  The  Catholic  Pioneers  of  America"
(1881);  and  "Lessons  in  English  Literature"
(1883).  He  revised  Kerney's  "General  History"
and  brought  it  down  to  date,  and  he  was  engaged
in  doing  the  same  for  Lingard's  "  History  of  Eng
land  "  when  he  died.

MURRAY,  Lindley,  grammarian,  b.  in  Swa-
tara,  Pa.,  22  April,  1745  ;  d.  near  YTork,  England,
16  Feb.,  1826.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  Rob
ert  Murray,  who  afterward  became  the  greatest
New  York  merchant
of  ante- Revolutionary
times.  The  son's  edu
cation  was  begun  at
a  Friends'  academy,
and  he  was  a  mem
ber  of  that  religious
society  through  life.
His  father,  with  a
view  of  making  a
merchant  of  him,
took  him  into  his
counting-room,  but,
in  order  to  escape
from  the  severity  of
his  father  and  the
drudgery  of  business,

^' -/' Js  he ran awav from

^s^iat  ^£44^*^ hom6) jmd ^ent to

Burlington,  N.J.  By
persuasions,  promises,  and,  above  all.  the  tears  of
his  mother,  the  lad  was  induced  to  return,  and,
after  this  escapade,  his  father  consented  to  his
studying  law.  In  1765,  after  passing  four  years
in  legal  studies,  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
soon  afterward  married.  When  the  Revolution
began  he  retired  to  a  cottage  on  Long  Island,  and
spent  four  years  in  fishing,  boating,  and  fowling.
He  afterward  regretted  the  years  that  he  had
thus  passed  without  intellectual  profit.  Returning
to  New  York  in  1779,  he  entered  into  commercial
speculations  under  the  direction  of  his  father,  with
such  success  that,  at  the  close  of  the  Revolution,  he
was  able  to  retire  with  a  fortune  to  a  beautiful
place  on  the  Hudson  about  three  miles  from  New
York.  Previous  to  this  he  had  been  attacked  by  a
severe  muscular  affection,  and,  finding  that  a
country  life  did  not  improve  his  health,  he  visited
the  springs  and  the  mountains,  but  experienced
very  little  relief.  At  last  his  physician  recom
mended  an  entire  change  of  climate,  and  he  sailed
for  England  early  in  the  summer  of  1784.  Soon
after  his  arrival  he  settled  in  Holdgate,  about  a
mile  from  the  city  of  York.  Here  he  devoted  him
self  to  intellectual  pursuits,  and  collected  a  library
Mat  was  particularly  rich  in  history,  philology,  and
theology.  His  first  literary  work,  "  The  Power  of
Religion  on  the  Mind"  (1787),  was  very  successful,
and  passed  through  seventeen  editions.  His
"English  Grammar"  was  written  for  the  use  of  a
young  ladies'  school  near  York.  It  was  first  pub
lished  in  book-form  at  York  in  1795,  and  its  success
was  immediate  and  extraordinary.  Edition  after
edition  was  published  in  a  few  years;  it  was  intro
duced  into  all  the  English  and  American  schools,
and  made  his  name  a  household  word  in  every
country  where  the  English  language  was  spoken.
It  was,  however,  severely  criticised  for  its  obscurity,


blunders,  and  deficient  presentation  of  etymology.
His  later  years  were  devoted  to  the  study  of  botany,
and  his  garden  at  Holdgate,  in  the  variety  and
rarity  of  its  plants,  surpassed  the  royal  gardens  at
Kew.  Besides  the  works  mentioned  above,  he  pub
lished  English  and  French  readers  and  spelling-
books,  "  Selections  from  Bishop  Home's  Commen
taries  on  the  Psalms  "  (1812) ;  "  Biographical  Sketch
of  Henry  Tuke"  (1815);  "Compendium  of  Relig
ious  Faith  and  Practice ;  designed  for  Young  Per
sons  of  the  Society  of  Friends  "  (1815);  and  "On
the  Duty  and  Benefit  of  a  Daily  Perusal  of  the
Scriptures"  (1817).  See  "  Memoirs  of  the  Life  and
Writings  of  Lindley  Murray,  in  a  Series  of  Letters
written  by  Himself,  with  a  Preface  and  a  Continua
tion  by  Elizabeth  Frank"  (York,  1826).

MURRAY,  Nicholas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bally-
naskea,  Ireland,  25  Dec.,  1802;  d.  in  Elizabethtown,
N.  J..  4  Feb.,  1861.  His  parents  were  Roman
Catholics,  and  destined  him  for  the  church,  but  he
refused  to  take  holy  orders,  and  was  apprenticed  to
a  merchant,  who  treated  him  with  such  cruelty  that
he  ran  away  and  emigrated  to  the  United  States,
landing  in  New  York  in  1818.  He  was  then  em
ployed  in  the  printing  establishment  of  Harper
Brothers,  became  a  Protestant,  and  was  graduated
at  Williams  in  1826.  and  at  Princeton  theological
seminary  in  1829.  He  was  ordained  joint  pastor  of
the  Presbyterian  churches  in  Wilkesbarre  and
Kingston,  Pa.,  in  the  autumn  of  the  latter  year,  and
from  1833  till  his  death  was  in  charge  of  the  church
in  Elizabethtown,  N.  J.  He  was  secretary  of  the
Foreign  missionary  society  of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  1835,  moderator  of  the  general  assembly
in  1850,  a  founder  of  the  New  Jersey  historical
society,  and  for  many  years  a  trustee  of  Princeton
theological  seminary  and  Williams  college,  receiv
ing  from  the  latter  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1843.  In
1847  he  began  the  publication,  in  the  "  New  York
Observer."  of  a  series  of  letters  addressed  to  Arch
bishop  Hughes,  signed  "  Kirwan,"  in  which  he
attacked  with  ability  some  of  the  doctrines  of  the
Roman  Catholic  church.  This  controversy  with
Archbishop  Hughes  excited  much  interest.  Dr.
Murray  then  lectured  on  "Popery."  He  visited
Ireland  in  1851,  and  again  in  1860.  in  the  interest
of  Protestantism,  and  preached  and  lectured  against
the  practices  of  the  Roman  Catholic  church.  His
publications  include  "  Notes,  Historical  and  Bio
graphical,  concerning  Elizabethtown,  N.  J."  (Eliza
bethtown,  1844);  "  Letters  to  the  Right  Rev.  John
Hughes  "(New  York,  1848;  enlarged  ed.,  1855);
"Romanism  at  Home "(1852):  "  Men  and  Things
as  I  saw  them  in  Europe"  (1853);  "Parish  and
other  Pencillings"  (1854);  "The  Happy  Home"
(1859);  "  Preachers  and  Preaching"  (1860);  and  a
volume  of  sermons  entitled  "A  Dying  Legacy  to
the  People  of  my  Beloved  Charge"  (1861).  See  a
"Memoir"  of  him  by  Samuel  I.  Prime  (1862).

MURRAY,  Robert,  surgeon,  b.  in  Howard
county,  Md.,  6  Aug.,  1822.  He  was  graduated  at
Jefferson  medical  college  in  1845,  was  appointed
assistant  surgeon  in  the  United  States  army  in
1846.  became  captain  and  assistant  surgeon  in
1851,  major  and  surgeon  in  I860,  and  received  the
brevets  of  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel  in  1865
for  meritorious  service  during  the  civil  war.  He
was  assistant  medical  purveyor  and  lieutenant-
colonel  in  1866.  colonel  and  surgeon  in  1876,  sur
geon-general  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general  in
1883,  and  was  retired  in  1886.

MURRAY,  William  Henry  Harrison,  author,
b.  in  Guilford,  Conn..  26  April,  1840.  He  was  grad
uated  at  Yale  in  1862,  licensed  to  preach  the  next
year,  and  in  1864-'8  was  pastor  of  churches  in


MURRAY


MUSSEY


471


Greenwich  and  Meriden,  Conn.,  at  the  latter  date
accepting  the  charge  of  Park  street  Congregational
church,  Boston.  Mass.  He  also  engaged  in  lectur
ing,  and  in  the  winters  of  1869-'73  delivered  Sun
day  evening  "  talks  "  in  Boston  music-hall,  which
enjoyed  considerable  popularity.  He  resigned  his
pastorate  in  1874,  and  since  that  time  has  engaged
in  business,  preaching  to  independent  congrega
tions.  He  has  published  "  Camp  Life  in  the  Adi-
rondacks"  (Boston,  1868);  "  Music-Hail  Sermons"
(1870-'3);  "Words  Fitly  Spoken"  (1873);  "The
Perfect  Horse"  (1873);  "Sermons  delivered  from
Park  Street  Pulpit"  (1874);  "  Adirondack  Tales  "
(1877):  and  "How  Deacon  Tubman  and  Parson
Whitney  kept  New  Year,  and  other  Stories"  (1887).

MURRAY.  William  Vans,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Cambridge,  Md.,  in  1762;  d.  there,  11  Dec.,  1803.
After  receiving  a  classical  education  he  went  to
London  in  1783  and  studied  law  in  the  Temple.
He  returned  to  Maryland  in  1785,  practised  his
profession,  was  in  the  state  legislature,  and  in  1790
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Federalist,  serving  in
1791-'7.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  early  legis
lation  of  that,  body,  and  had  few  superiors  in  eru
dition,  eloquence,  and  skill  in  debate.  He  was
appointed  by  Washington  minister  to  the  Nether
lands  in  1797,  and  envoy  to  France  by  President
Adams  in  1799.  In  the  latter  mission  he  was  asso
ciated  with  Oliver  Ellsworth  and  William  R.  Davie,
but  the  convention  that  was  signed  in  Paris,  30
Sept.,  1800,  and  put  an  end  to  the  threatened  diffi
culties  between  the  United  States  and  France,  was
mainly  the  work  of  Mr.  Murray.  He  then  returned
to  his  post  at  the  Hague,  which  he  occupied  till
1801.  He  published  a  pamphlet  entitled  "The
Constitution  and  Laws  of  the  United  States,"  which
was  much  commended.

MUSGRAVE,  Sir  Anthony,  governor  of  New
foundland,  b.  in  1828.  His  father,  of  the  same
name,  was  treasurer  of  Antigua.  The  son  entered
the  Inner  Temple,  London,  in  1851,  was  appointed
treasury  accountant  at  Antigua  in  1852,  and  was
nominated  colonial  secretary  there  in  1854.  In
18(50  he  was  appointed  administrator  of  the  colony
of  Nevis,  and  in  1861  he  was  transferred  to  the
island  of  St.  Vincent  in  the  same  capacity.  He
was  governor  of  Newfoundland  from  1864  till
1809,  and  in  the  latter  year  became  governor  of
British  Columbia.  He  was  nominated  lieutenant-
governor  of  Natal  in  1872,  and  he  was  soon  trans
ferred  to  the  governorship  of  South  Australia,
which  post  he  held  till  1877,  when  he  was  trans
ferred  to  the  island  of  Jamaica.  In'  1883  he  was
appointed  governor-general  of  Queensland,  Aus
tralia.  Sir  Anthony  was  nominated  a  companion
of  the  order  of  St.  Michael  and  St.  George  in  1871,
and  promoted  for  his  official  service  to  the  knight
commandership  of  that  order  in  1875.  He  mar
ried  a  daughter  of  David  Dudley  Field.

MUSGRAVE,  Georare  Washington,  clergy
man,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  19  Oct.,  1804;  d.
there,  24  Aug.,  1882.  He  was  educated  at  Prince
ton  and  at  the  theological  seminary  there,  but,
owing  to  failing  health,  was  not  graduated.  In
1828  he  was  licensed  to  preach,  and  after  holding
pastorates  in  Baltimore  and  Philadelphia  he  was
corresponding  secretary  of  the  Presbyterian  board
of  publication  in  1852-'8,  and  of  the'  board  of  do
mestic  missions  from  1853  till  1861,  and  from  1868
till  1870.  He  was  a  director  of  the  Presbyterian
national  union  convention  in  Philadelphia  in  1867,
that  healed  the  rupture  between  the  old-  and  new-
school  branches  of  the  church.  As  chairman  of
the  joint  committee  on  reconstruction  he  reported
a  plan  to  the  first  reunited  general  assembly  in


Philadelphia,  May,  1870.  which  was  adopted.  Ik-
was  president  of  the  Philadelphia  Presbyterian
alliance  for  evangelical  work  from  its  inception
in  1869  till  his  death,  and  of  the  board  of  trus
tees  of  the  Presbyterian  hospital.  In  1837  he  was
chosen  a  director  of  Princeton  seminary,  and  in
1859  he  became  a  trustee  of  the  college,  retaining
these  offices  until  his  death.  Princeton  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1845,  and  the  University  of
Indiana  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1862.

MUSGRAVE,  Sir  Thomas,  British  soldier,  b.
in  1738;  d.  12  Dec.,  1812.  He  was  captain  of  the
64th  regiment  in  1759,  brevet  major  in  1772,  and
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  40th  regiment  on  28
Aug.,  1776,  in  which  year  he  accompanied  Gen.
Howe  to  this  country.  He  was  wounded  in  the
battle  of  Pelham  Manor,  18  Oct..  1776,  and  at  Ger-
mantown,  4  Oct.,  1777,  saved  the  day  by  throwing
himself  with  five  companies  into  the  Chew  house,
where  he  successfully  held  the  American  forces  at
bay  until  the  British  columns  rallied.  He  became
colonel  and  aide-de-camp  to  the  king  and  briga
dier-general  in  1782,  major-general  in  1790,  and
general  in  1802.

MUSSEY,  Reuben  Dimoml,  surgeon,  b.  in
Pelham,  N.  H.,  23  June,  1780;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
21  June,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth
in  1803,  and  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1809,  and  while  a  stu
dent  subjected  himself  to  an  experiment  that
demonstrated  the  incorrectness  of  the  theory  that
the  human  skin  has  no  power  of  absorption.  He
practised  in  Salem,  Mass.,  from  1809  till  1814,
when  he  was  made  professor  of  materia  medica
and  therapeutics  in  Dartmouth,  holding  this  chair
until  1820.  He  was  also  professor  of  obstetrics
from  1814  till  1838.  and  professor  of  anatomy  and
surgery  from  1822  till  1838.  In  1831-'5  he  lec
tured  on  anatomy  and  surgery  in  Bowdoin.  He
was  professor  of  surgery  in  Ohio  medical  college
from  1838  till  1852,  and  held  the  same  chair  in
Miami  medical  college  from  1852  till  1860,  when
he  removed  to  Boston.  In  1830  he  proved  what
Sir  Astley  Cooper  had  said  was  impossible,  that
intra-capsular  fractures  could  be  united,  and  was
the  first  person  to  tie  both  carotid  arteries.  In
1837  he  removed  the  entire  shoulder-blade  and
collar-bone  of  a  patient  who  was  suffering  from
osteo-sarcoma,  the  first  operation  of  the  kind  on
record.  Dr.  Mussey  was  president  of  the  New
Hampshire  medical  society,  and  was  an  early  la
borer  in  the  temperance  cause.  Harvard  gave
him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1806,  and  Dartmouth
that  of  LL.  D.  in  1854.  In  addition  to  addresses,
he  was  the  author  of  "Health:  its  Friends  and
its  Foes"  (Boston,  1862).— His  son.  William
Heberdon,  surgeon,  b.  in  Hanover,  N.  H.,  30  Sept.,
1818;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  1  Aug.,  1882,  studied
at  Phillips  Andover  academy  and  was  graduated
at  Ohio  medical  college  in  1848,  subsequently
studying  medicine  in  Paris.  He  returned  to  Cin
cinnati  and  made  a  specialty  of  general  surgery.
In  1855  he  was  surgeon  to  St.  John's  hotel  for  in
valids,  Cincinnati.  He  served  in  the  civil  war  as
a  surgeon,  became  medical  inspector  with  the  rank
of  lieutenant-colonel  on  14  June,  1862,  and  re
signed  on  1  Jan..  1864.  He  was  appointed  sur
geon  of  the  Cincinnati  hospital  on  15  April,  1864,
and  also  in  that  year  vice-president  of  the  Ameri
can  medical  association.  In  1865  he  was  given
the  chair  of  operative  and  clinical  surgery  in  Mi
ami  medical  college,  which  post  he  held  until  his
death.  In  1876  he  became  surgeon-general  of
Ohio  and  president  of  the  Cincinnati  natural  his
tory  society.  He  was  president  of  the  Cincinnati


472


MUTIN  DE PRESLES


MUZQUIZ


board  of  education  from  1879  till  1880,  and  from
1876  till  1881  a  manager  of  the  public  library  of
that  city,  to  which  he  gave  5,000  volumes  and
2,500  pamphlets  as  a  nucleus  for  the  "  Mussey
medical  and  scientific  library,"  designed  as  a  me
morial  to  his  father.  He  received  the  degree  of
A.  M.  from  Dartmouth  in  1809.

MUTIN  DE  PRESLES,  Saturnin  Ainable
(moo-tang),  French  colonial  magistrate,  b.  in  Loui
siana  in  1721 ;  d.  in  Cape  Francais,  Santo  Domingo,
in  1779.  He  received  his  early  education  in  New
Orleans,  but  finished  his  studies  in  Paris,  and  in
1746  became  civil  magistrate  of  Port  Louis  in
Santo  Domingo.  He  was  afterward  appointed
civil  justice  of  Cape  Francais,  and  member  of  the
privy  council  of  the  governor.  In  1751  he  pre
pared,  at  the  request  of  the  colonial  intendant,  a
modified  ''  code  noir,"  or  legislation  for  the  slaves
in  the  French  possessions,  who  were  then  governed
under  the  laws  of  the  famous  code  noir  that  was
promulgated  by  Louis  XIV.  in  1685.  The  modifi
cations  that  Mutin  proposed  were  rejected  in  the
king's  council  as  too  favorable  to  the  slaves,  but
the  adoption  of  his  code  was  nevertheless  left  to
the  discretion  of  the  colonial  governors,  and  it
probably  replaced  the  Draconian  code  of  1685
everywhere  in  the  French  possessions.  Mutin
composed  also,  at  the  instance  of  the  authorities,  a
"  Histoire  generate  des  iles  du  vent  et  sous  le  vent,
suivie  d'un  traite  statistique  de  la  population,  des
esclaves,  et  du  commerce  de  ces  possessions  "  (6
vols.,  Paris,  1762).  His  other  works  include  "  Me-
moire  sur  le  gouvernement  de  la  colonie  de  Saint
Domingue,  de  1700  a  1725"  (3  vols..  1765);  "Rela
tion  du  siege  et  de  la  defense  de  la  ville  de  Saint
Louis  en  1697"  (Cape  Francais,  1772):  "  Memoire
a  sa  Majeste  sur  1'administration  de  la  justice  dans
les  iles  sous  le  vent,  et  des  reformes  a  introduire  "
(2  vols.,  Paris,  1775).

MUTIS,  Jos6  Celestino  (moo-tiss),  Spanish
botanist,  b.  in  Cadiz,  6  April,  1732 ;  d.  in  Santa
Fe  de  Bogota,  12  Sept.,  1808.  After  studying
mathematics  he  went  through  the  medical  course
at  the  College  of  San  Fernando,  in  Cadiz,  was
graduated  at  Seville,  and  appointed  in  1757  pro
fessor  of  anatomy  in  Madrid.  In  this  city  he  be
came  acquainted  with  Linnaeus,  who  later  called
him  "  phytologorum  americanornm  princeps,"  and
named  several  plants  in  his  honor.  Mutis  accom
panied  Don  Pedro  Mesia  de  la  Cerda  as  his  physi
cian  in  1760  to  his  viceroyalty  of  New  Granada.
He  was  appointed  professor  of  mathematics  in  the
College  of  Nuestra  Sefiora  del  Rosario,  and  was  the
first  to  teach,  in  the  viceroyalty,  the  Copernican
system,  which  had  been  prohibited  by  the  Spanish
government.  Desiring  to  examine  the  plants  of
the  hot  region,  and  to  visit  the  silver-mines  of
Mariquita,  he  left  Bogota  and  resided  first  in  La
Montuosa  between  Giron  and  Pamplona,  and  from
1777  till  1782  in  Real  del  Sapo  and  Mariquita.
At  La  Montuosa  he  began  his  "Flora  de  Nueva
Granada,"  on  which  he  bestowed  forty  years  of
labor,  but  which  remained  unfinished  at  his
death.  Mutis  was  the  first  to  discover  in  New
Granada  and  distinguish  the  various  species  of
cinchona  or  Peruvian  bark.  He  has  described
them  and  their  different  properties  in  one  of  his
works,  "  El  arcano  de  la  Quina,  o  sea  la  historia
de  los  arboles  de  la  quina."  Among  the  most
important  plants  that  he  discovered  and  classi
fied  are  the  ipecacuanha  of  the  river  Magdalena,
the  toluifera,  and  the  myroxylum,  from  which  are
extracted  the  balsam  of  Tolu  and  of  Peru,  the
tea-plant  of  Bogota,  and  the  wintera  granadensis.
Mutis  also  made  known  a  plant  called  "  Bejuco  del


Guaco,"  which  is  an  antidote  for  serpent -bites.
In  1786  he  discovered  a  quicksilver-mine  near
Ibague-viejo.  At  his  solicitation,  with  that  of  the
viceroy,  the  court  of  Madrid  founded  a  royal
academy  of  natural  history,  with  the  name  of
Expedition  Botanica,  and  Mutis  was  appointed
its  director.  The  academy  first  had  its  seat  at
Mariquita  and  afterward  at  Bogota.  Mutis  ob
tained  the  co-operation  of  the  viceroy  Mcndinueta
in  the  construction  in  1802  of  an  astronomical  ob
servatory  in  Bogota,  and  the  first  expenses  were
met  with  the  money  from  the  sale  of  quinine  that
Mutis  had  sent  to  Cuba.  All  the  manuscripts  and
drawings  of  the  great  work  of  Mutis,  the  "  Flora
de  Nueva  Granada,"  were  sent  by  Morillo  to  Spain.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Jardin  botanico  de  Ma
drid,  the  Sociedad  Vascongada,  and  the  Academy
of  sciences  of  Stockholm.

MUTTER,  Thomas  Dent,  physician,  b.  in  Rich
mond,  Va.,  9  March,  1811 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,
16  March,  1859.  He  was  graduated  at  Hampden
Sidney  and  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1831.  He  then  went  to
Paris  and  on  his  return  settled  in  Philadelphia.
In  1841-'56  he  was  professor  of  surgery  in  Jeffer
son  medical  college.  He  wrote  an  account  of  the
salt  sulphur  springs  of  Virginia,  an  essay  on  "  Club-
Foot,"  contributed  various  professional  papers  to
periodicals,  and  published  an  edition  of  Robert
Listen's  "  Lecture  on  the  Operations  of  Surgery,"
with  additions  (Philadelphia,  1846).

MUY,  Jean  liaptiste  Louis  Philippe  de  F«§-
lix-Saint-Maime,  Comte  du,  French  soldier,  b.  in
Ollioules,  France,  25  Dec.,  1755;  d.  in  Paris.  6
June,  1820.  He  was  the  nephew  of  Marshal  du
Muy,  of  France.  Under  the  name  of  Saint-Maime
he  entered*the  service  in  1766.  and  in  1775  became
colonel  of  the  regiment  of  Soissonnais  infantry.
He  served  under  .Rochambeau  in  this  country  in
1780-'2,  and  for  his  gallantry  at  Yorktown  re
ceived  the  cross  of  St.  Louis,  a  pension,  and  the
brevet  of  brigadier.  In  1784  he  succeeded  to  the
title  of  the  Comte  du  Muy,  and  he  was  made  field-
marshal  in  1788.  Pie  became  lieutenant-general
on  6  Feb.,  1792,  and  in  1806  was  appointed  gov
ernor-general  of  Silesia.  In  January,  1811,  he  was
created  a  senator.  He  commanded  the  2d  military
division  at  Marseilles  in  1812-'14,  and  was  created
a  peer  on  17  Aug.,  1815.

MUY,  Nicholas  Daneanx  de,  French  soldier,
b.  in  Beauvais,  France,  in  1651  ;  d  in  Havana,
Cuba,  in  1708.  He  was  a  knight  of  St.  Louis,  and
after  his  arrival  in  Canada  held  a  command  at  the
defence  of  Chambly  in  1691.  He  commanded  a
battalion  of  regulars  under  Count  de  Frontenac  in
the  expedition  against  the  Iroquois  in  1696,  and
soon  afterward  brought  a  re-enforcement  to  Iber-
ville  (q.  v.)  in  Newfoundland.  He  did  good  service  at
the  capture  of  Fort  St.  John,  and  it  was  proposed
to  make  him  its  governor,  but,  as  he  considered
the  number  of  men  allowed  him  insufficient  for  its
defence,  it  was  burned,  and  he  returned  to  Placen-
tia.  He  was  appointed  governor  of  Louisiana  in
1707.  but  died  on  his  way  to  the  colon  v.

MUZQUI/,  Melchor  (mooth  -  kith),  Mexican
soldier,  b.  in  Santa  Rosa,  Coahuila,  about  1790;  d.
in  the  city  of  Mexico,  14  Dec,,  1844.  He  studied
in  the  College  of  San  Ildefonso,  Mexico,  intending
to  follow  a  literary  career,  but  took  part  in  the
revolution  of  1816.  He  had  risen  to  the  rank  of
colonel  when  he  was  taken  prisoner  at  the  estate
of  Monte  Blanco  and  condemned  to  death,  but  af
terward  included  in  a  pardon  by  the  Spanish  gov
ernment.  Refusing  to  give  his  word  to  remain
neutral,  he  joined  the  forces  of  Iturbide,  and  in


MUZZARELLI


MYER


473


1824  he  was  appointed  governor  of  the  estate  of
Mexico,  in  which  place  he  served  with  honesty  and
economy,  leaving  in  the  treasury  the  sum  of  $900,-
000.  lie  was  appointed  general  commander  of
Ptiebla  and  protested  against  the  revolution  of
Acordada;  but  his  forces  revolted  and  he  was
obliged  to  deliver  the  command  to  Gen.  Guerrero
in  1828.  In  consequence  of  the  political  disturb
ances  of  the  country  in  1882,  the  chamber  of  depu
ties  appointed  him  temporary  president  of  the  re
public,  which  place  he  held  from  14  Aug.  till  27
Dec.,  1832,  when  the  capital  declared  in  favor  of
Gomez  Pedraza.  He  then  retired  from  public  life
till  1836.  when  the  federal  constitution  was  changed
for  a  policy  of  centralization,  and  a  body  was  estab
lished  under  the  name  of  '•  poder  conservador,"  of
which  Muzquiz  was  made  president,  and  in  1840
he  was  re-elected.  In  1845  congress  passed  an  act
giving  the  name  of  Muzquiz  to  his  native  town.

MVZZARELLI,  Antoine  Jules  C6sar  Yen-
ceslas  Ermanigilde  (moo-zah-rel-le),  French  edu
cator,  b.  in  Angouleme,  20  Sept.,  1847.  His  grand
father  served  as  a  volunteer  during  the  war  of
American  independence,  and  his  father  was  a  law
yer  who  was  transported  to  Cayenne  on  the  acces
sion  of  Napoleon  III.  The  son  entered  the  army
in  1807  and  served  as  captain  of  engineers  during
the  Franco-German  war  and  against  the  commu
nists  in  1871.  He  emigrated  in  1876  to  the  United
States,  but  afterward  visited  Peru  and  Chili,  and
during  the  Pacific  war  accompanied  the  Chilian
army  as  a  reporter,  returning  in  1880  to  the  United
States,  where  he  became  a  lecturer  and  a  professor
in  the  Osvvego.  X.  Y.,  college  of  languages.  He
has  published  "  Histoire  de  la  guerre  du  Pacifique.
recits  d'un  reporter  "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1880) ;  "  Etude
sur  la  situation  politique  de  rAmerique  du  Sud
envisagee  en  general,  et  en  particulier  des  resultats
de  la  guerre  du  Pacifique"  (1881);  "La  question
du  Canal  de  Panama"  (1881).  etc.

MUZZEY,  Artemas  Bowers,  clergyman,  b.  in
Lexington,  Mass.,  21  Sept.,  1802.  He 'was  gradu
ated  at  Harvard  in  1824  and  at  the  divinity-school
in  1828,  and  was  pastor  of  the  Unitarian  church  in
Framingham,  Mass.,  in  1830-'3.  He  afterward
held  pastorates  in  Cambridge,  Concord,  N.  H.,  and
Newburyport.  Mass.,  but  retired  in  May,  1865.
He  published  "  The  Young  Man's  Friend  "  (Boston.
1880);  "Sunday-School  Guide"  (1837);  "Moral
Teacher"  (1839);  "The  Young  Maiden"  (1840);
"Man  a  Soul"  (1842);  "The  Fireside"  (1849);
"  The  Sabbath  -  School  Hymn  and  Tune  Book  "
(1855) ;  "  Christ  in  the  Will,  the  Heart,  and  the
Life,"  sermons  (1861);  "The  Blade  and  the  Ear,
Thoughts  for  a  Young  Man  "  (1864) ;  "  Value  of
Study  of  Intellectual  Philosophy  to  the  Minis
ter  ""(1869):  "The  Higher  Education"  (1871);
"Personal  Recollections  of  Rev.  Dr.  Charming"
(1874-'o) ;  "  Immortality  in  the  Light  of  Scripture
find  Science"  (1876);  "Personal  Recollection  of
Men  in  the  Battle  of  Lexington  "  (1877) ;  "  Truths
Consequent  on  Belief  in  a  God  "  (1879) ;  "  Remi
niscences  of  Men  of  the  Revolution  and  their
Families  "  (1882) ;  "  Education  of  Old  Age  "  (1884) ;
and  numerous  tracts,  essays,  and  reports  on  com
mon  schools  and  Sunday-schools.

MYER,  Albert  James,  chief  signal  officer,  b.
in  Xewburg,  X.  Y.,  20  Sept.,  1827;  d.  in  Buffalo,
X.  Y.,  24  Aug.,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  Ilobart
college  in  1847  and  at  Buffalo  medical  college  in
1851.  In  September.  1854.  he  entered  the  U.  S.
army  as  assistant  surgeon  and  was  assigned  to  duty
in  Texas.  He  devised  a  system  for  signalling  with
flags  by  day  and  torches  by  night,  whereby  mes
sages  could  be  sent  many  miles  accurately  and  with


considerable  rapidity.  The  simplicity  of  this  sys
tem  was  such  that  it  has  commended  itself  to  the
armies  of  the  world.  He  demonstrated  the  impor
tance  and  possibility  of  his  work  by  signal  duty  in
Texas  and  Xew  Mexi
co,  and  in  July.  1860,
he  was  appointed  ma
jor  and  signal  officer,
which  post  congress
created  as  a  reward  for
his  services.  He  per
formed  signal  duty  in
New  Mexico  until  the
beginning  of  the  civil
war,  when  he  was  or
dered  to  Washington
and  assigned  to  duty
in  the  Army  of  the
Potomac.  Through
out  the  peninsular
campaign  he  served  as
chief  signal  officer  to
Gen.  George  B.  McClel-
lan,  participating  in  all
of  the  battles  from
Bull  Run  to  Aritietam.  He  then  returned  to  Wash
ington,  where  he  took  charge  of  the  U.  S.  signal
office  on  3  March,  1863,  with  the  rank  of  colonel.
At  this  time  he  introduced  the  study  of  military
signals  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  and  was  a
member  of  the  central  board  of  examination  for
admission  to  the  U.  S.  signal  corps.  In  December,
!  18(53,  he  was  assigned  to  reconnoissance  on  Missis-
I  sippi  river,  and  later  he  became  chief  signal  officer
of  the  division  of  West  Mississippi  under  Gen.  Ed
ward  R.  S.  Canby,  by  whom  he  was  commissioned
to  arrange  the  terms  of  surrender  of  Fort  Gaines.
He  was  relieved  of  his  command  at  this  time  by
the  secretary  of  war  on  the  ground  that  his  nomi
nation  had  not  been  confirmed,  and  his  appoint
ment  of  chief  signal  officer  was  revoked  on  21  July,
1864;  but  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  on  13
March,  1865.  After  his  removal  from  the  army  he
settled  in  Buffalo,  and  there  devoted  his  time  to
the  preparation  of  a  "  Manual  of  Signals  for  the
U.  S.  Army  and  Navy"  (Xew  York,  1868).  He  was
reappointed  colonel  'and  chief  signal  officer  on  28
July,  1866.  An  act  of  congress,  approved  9  Feb.,
1870,  authorized  provision  for  taking  meteorologi
cal  observations  at  the  military  stations  in  the  in
terior  of  the  continent  and  at  other  points,  and  for
giving  notice  on  the  northern  lakes  and  seaboard
by  telegraph  and  signals  of  the  approach  and  force
of  storms  ;  and  the  execution  of  this  duty  was  con
fided  to  Gen.  Myer,  as  he  had  been  interested  pre
viously  in  the  subject  of  storm  telegraphy.  Ar
rangements  were  made  with  the  telegraph  compa
nies,  and  the  first  observations  of  this  simultane
ous  meteorological  system  were  made.  1  Nov.,  1870,
7.35  A.  M.,  at  twenty-four  stations.  The  first  storm
warning  was  telegraphed  to  all  stations  on  the
Great  Lakes,  8  Nov.,  1870.  and  the  practical  work
ing  of  the  scheme  was  assured.  The  work  of  the
weather  bureau  soon  became  popular  and  was  rap
idly  extended,  and  at  the  date  of  Gen.  Myer's  death
there  were  over  100  reporting  stations,  with  a  force
of  500  men.  Gen.  Myer  was  familiarly  known  as
"Old  Probabilities,"  a  name  which  properly  came
to  him  not  only  as  the  executive  head  of  his  bu
reau,  but  for  the  persistent  and  systematic  manner
in  which  he  developed  and  organized  the  scientific
workings  of  the  signal  corps,  his  labors  not  being
merely  executive.  In  1873  Gen.  Myer  represented
the  United  States  at  the  International  congress  of
meteorologists  in  Vienna.  On  1  July,  1875,  the


474


MYERS


MYLES


signal  service  bureau  began  the  publication  of  a
daily  "  International  Bulletin,"  comprising  the  re
ports  from  all  co-operating  stations,  and  on  1  July,
1878,  this  was  supplemented  by  a  daily  interna
tional  chart.  In  1879  he  was  'a  delegate  to  the
Meteorological  congress  at  Rome.  He  was  pro
moted  brigadier-general  on  16  June,  1880,  as  a
special  reward  by  congress  for  his  services  in  the
line  of  his  profession.  Gen.  Myer  established  a  sys
tem  of  cautionary  day  and  night  signals  for  the
benefit  of  lake  and  ocean  commerce  and  naviga
tion,  a  system  of  reliable  river  reports  for  the
benefit  of  interior  commerce,  and  special  series  of
reports  for  farmers  and  planters.

MYERS,  Peter  Hamilton,  author,  b.  in  Her-
kimer,  N.  Y.,  4  Aug.,  1812;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
30  Oct.,  1878.  He  lived  in  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  in  early
life,  educated  himself,  and  became  a  lawyer  in
Brooklyn.  In  1841  he  delivered  a  poem  on  "  Sci
ence  "  before  a  society  in  Hobart  college.  He  wrote
several  prize  stories,  and  American  historical  ro
mances,  including  "  The  First  of  the  Knickerbock
ers,  a  Tale  of  1673  "  (New  York,  1848) ;  "  The  Young
Patroon,  or  Christmas  in  1(590  "  (1849) ;  "  The  King
of  the  Hurons,"  republished  in  England  as
"  Blanche  Montaigne"  (1850);  and  ''The  Prisoner
of  the  Border,  a  Tale  of  1838"  (1857).

MYERS,  Sarah  Ann  (!RWIN),  author,  b.  in
Wilmington.  Del.,  in  1800 :  d.  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  11
Dec.,  1876.  She  was  educated  at  Bethlehem  female
seminary,  married  Dr.  Theodore  Myers  in  1825.
and  on  his  death  was  thrown  on  her  own  resources.
She  went  to  Philadelphia,  where  she  became  a
friend  of  Mrs.  Sarah  J.  Hale,  and  was  advised  by
the  latter  to  attempt  authorship.  Her  success  en
abled  her  to  continue  studies  in  music  and  paint
ing,  and  she  became  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania
academy  of  fine  arts.  Subsequently  she  removed
to  Carlisle,  Pa.,  where  she  supported  herself  by
teaching  music  and  art  and  by  her  writings.  Her
paintings  include  a  head  of  "  Evangeline,"  "Greek
Girl,"  and  "  One  of  the  Pharisees."  Among  her
numerous  books,  which  are  largely  intended  for
children,  are  "  Fitz  Harold "  (New  York,  1853) ;
"  Aunt  Carrie's  Budget "  (Philadelphia,  1859) ;
"Poor  Nicholas"  (1863);  "The  Gulf  Stream"
(1864) ;  and  "  Margaret  Gordon,"  her  last  work,
which  is  said  to  be  founded  on  her  own  life  (1869).

MYERS,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Reading,  Pa.,
4  Dec.,  1830;  d.  in  New  York  city,  11  Nov.,  1887.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  9.  military  academy
in  1852,  and  served  in  various  garrisons  till  the
civil  war,  when,  on  17  May,  1861,  he  was  made  as
sistant  quartermaster,  with  the  staff  rank  of  cap
tain.  He  was  chief  quartermaster  of  the  Depart
ment  of  the  Missouri  in  1863-'5,  and  at  the  close
of  the  war  was  given  for  his  services  the  brevet  of
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  and  the  same  in
the  regular  army.  After  the  war  he  served  as  chief
quartermaster  of  various  departments,  becoming
lieutenant-colonel  in  1881,  and  on  15  March,  1883,
he  was  retired  from  active  service.

MYLES,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newton,  Gla
morganshire.  South  Wales,  in  1621 ;  d.  near  Swan
sea,  Mass.,  3  Feb.,  1683.  He  was  matriculated  at
Brasenose  college,  Oxford,  11  March.  1636,  began
to  preach  about  1644-'5,  was  the  founder  of  Swan
sea  church,  and  soon  became  popular  in  the  prin
cipality.  He  travelled  extensively,  forming  new
churches,  and  in  1651  was  sent  as  a  representative
of  the  Welsh  Baptist  churches  to  the  ministers'
meeting  in  London.  He  returned  with  a  letter
from  the  London  ministers  recommending  the  for
mation  of  new  churches.  While  in  Wales  he  was
an  able  advocate  of  strict  communion,  but  in  this


country,  although  persecuted  by  the  "standing  or
der"  in  Massachusetts,  his  views  became  more  lib
eral.  In  1662  the  act  of  uniformity  was  passed,
and  dissenters  were  severely  persecuted  in  Wales.
In  1663  Mr.  Myles  and  several  members  of  his
church  fled  to  New  England.  But  in  Boston  he
found  no  sympathy  or  "  spiritual  comfort,"  and,
settling  at  Rehoboth,  Mass.,  he  there  organized  a
church  in  the  house  of  John  Butterworth.  Very
soon  complaint  was  made,  and  on  2  July,  160f,
Mr.  Myles  and  James  Brown  were  each  fined  five
pounds  "  for  setting  up  a  public  meeting  without
the  knowledge  and  approbation  of  the  court."
Upon  this  Mr.  Myles  and  his  church  removed  to
Barrington,  R.  I.  He  built  a  house  near  the  pres
ent  Barneyville  on  Palmer's  river,  and  during  the
Indian  wars  his  house  was  the  refuge  of  the  people,
and  was  called  "Myles's  garrison."  A  bridge  over
the  river  is  still  called  Myles's  bridge.  The  catho
lic  spirit  of  Mr.  Myles  had  drawn  to  his  settlement
many  Baptists,  as  well  as  others,  and  ere  long  he
obtained  leave  from  the  general  court  to  form  a
new  township,  which  in  honor  of  his  old  home  in
Wales  he  called  Swansea.  It  was  in  Massachusetts,
and  among  the  corporators  was  Capt.  Thomas
Willetts,  who  had  been  the  first  mayor  of  New  York
city,  and  who  warmly  joined  with  Mr.  Myles  in  his
efforts  to  advance  the  interests  of  the  new  town.  In
1673  a  school  was  organized,  of  which  Mr.  Myles
was  master.  The  troops  first  gathered  in  Swansea
during  the  Indian  war,  and  at  its  close  the  church
of  Mr.  Myles  was  scattered,  and  he  was  compelled
to  seek  support  in  other  places.  He  went  to  Bos
ton  and  preached  there  for  some  time,  but  in  1678
he  returned  to  his  old  church.  Mr.  Myles  was  a
cultured  scholar  and  a  popular  preacher.

MYLES,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  1664;  d.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  in  March,  1728.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1684,  went  to  England  for  orders,
and  on  his  return  became  rector  of  King's  chapel,
Boston  (erected  in
1689 ;  see  illus
tration),  29  June,
1689.  After  three
years  of  service  lie
visited  England
for  the  purpose  of
laying  before  the
proper  authorities
the  condition  of
the  chapel  and
congregation,  and
obtaining  aid  in
their  behalf.  Dur
ing  two  years  of
effort  in  this  cause
he  was  very  suc
cessful  in  enlisting
the  royal  bounty,
part  of  which  was
an  annuity  of  £100
for  support  of  an

assistant  minister.  While  in  England  he  received
the  degree  of  M.  A.  from  the  University  of  Oxford
in  1693.  The  assistant  minister  arrived  in  Boston
in  1699,  but  after  several  years  a  serious  disagree
ment  arose  between  him  and  the  rector.  The  bishop
of  London,  who  was  diocesan  for  the  colonies,  inter
posed  in  1706,  and  a  new  assistant  was  appointed
in  1709.  In  April,  1723,  Mr.  Myles  laid  the  corner
stone  of  Christ  church,  Boston,  which  was  opened
for  public  worship  by  Rev.  Dr.  Timothy  Cutler  in
December  of  the  same  year.  His  health  failed  in
the  summer  of  1727.  Mr.  Myles  is  represented  as
a  good  preacher  and  fair  scholar.


XAAR


XAGLE


475


N


NAAR,  David,  journalist,  b.  in  St.  Thomas,
W.  I.,  G  Nov..  1800 ;  d.  in  Trenton,  X.  J.,  25  Feb.,
1880.  He  belonged  to  an  old  family  of  Portuguese
Jews  that  maintained  its  family  records  from  the
expulsion  of  the  Jews  from  Spain  in  1492.  He
was  educated  as  a  merchant  in  the  West  Indies,
and  with  his  brothers  established  a  commission
business  in  Xew  York,  which  was  destroyed  by  the
fire  of  1833.  He  then  engaged  in  farming  near
Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,  and  by  his  general  reading
and  strong  oratorical  powers  soon  became  a  public
speaker  of  note.  In  the  canvass  of  1844  he  accom
panied  James  Buchanan  on  an  electioneering  tour
through  the  state,  and  when  the  Polk  administra
tion  began  he  was  appointed  by  Mr.  Buchanan,
then  secretary  of  state,  IT.  S.  consul  to  St.  Thomas,
at  that  time  an  important  commercial  centre.  On
his  return  in  1848  he  maintained  his  reputation  as
a  popular  and  effective  speaker,  and  was  elected
mayor  of  Elizabeth  in  1849,  clerk  of  the  house  of
assembly  in  1851-'2,  and  state  treasurer  in  18G5.
lie  was  an  ardent  Mason,  and  during  the  agitation
in  relation  to  colored  members  did  much  to  secure
the  recognition  by  the  Xew  Jersey  grand  lodge  of
the  universality  of  the  order.  In  1833  he  assumed
control  of  the  Trenton  '•  True  American,''  and
made  its  influence  felt  in  the  state.

NABUCO  DE  ARAUJO,  Jose  Tito  (nah  boo  -
co-day-ar-ah-oo'-zho),  Brazilian  author,  b.  in  Rio
Janeiro,  4  Jan.,  183G.  He  entered  the  magistracy,
and  was  provincial  deputy  and  afterward  district
attorney  of  the  city  of  Rio  Janeiro,  retiring  to
private  life  in  1879.  He  has  composed  "  O  Filho  do
Acaso,"  a  drama,  represented  with  success  in  several
cities  of  South  America,  and  published  "  Maximas
e  pensamentos"  (Rio  Janeiro,  187G);  "Biographia
de  Lamartine  "  (1877) ;  "  Historia  e  vida  do  general
Gurjao"  (1878);  and  "Poesias"  (1879).

NACK,  James,  poet,  b.  in  Xew  York  city,  4  Jan.,
1809 ;  d.  there,  23  Sept.,  1879.  He  was  the  son  of
a  merchant,  and  showed  great  precocity  in  early
youth.  An  accident  deprived  him  at  first  of  the
power  of  articulation,  and  afterward  of  hearing,  and
he  was  educated  in  the  Institution  for  the  deaf  and
dumb  in  Xew  York  city.  He  married  in  1838,  and
became  an  assistant  in  the  office  of  the  clerk  of  the
city  and  county  of  Xew  York.  Here  he  continued
more  than  thirty  years.  Toward  the  close  of  his
life  he  lived  in  retirement,  but  kept  up  an  exten
sive  correspondence.  His  incessant  regret  was
that  he  had  accomplished  so  little  to  advance  the
cause  of  letters.  Xack  frequently  contributed
poems  to  the  Xew  York  "Mirror,"  varied  with
renderings  from  the  French  and  German  poets.
Among  his  verses  that  have  been  popular  are
"Spring  is  Coming"  and  "  Here  She  goes  and  there
She  goes."  His  publications  include  "The  Legend
of  the  Rocks"  (Xew  York,  1827);  "Earl  Rupert,
and  other  Poems"  (1839);  "The  Immortal,  and
other  Poems  "  (1850) ;  "  Poems  "  (1852) ;  and  "  The
Romance  of  the  Ring,  and  other  Poems"  (1859).

NADAL,  Bernard  Harrison,  clergyman,  b.  in
Talbot  county,  Md..  27  March,  1812;  il.  in  Madi
son,  X.  J..  20  June.  1870.  In  1835  he  was  admitted
to  the  old  Baltimore  conference  of  the  Methodist
church,  and  he  labored  in  Maryland,  Virginia,
Pennsylvania,  Brooklyn,  X.  Y.,  and  Xew  Haven,
Conn.  While  stationed  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  he  was
graduated  at  Dickinson  in  1848,  and  in  1854  ac
cepted  a  professorship  in  Indiana  Asbury  uni
versity,  which  he  held  until  1857.  While  in


Washington  he  served  for  one  session  as  chaplain
to  the  house  of  representatives.  On  the  organization
of  Drew  theological  seminary  he  was  made  pro
fessor  of  church  history,  and  on  the  death  of  Dr.
John  McClintock  in  1870  he  became  acting  presi
dent,  which  office  he  held  at  the  time  of  his  death.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Dickinson  in
1857.  Between  1854  and  1857  he  published  "  Essays
upon  Church  History  "  in  the  "  Methodist  Quarterly
Review."  and  he  was  also  an  editor  of  the  "  Method
ist."  He  was  a  strong  opponent  of  slavery,  and
spoke  frequently  upon  this  subject.  In  his  sermons
and  addresses  he  exerted  much  influence  in  favor
of  the  Xational  government  during  the  civil  war.
A  volume  of  his  sermons,  entitled  "  Xew  Life
Dawning,"  was  published  under  the  editorship  of
Prof.  Henry  A.  Buttz,  with  a  memoir  (Xew  York,
1873).  —  His  son,  Ehrman  Syme,  author,  b.  in
Lewisburg,  W.  Va.,  13  Feb.,  1843,  studied  at  Co
lumbia,  and  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1864.  He
was  second  secretary  of  the  American  legation  in
London  in  1870-'!,  and  again  from  1877  till  1884,
and  was  engaged  for  several  years  on  the  Xew  York
"  Evening  Post."  He  is  the  author  of  "  Impres
sions  of  London  Social  Life  "  (London,  1875)  and
"  Essays  at  Home  and  Elsewhere  "  (1882).  In  1887
Mr.  Xadal  issued  a  series  of  papers  entitled  "  Zwei-
bak,  or  Xotes  of  a  Professional  Exile."

NADAL,  Emmanuel  Yictiirnien,  Comte  de,
French  soldier,  b.  in  Mobile,  Ala.,  in  1759 ;  d.  in
Xantes,  France,  in  October,  1793.  He  served  as
a  volunteer  under  Lafayette  in  the  American  Revo
lution  in  1778-'83,  and  after  the  conclusion  of
peace  resided  on  his  estate  near  Mobile.  He  re
moved  to  France  at  the  beginning  of  the  revolution
there,  served  in  the  army  of  the  Marquis  de  C'us-
tine,  was  one  of  the  defenders  of  Mayence,  and
after  the  fall  of  that  place  set  out  for  Louisiana,
but  was  arrested  in  Xantes  for  leaving  the  terri
tory  of  the  republic  without  authority.  He  was
trie'd  and  sentenced  to  death  by  the  revolutionary
tribunal  in  October,  1793.

NACrLE,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Reading,  Pa.,  5
April,  1822;  d.  in  Pottsville,  Pa.,  22  Aug.,  18GG.
In  1842  he  organized  the  Washington  artillery
company,  and,  when  war  was  declared  against
Mexico,  he  en
listed  with  it  as
the  1st  Penn
sylvania  volun
teers.  His  regi
ment  was  sta
tioned  at  Perote
castle  to  keep
open  the  com
munication  with
Vera  Cruz  dur
ing  its  siege.
He  assisted  in
routing  a  force
of  guerillas  at
La  Hoya,  fought
at  Huamantla,
Puebla,  Atlixco,
entered  the  city
of  Mexico,  and
was  finally  sta
tioned  at  'San  Angel  until  the  close  of  the  war.
He  was  mustered  out  of  service  with  his  com
pany  at  Philadelphia  on  27  July,  1848,  and  the
inhabitants  of  Schuylkill  county,  Pa.,  presented


476


NAG LEE


NANTEL


him  with  a  sword.  In  18G1  he  was  commissioned
colonel  of  the  6th  Pennsylvania  regiment,  and  in
that  year  organized  the  48th  Pennsylvania,  of
which  he  was  made  colonel.  He  served  at  Fort
Monroe,  Hatteras  island,  and  Newbern,  and  com
manded  a  brigade  in  the  9th  army  corps  in  the  soc-
ond  battle  of  Bull  Run.  lie  was  appointed  briga
dier-general  of  volunteers  on  10  Sept.,  1802,  and  at
Antietam  his  brigade  performed  an  important  part
in  carrying  Antietam  bridge,  which,  according  to
Gen.  McCleilan,  saved  the  day.  His  appointment
expired  on  4  March,  1863,  but  was  renewed  on  13
March,  and  he  served  with  his  brigade  in  Kentucky
until  !)  May,  when  he  resigned,  owing  to  impaired
health.  When  Gen.  Lee  invaded  Pennsylvania  in
June,  1863,  Gen.  Nagle  organized  the  39th  regiment
of  Pennsylvania  militia,  was  commissioned  its  colo
nel,  and  commanded  a  brigade,  but  was  mustered
out  on  2  Aug.,  1863.  In  1864  he  organized  the
149th  Pennsylvania  regiment  for  100  days'  service,
became  its  colonel,  and  guarded  the  approaches  to
Baltimore  until  the  expiration  of  his  service.

NAGLEE,  Henry  Morris,  soldier,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  15  Jan.,  1815  ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,
Cal.,  5  March,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1835,  and  assigned  to
the  5th  infantry,  but  resigned  his  commission  on
31  Dec.  of  that  year  and  became  a  civil  engineer.
At  the  beginning  of  the  Mexican  war  he  returned
to  military  service,  and  on  15  Aug.,  1846.  became
captain  in  the  1st  Xcw  York  volunteers,  serving
through  the  war.  At  its  close  he  engaged  in  bank
ing  in  San  Francisco,  Oal.,  until  the  civil  war,
when  he  was  reappointed  in  the  U.  S.  army  with
the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  16th  in
fantry,  14  May,  1861.  He  did  not  join  his  regi
ment,  but  resigned  on  10  Jan.,  1862.  and  was  reap
pointed  in  the  volunteer  service  with  the  rank
of  brigadier-general  on  4  Feb.  of  the  same  year.
He  participated  in  the  defence  of  Washington  in
1862,  and  in  the  Virginia  peninsular  campaign,  be
ing  wounded  at  Fair  Oaks.  He  then  led  a  division
in  the  Department  of  Xorth  Carolina  and  in  the  De
partment  of  the  South  at  St.  Helena  island,  and  in
1863  commanded  the  7th  army  corps  and  the  dis
trict  of  Virginia.  On  4  April,  1864,  he  was  mus
tered  out  of  service.  He  then  resumed  banking
in  San  Francisco,  and  also  engaged  in  vine-culture.
His  vineyard  at,  San  Jose  included  more  than  fifty
acres,  and  was  devoted  chiefly  to  the  cultivation  of
Riesling  and  Charbonneau  grapes,  from  which  the
Naglee  brandy  is  made.

NAGOT,  Francis  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in
Tours,  France,  19  April.  1734;  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  9  April,  1816.  He  studied  in  the  Jesuit  col
lege  of  Tours,  and  afterward  with  the  order  of
Robertins  in  Paris.  He  then  entered  the  congre
gation  of  St.  Sulpice,  and  taught  theology  in  the
seminary  of  Nantes,  where  he  received  the  degree
of  doctor.  He  was  for  some  time  superior  of  the
smaller  seminary  of  St.  Sulpice  and  director  of  the
large  seminary  at  Paris,  where  he  established  two
new  religious  communities.  In  1791  he  was  sent
by  the  superior  of  his  order  to  found  a  seminary
in  Baltimore.  He  took  with  him  a  colony  of  seven
Sulpitians.  and,  reaching  Baltimore  on  10  July,
purchased  land  and  opened  a  seminary,  but  for
several  years  there  were  few  pupils.  Nagot  finally
triumphed  overall  obstacles,  and  in  1799  succeeded
in  placing  in  a  prosperous  condition  his  two  founda
tions,  St.  Mary's  college  and  the  Sulpitian  semi
nary,  of  which  he  acted  as  superior.  In  1806  he
founded  a  college  at  Pigeon  Hill,  in  Pennsylvania,
but.  as  he  was  unable  to  give  it  his  personal  super
vision,  it  did  not  succeed.  Discouraged  somewhat


I  by  this  failure  and  weakened  in  health,  he  resigned

I  his  office  of  superior  and  devoted  the  remainder  of

I  his  life  to  translating  religious  works  from  English

|  into  French,  for  the  benefit  of  his  countrymen  in

Baltimore. He  also  wrote some  original  works.

I  His  books  include:  "Recneil  de  conversions  remar-

j  quables,  nouvellement  operees  en  quelques  protes-

J  tants"  (Baltimore.  1791):  ••  Doctrine  de  I'Ecriturc

sur  les  miracles"  (1808): "La  vie  de  M.  Olier"

(1813) :  and  "  Traite  des  fetes  mobiles."

NAIRNE.  Charles  Murray,  educator,  b.  in
Perth,  Scotland,  15  April.  1808;  d.  in  Warrenton,
Va.,  28  May,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Uni
versity  of  St.  Andrews  in  1830.  and  afterward  at
;  Edinburgh.  For  some  time  he  was  assistant  to
Dr.  Thomas  Chalmers  at  Glasgow,  and  in  1847  he
came  to  this  country,  where  he  taught  at  College
Hill.  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  and  subsequently  estab
lished  a  private  school  in  New  York.  In  1857  he
accepted  the  chair  of  moral  and  intellectual  phi
losophy  and  literature  in  Columbia,  which  he  held
until  he  became  professor  emeritus  in  1881.  He
received  the  degree  of  L.  II.  D.  from  the  regents  of
New  York  in  1865.  Besides  many  pamphlets,  he
published  "  Two  Lectures  of  the  Annual  Psychologi
cal  Course  in  Columbia  College  "(New  York,  1866).
NAKAHAMA,  Manjiro,  Japanese  naval  officer,
b.  in  Shikoku,  Japan,  about  1824.  He  was  blown
out  to  sea  in  a  fishing- vessel  in  1840,  and  rescued
by  Capt.  Whitefield,  of  the  American  whaling-ship
"John  Howlnnd."  lie  was  taken  to  the  United
States  in  1844  and  given  a  good  education.  On  his
return  to  Japan  he  was  called  to  Yedo,  now  Tokio,
and  made  an  officer,  the  wearer  of  two  swords,  and
official  interpreter.  He  translated  Nathaniel  Bow-
ditch's  "Navigator"  into  Japanese,  and  was  the
first  native  of  Japan  to  navigate  a  ship  out  of  sight
of  land  on  scientific  principles.  Though  unseen  or
unknown  by  Com.  Perry  or  the  American  officers,
he  was  chief  interpreter  of  written  English,  to
whom  all  questions  and  treaty  documents  were  re
ferred.  He  was  made  curator  of  the  scientific  ap
paratus  brought  from  the  United  States.  Nakaha-
ma  built  various  smaller  craft  on  American  models,
and  was  made  a  captain  in  the  imperial  navy.

NANCREDE,  Paul  Joseph  tiugrard  de,  sol
dier,  b.  in  France  in  1760;  d.  in  Paris  in  1841.  lie
came  to  this  country  in  the  army  of  Count  Rocham-
beau.  in  which  he  served  as  a  lieutenant,  and  was
wounded  at  Yorktown.  From  1787  till  1800  he
was  instructor  in  French  at  Harvard,  and  he  after
ward  resided  for  some  time  in  Philadelphia.  He
edited  "  L'Abeille  Francoise  "  (1792). —  His  son,
Joseph  Grii6rard,  physician,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
in  June,  1793  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  2  Feb.,  1857,
was  educated  chiefly  in  Montreal  and  Paris,  but
returned  to  this  country,  through  fear  of  conscrip
tion,  and  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1813.  He  resided  in
Louisville,  Ky.,  till  1816,  and  then  in  Philadelphia
till  his  death,  practising  largely  among  French
families,  and  numbering  Joseph  Bonaparte  among
his  patients.  Dr.  Nancrede  married  Cornelia,
daughter  of  Com.  Truxton.  He  contributed  to
current  professional  literature,  and  edited  Legal-
Jois's  "Experiments  on  the  Principles  of  Life."
with  his  brother.  Dr.  Nicholas  Nancrede  (Philadel
phia,  1813).  and  an  abridgment  of  Orfila's  "  Toxicol
ogy,"  which  was  commended  by  the  author  (1817).
NANTEL,  Antonin,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in
St.  Jerome,  Quebec,  16  Sept.,  1839.  He  was  edu
cated  at  St.  Thc'rese  college,  where  he  was  gradu
ated  in  July,  1859.  He  then  became'a  clergyman
of  the  Roman  Catholic  church,  was  prelect  of
studies  at  St.  Therese  college  from  1802  till  1870,


NAPIER


NARBOROUGH


477


and  its  president  from  1870  till  1886.  lie  has  con-
tri bated  articles  to  the '•  Revue  Canadienne  "  and
"  Annales  Teresienne,"  and  has  edited  several
works  of  elementary  instruction,  including  "  Nou-
veau  cours  de  langue  Anglaise  "  (Montreal.  1867) ;
'•  Petites  fleurs  de  poesie  "  (1868) ;  "  Fleurs  de  la
poesie  Canadienne "  (1809);  "Petite  geographic
des  ecoles  Canadiennes"  (1871);  and  "The  Pro
nouncing  Book  "  (1878). — His  brother,  Gui  I  laninc
Alphunse,  journalist,  h.  in  St.  Jerome,  Quebec,  4
Nov.,  1852,  was  educated  at  the  Seminary  of  Sainte
Therese  de  Blainville,  studied  law,  and  was  admit
ted  to  the  bar  of  Quebec  in  1875.  He  has  been
editor  of  "  La  Minerve  "  and  of  '•  Le  Nord,"  pub
lished  at  St.  Jerome.  Mr.  Nantel  was  elected  to
the  Dominion  parliament  for  Terrebonne  in  1882,
resigned  to  make  way  for  Joseph  A.  Chapleau.  who
became  secretary  of  state  in  the  Dominion  cabinet,
was  elected  for  the  s-ame  constituency  to  the  legis
lature  of  Quebec  in  August,  1882,  and  was  re-elect
ed  in  December,  1886.

NAPIER,  Sir  Charles,  British  naval  officer,  b.
in  Merchistoun  Hall,  Stirlingshire,  Scotland,  6
March,  1786;  d.  in  London.  8  Nov.,  1860.  He
was  a  grandson  of  the  fifth  Lord  Napier,  and  a
lineal  descendant  of  the  inventor  of  the  Napierian
logarithms.  He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman
in  1799.  was  promoted  lieutenant  in  1805,  and  sent
to  the  West  Indies,  where  he  served  in  the  opera
tions  against  the  French,  and.  being  appointed
commander  of  the  brig  "Recruit."  captured  Fort
Edouard  at  the  entrance  of  Fort  de  France,  and
otherwise  contributed  to  the  success  of  the  Mar
tinique  expedition  in  1809.  After  a  successful
cruise  against  French  vessels,  he  was  promoted
commander  by  Admiral  C'ochrane  in  August.  1809.
and  in  1811  was  employed  in  Portugal  and  along
the  coast  of  southern  Italy,  capturing  Ponza  island.
He  was  attached  in  1813  to  the  North  American
squadron,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  war
against  the  United  States,  serving  on  Lake  Cham-
plain  under  Com.  Downie.  in  the  expedition  up
Potomac  river  in  August,  1814.  bombarded  Alex
andria,  commanded  the  long-boats  during  the
operations  against  Baltimore  in  September,  1814,
and  assisted  also  at  the  battle  of  New  Orleans.  He
was  made  a  K.  C.  B.,  and  in  1829,  being  given  a
special  mission  to  Portugal,  entered  the  navy  of
that  country  as  vice-admiral,  defeated  off  Cape  St.
Vincent,  3  July,  1833,  the  forces  of  Dom  Miguel,
and  was  created  Viscount  of  St.  Vincent  and  a

frandee  of  the  first  class  in  Portugal.  He  obtained
is  reinstatement  in  the  British  navy  in  1834,  be
came  commodore  in  1839.  participated  in  the  storm
ing  of  Sidon  in  September.  1840,  and  that  of  Acre
in  October,  and  was  promoted  rear-admiral  in  1841.
He  also  represented  Marylebone  in  parliament  in
1841-'7,  became  vice-admiral  of  the  blue  in  May,
1853,  bombarded  Bomarsund  in  1854.  and  was  pro
moted,  in  June,  1858.  admiral  of  the  blue.  Among
his  works  are  "  The  Navy,  its  Past  and  Present
State  "  (London.  1831 ):  "  The  War  in  Syria  "  (1842) :
and  "  Mv  Own  Life  "  (1856).

NAPIONE,  Carlo  Antonio  Galeami  (nah-pe-
o'-nay),  Brazilian  soldier,  b.  in  Piedmont  about
1750;  d.  in  Rio  Janeiro  in  1814.  He  entered  the
military  service  of  his  country,  but  being  fond  of
natural  science  studied  physics.  When  Sardinia
was  annexed  by  Napoleon,  Napione,  who  had
reached  the  rank  of  colonel,  emigrated  and  ac
cepted  a  place  on  the  staff  in  Lisbon.  He  soon
was  appointed  under-secretary  of  war,  and  was
promoted  afterward  brigadier  and  general  director
of  the  arsenal,  where  he  put  in  practice  a  new  pro
cess  of  casting  cannon  which  he  had  invented.


In  1807  he  accompanied  the  prince  regent  to  Brazil,
and  was  appointed  inspector-general  of  artillery
and  director  of  the  arsenal,  where  he  established  "a
powder-factory  and  a  cannon-foundry,  and  by  his
mineralogical  knowledge  discovered  and  began  to
work  a  mine  of  iron-ore.  He  explored  a  great  part
of  the  neighboring  provinces  for  metal,  and  left  in
teresting  notes  on  mineralogy  and  metallurgy,
which,  after  his  death,  were  edited  by  order  of  the
government  by  Col.  Pinto,  under  the  title  of  "Tra-
tado  da  mineralogia,  com  referenda  expressaos
metaes  uteis  achados  no  Brazil  ?'( Rio  Janeiro,  1817).

NARBONNE,  Charles  Henry,  buccaneer,  b.
in  Canada  about  1627;  d.  in  Tortugas,  W.  I.,  in
1681.  He  was  the  son  of  a  French  officer  and  an
Indian  woman,  and  took  the  name  of  his  father's
native  city.  He  began  life  as  a  soldier  in  Canada,
but  went  about  1660  to  Tortugas,  and  afterward
became  famous  for  his  daring  exploits  as  a  bucca
neer.  Either  alone  or  in  association  with  other
buccaneers,  he  ravaged  the  coast  of  Santo  Domin
go,  the  Bay  of  Honduras,  and  the  Gulf  of  Uraba,
and.  joining  Sir  Henry  Morgan  in  1670,  took  part
in  the  expedition  against  Panama.  He  was  de
tached  to  secure  provisions  for  the  invaders,  and
stormed  Carthagena,  captured  Santa  Catalina  isl
and,  and.  rejoining  Morgan  on  Chagres  river,
headed  the  attack  against  Fort  San  Lorenzo.  He
undertook  afterward  expeditions  against  Mara-
caibo  and  San  Antonio  de  Gibraltar,  and,  having
amassed  a  large  fortune,  settled  in  Tortugas,  be
coming  in  1677  deputy-lieutenant  of  the  king,
which  post  he  held  till  his  death.

N  ARBONNE,  Peter  Hemi.  Canadian  insurgent,
b.  in  St.  Remi,  Canada,  in  1806;  d.  in  Montreal,
15  Feb.,  1839.  He  was  active  in  the  Canadian
troubles  of  1837,  and  after  the  defeat  of  the  insur
gents  at  St.  Charles  he  escaped  to  the  United
States.  He  enrolled  himself  in  the  band  that  was
organized  by  Lucien  Gagnon  (q.  r.),  returned  to
Canada,  and  took  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  unfor
tunate  affair  of  Moore's  Corner.  After  this  defeat
he  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  a  body  of  insur
gents  from  Deux-Montagnes  and  fought  at  St.
Eustache.  but  was  taken  prisoner  near  Sherring-
ton  and  led  to  St.  Jean.  His  wife  was  not  al
lowed  to  see  him,  and  died  of  grief  a  few  days  after
ward.  He  was  released  in  July,  when  an  amnesty
was  granted  to  the  insurgents  by  Lord  Durham,
but  took  part  in  the  rising  of  1838,  and  command
ed  a  body  of  Canadians  at  Napierville  and  Odel-
town.  He  tried  to  make  his  way  through  the  lines
after  the  latter  engagement,  but  was  arrested  and
taken  to  Napierville.  He  was  tried  at  Montreal
for  high  treason.  26  Jan..  1839,  and  hanged.

NARBOROUGH,  Sir  John,  Endish  navigator,
b.  in  Norfolk  in  1637;  d.  in  Chelsea  in  1688.  He
entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  served  during
the  war  with  the  Dutch  in  1664.  and  was  given  in
1669  the  command  of  an  expedition  to  the  South
sea.  He  sailed  from  Deptford.  26  Nov.,  1669.  and
after  exploring  the  coast  of  Patagonia  entered  the
Strait  of  Magellan,  and  arrived  on  15  Nov..  1670,
in  the  Pacific  ocean.  He  sailed  along  the  Chilian
coast  as  far  as  Valdivia.  but.  being  denied  entrance
to  that  harbor  by  the  Spanish  authorities,  he  re
turned  to  England.  Charles  II..  who  had  expect
ed  great  results  from  Narborough's  voyage,  and
came  in  state  to  receive  the  latter  at  Gravesend,
was  greatly  disappointed.  In  the  following  year
Narborough  served  under  the  Duke  of  York  at  the
battle  of  Solebay.  He  was  made  rear-admiral  and
knighted  in  1673.  commanded  also  the  expeditions
against  Tripoli  in  1674  and  Algiers  in  1677.  and
was  appointed  in  1680  commissioner  of  the  admi-


478


NARES


NASCHER


ralty,  which  post  he  held  till  his  death.  The  nar
rative  of  his  expedition  to  the  South  sea,  written
in  collaboration  with  his  lieutenant,  Pecket,  was
published  in  the  series  "  An  Account  of  Several
Late  Voyages  and  Discoveries  to  the  South  and
North" '(London,  1094).  It  was  translated  into
French  (Amsterdam,  1722),  into  German  (Vienna,
1723),  and  into  Dutch  and  Italian.  Narborough's
narrative  gives  the  exact  geographical  position  of
the  principal  points  on  the  Patagonian  coasts  and
the  Strait  of  Magellan,  and  was  extensively  used
for  nearly  a  century  by  navigators  to  the  South
sea.  He  gave  his  name  to  an  island  south  of  Ghiloe.

NARES,  Sir  George  Strong,  explorer,  b.  in  Mon
mouthshire,  England,  in  1831.  He  was  educated  at
the  Royal  naval  college.  New  Cross,  England,  served
on  the  Australian  station,  was  mate  on  the  "  Reso
lute''  in  the  arctic  expedition  of  1852-*4,  and  was  a
courageous  sledge-traveller  in  the  spring  of  1853,
making  605  miles  in  6!)  days,  and  586  miles  in  50  days
during  the  next  inarch.  He  subsequently  served
in  the  Crimea  and  on  the  Mediterranean  station,
in  charge  of  cadet  ships,  was  promoted  commander
in  1854.  and  from  that  date  till  1875  was  on  foreign
surveying  service.  In  the  latter  year  he  left  Eng
land  in  command  of  an  expedition  to  reach  the
north  pole.  The  fleet  arrived  in  Lady  Franklin
bay  on  27  Aug.  It  consisted  of  two  ships,  the
"  Alert "  and  the  "  Discovery."  The  latter  was  left
in  winter-quarters,  and  the  "  Alert,"  in  command
of  Nares,  continued  her  course  along  the  western
shore  of  Robeson  channel  until  1  Sept.,  when  she
attained  latitude  82°  27',  the  highest  that  had  been
made.  The  explorers  defined  the  character  of  the
great  polar  sea,  and  made  important  hydrographi-
cal,  meteorological,  tidal,  magnetic,  and  electric
observations.  After  the  return  of  daylight  in
1876  sledging  expeditions  were  sent  out,  and  on  12  '
May  the  British  flag  was  planted  at  latitude  83°  10'
26''  N.  From  this  point  there  was  no  appearance
of  land,  but  the  depth  of  the  water  was  only  72
fathoms.  The  expedition  then  set  sail  for  Eng
land,  arriving  at  Valentia,  Spain,  in  October,  1876.
Nares  was  made  a  K.  C.  B.  for  his  services,  and  in
1878  again  commanded  the  "  Alert"  in  a  two-years'
cruise  in  the  South  Pacific.  He  has  published
"  The  Xaval  Cadet's  Guide  "  (London,  1860) ;  "  Re
ports  on  Ocean  Soundings "  (6  parts,  1874-'5) :
"The  Official  Report  of  the  Arctic  Expedition"
(1876) ;  and  •'  Narrative  of  a  Voyage  to  the  Polar
Sea,  during  1875-'6.  in  II.  M.  Ships  '  Alert  '  and
'  Discoverv  '  "  (2  vols.,  1878).

NARIJTO,  Antonio  (nah-reen'-yo),  Colombian
patriot,  b.  in  Bogota  in  1765;  d.  in  Leiva,  13  Dec.,
1823.  He  studied  philosophy  and  jurisprudence
in  the  College  of  San  Bartolome  in  his  native  city,
was  graduated  there  in  law,  and  entered  the  magis
tracy.  The  viceroy  appointed  him  to  several  lu
crative  posts,  but  He  cherished  ultra-liberal  ideas,
and  in  the  satirical  paper  "  La  Bagatela,"  which
he  edited,  prepared  the  minds  of  his  compatriots
for  future  independence.  In  1794  a  copy  of  the
French  revolutionary  constitution  fell  into  his
hands,  and  he  translated  from  it  the  declaration
of  the  rights  of  citizens  and  published  it.  The
pamphlet  was  confiscated,  and  Nariilo  was  con
demned  to  imprisonment  and  transported  to  Ca
diz.  He  escaped  and  took  refuge  in  France  and
then  in  England,  where  he  worked  for  the  inde
pendence  of  his  country,  but,  being  nnable  to  ob
tain  material  assistance  for  his  project,  he  returned  I
to  his  country,  determined  to  incite  an  insurrection.  |
On  his  arrival  he  was  imprisoned,  but  released  on
condition  that  he  should  live  quietly  on  his  coun
try  property.  When  a  new  viceroy  arrived,  he


ordered  Narino's  arrest,  and  confined  him  in  the
fortress  of  Bocachica,  in  Carthagena.  The  revolu
tion  of  1810  gave  him  his  liberty,  but  the  revolu
tionary  chiefs  did  not  give  him  any  place  in  their
councils.  When  the  division  between  the  Feder
alist  and  Centralist  parties  became  wider  in  1811,
the  congress  of  Bogota,  chiefly  composed  of  the
latter  faction,  elected  him  vice-president  of  Cundi-
namarca.  When  open  hostilities  began,  he  won  a
victory  on  8  Jan.,  1813,  and  became  president  of
Cundinamarca.  He  showed  his  patriotism  by  a
conciliatory  policy,  and,  when  the  royalist  troops
from  Quito  invaded  the  country,  he  marched  at
the  head  of  the  patriot  army  and  defeated  them  in
several  battles,  but  was  in  turn  defeated  at  Pasto
and  gave  himself  up  to  the  Spanish  commander.
After  a  long  imprisonment  in  Bogota  and  Santa
Marta,  he  was  sent  to  Cadiz,  where  he  remained
till  the  revolution  of  23  March,  1820.  After  its
suppression  he  fled  to  England,  where  he  framed
a  constitution  for  his  country,  and  presented  it  the
same  year,  on  his  return,  to  congress.  He  was
nominated  vice-president  of  Colombia,  but  did  not
accept,  and  in  1821  was  elected  senator.  In  1823
he  was  appointed  commander-in-cliicf,  but  feeble
health  soon  forced  him  to  retire  to  Leiva,  neat-
Bogota,  where  he  died.

NARVAEZ,  Pauiilo  de  (nar-vah'-eth).  Spanish
adventurer,  b.  in  Valladolid  in  1470;  d.  in  Florida
in  November,  1528.  He  went  in  his  youth  to
South  America,  served  under  several  adventurers,
and  in  1510  was  sent  by  Juan  de  Esquivel,  gov
ernor  of  Jamaica,  to  the  relief  of  Alonso  de  Ojeda
(q.  c.),  who  had  been  shipwrecked  upon  the  coast
of  Cuba.  Joining  Diego  Velasquez  in  1512  with
an  auxiliary  force,  he  aided  him  to  conquer  Cuba,
and,  being  sent  to  Spain  in  1516  to  promote  Velas
quez's  interests,  obtained  for  the  latter  the  com
mission  of  governor-general  of  Cuba,  and  permis
sion  to  conquer  the  neighboring  continent.  In
1520,  Velasquez,  being  envious  of  Cortes's  success
in  Mexico,  and  displeased  at  the  latter's  resistance
to  his  authority,  prepared  an  expedition  against
him,  and  appointed  Narvaez  commander.  Sailing
from  Havana  in  March,  1520,  the  latter  landed  on
23  April  at  San  Juan  d'Ulua,  and  took  and  forti
fied  Cernpoala,  where  Cortes  tried  to  open  negotia
tions  with  him.  But  Narvaez  demanded  complete
submission,  and  on  26  May,  1520,  was  defeated  by
Cortes,  severely  wounded,  and  kept  a  prisoner  for
several  months  in  Vcra  Cruz.  On  his  return  to
Spain  he  obtained  in  1526  the  government  of  Flori
da,  and  prepared  an  expedition  in  Cuba  to  con
quer  that  country.  Sailing  from  Havana  in  March,
1528,  with  six  ships  and  300  soldiers,  he  landed
on  1  May  near  Cape  Corrientes,  and  discovered
the  Bay  of  Pensacola.  Afterward,  entering  the
territory  of  the  Appalache  Indians,  he  began  the
march  westward  in  search  of  the  rich  empire  of
which  he  had  heard,  but  after  several  months  of
hardship,  being  continually  harassed  by  hostile
tribes,  the  Spaniards  resolved  to  return  to  Cuba.
With  the  loss  of  about  half  their  force,  they
reached  the  coast,  and  constructed  five  boats,
which  were  shipwrecked  at  the  mouth  of  Missis
sippi  river,  and  Narvaez  with  nearlv  all  his  follow
ers  perished.  Only  Cabeza  de  Vaca  (q.  v.)  and
three  others  returned.

NASCHER,  Friedrich  Wilhelm  (nash  -er),  ~
German  naturalist,  b.  in  Newent,  England,  in
1702;  d.  in  Paderborn.  Westphalia,  in  1764.  He
was  a  merchant,  resided  several  years  in  Havana,
and,  having  made  a  fortune,  followed  his  taste  for
travel,  visiting  Brazil  and  most  of  the  Spanish
possessions.  On  his  return  to  Germany  in  175'2  he


-
A<


XASH


NASOX


479


obtained  employment  at  the  court  of  the  Prince
of  Reuss-Greitz,' but,  resigning  a  few  months  later,
devoted  the  remainder  of  his  life  to  the  arrange
ment  and  publication  of  the  material  he  had  col
lected  during  his  travels.  He  published  "  Reisen
im  Siidlichen  Amerika"  (2  vols..  Dresden,  1754) :
"  Neueste  Reisen  durch  Amerika"  (2  vols.,  1755):
"  Grundlehren  der  Anatomie  und  Physiologic  der
Pflanzen"  (2  vols.,  Berlin.  1756);  "Neueste  Ge-
schichte  und  Beschreibungdes  Brodbaums  "  (1758) :
'•  Flora  Cubana,  exhibens,  characteres  generum  et
specierum  plantarum  circa  Havana  crescentium  "
(2  vols.,  Leipsic,  1758);  "  Criptogama?  Brasilienses
ab  Nascher  collects,  cui  additus  lexicon  in  quo
terminis  artis  hreviter  exponuntur  "  (1760) ;  "  Bilder
und  Skizzen  der  Urngebungen  von  Havana"  (Ber
lin.  1762);  "Land  und  Leute  der  Insel  Cuba"
(1762):  and  several  other  works.

NASH,  Abner,  governor  of  North  Carolina,  b.
in  Prince  Edward  county,  Va.,  8  Aug.,  1716  ;  d.  in
Philadelphia.  Pa,,  2  Dec..  1786.  He  removed  to
New-Berne,  N.  C..  at  an  early  age,  practised  law
with  success,  represented  that  towu  in  the  first  Pro
vincial  congress  which  met  there,  25  Aug..  1774.
and  previous  to  the  Revolution  and  during  its  con
tinuance  was  active  in  the  patriot  cause.  He  was
one  of  the  provincial  council  in  1775,  one  of  the
council  and  committee  that  framed  the  state  con
stitution  in  1776,  the  first  speaker  of  the  house
of  commons  that  assembled  in  North  Carolina,
speaker  of  the  senate  in  1779.  and  governor  from
the  latter  year  till  1781.  The  period  of  his  adminis
tration  was  the  gloomiest  part  of  the  Revolutionary
war  in  North  Carolina,  and  he  seems  to  have  been
of  too  feeble  health  or  too  easy  temper  for  such
times.  His  first  assembly,  17  April,  1780,  made
Gen.  Richard  Caswell  the  commander  of  all  the
militia  of  the  state,  although  by  the  constitution
the  governor  was  commander-in-chief.  and  at  its
session  in  September  it  appointed  a  board  of  war  to
manage  military  operations,  which  was  a  still
larger  invasion  of  his  rights.  At  its  meeting  in
December  it  made  him  a  member  only  of  a  "  coun
cil  extraordinary,"  to  which  the  supreme  executive
authority  was  confided.  He  declined  to  serve
longer  than  the  spring  of  1781.  was  succeeded  by
Thomas  Burke,  and  in  1782-'6  was  a  member  of
the  Continental  congress.  His  death  occurred  dur
ing  his  attendance  on  that  body. — His  brother,
Francis,  soldier,  b.  in  Prince  Edward  county.  Va.,
10  May,  1720;  d.  in  Germantown.  Pa..  7  Oct.",  1777,
was  clerk  of  the  superior  court  of  Orange  county,
N.  C.,  held  a  captain's  commission  under  the  crown,
and  in  the  latter  capacity  served  against  the  Regu
lators  at  the  battle  of  Alamance  in  1771.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Provincial  congress  that  met  in
Hillsborough  in  August,  1775.  and  was  appointed  by
that  body  lieutenant-colonel  of  one  of  the  two  regi
ments  that  were  then  forming  for  the  Continental
service.  He  was  commissioned  brigadier-general
by  the  Continental  congress  in  February,  1777.
joined  Gen.  Washington  and  commanded  a  brigade
at  the  battle  of  Germantown.  where  he  was  mor
tally  wounded.  In  November  of  that  year  con
gress  passed  a  resolution  that  a  monument  of  the
value  of  $500  be  erected  to  his  memory  at  the  ex
pense  of  the  government,  but  it  was  never  carried
into  effect. — Abner's  son,  Frederick,  jurist,  b.  in
New-Berne,  N.  C.,  9  Feb.,  1781 :  d.  in  Hillsborough.
N.  C.,  5  Dec.,  1858,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1799.  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
represented  New -Berne  in  the  legislature  in
181:3-' 17.  He  was  a  judge  of  the  superior  court
from  1818  till  his  resignation  in  1824.  was  re-
elected  to  th:it  office  in  1836,  and  in  1844  was  raised


to  the  supreme  bench.  From  the  resignation  of
Judge  Thomas  Ruffin  in  1852,  he  was  chief  justice
of  Xorth  Carolina  until  his  death.

NASH,  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Housatonic
(now  Great  Harrington),  Mass..  28  May,  1763;  d.  in
Burlington,  X.  Y..  4  June.  1836.  He  was  graduat
ed  at  Yale  in  1785.  and  for  about  ten  years  was
principal  of  an  academy,  first  at  Pittsgrove,  and
afterward  at  Swedesborough,  X.  J.  He  was  origi
nally  a  Congregationalist,  but  became  a  communi
cant  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  In  1794
he  took  charge  of  an  academy  at  Xew  Lebanon
Springs,  X.  Y.  Soon  afterward  he  began  to  pre
pare  for  orders,  and  was  ordained  deacon  in  St.
George's  chapel,  Xew  York,  8  Feb.,  1797,  by  Bishop
Provoost,  and  priest  in  October,  1801.  by  Bishop
Benjamin  Moore.  From  the  time  of  his  ordina
tion  for  nearly  forty  years  he  labored  incessantly
in  the  discharge  of  his  duties  as  missionary  in
Otsego  and  Chenango  counties,  X.  Y.,  and  was
everywhere  known  as  Father  Xash.

NASH,  Simeon,  jurist,  b.  in  South  Hadley,
Mass.,  21  Sept.,  1804;  d.  in  Gallipolis,  Ohio,  19  Jan.,
1879.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1829,  and
began  the  practice  of  law  at  Gallipolis,  Ohio.  He
served  in  the  state  senate  in  1839-'41.  in  the  State
constitutional  convention  in  1852,  and  from  that
year  till  1862  was  judge  of  the  7th  district  of  Ohio.
From  the  latter  date  till  his  death  he  practised  his
profession.  His  publications  include  "Digest  of
Ohio  Reports"  (20  vols.,  Cincinnati.  1853);  "  Plead
ing  and  Practice  under  the  Civil  Code"  (1856);
"Morality  and  the  State"  (Columbus,  1859);
"Pleading  and  Practice"  (Cincinnati,  1875);  and
"  Crime  and  the  Family  "  (1876).

NASH,  Stephen  Payne,  lawyer,  b.  in  Albany.
X.  Y.,  26  Aug..  1821.  He  was  educated  in  the  pub
lic  schools  in  Albany,  and  at  the  French  college  at
Chamblay.  Canada,  began  the  practice  of  law  in
Saratoga,  X.  Y.,  and  resided  there  and  in  Albany
till  1845,  when  he  removed  to  Xew  York  city.  He
was  a  founder  of  the  Xew  York  bar  association  in
1863.  and  in  1880  became  its  president.  He  is  a
trustee  of  Columbia  college,  a  member  of  the  vestry
of  Trinity  church,  and  is  prominent  in  the  debates
of  the  diocesan  conventions  of  Xew  York.

NASIMBEN,  Pedro  (nah-seem-ben'),  Italian
missionary,  b.  in  Venice.  8  April,  1703  ;  d.  in  Santa
Rosa,  Cal.,  in  1755.  He  entered  the  Society  of
Jesus  in  Italy  in  1719,  and  in  1733  was  sent  by
his  superiors  to  Xew  Spain.  In  1735  he  was  as
signed  to  the  missions  in  California,  where  he  died
after  twenty  years  of  successful  labor  in  convert
ing  the  Indians.  He  wrote  "  Xoticias  del  estable-
cimiento  y  estado  de  la  Mision  de  Santa  Rosa,  y
de  sus  pueblos  de  la  Trinidad  y  San  Marcos  en
California  "  (Mexico,  1750).

NASON,  Klias.  clergyman,  b.  in  Wrentham,
Mass.,  21  April.  1811 ;  d.  in  Xorth  Billerica,  Mass.,
17  June,  1887.  He  taught  to  obtain  means  to  enter
college,  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1835,  taught  in
Augusta.  Ga.,  in  1836-'40.  edited  the  "Georgia
Courier,"  and  lectured  throughout  the  state  on  the
flora  of  the  south.  Returning  to  the  north,  he  set
tled  in  Xewburyport.  Mass.,  edited  the  "  Watch-
tower,"  became  master  of  the  Latin-school,  and  sub
sequently  of  the  high-school,  and  in  1852  was  or
dained  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in
Xatick.  He  officiated  at  Xeedham  in  1858-'60,
served  on  the  Christian  commission  during  the
civil  war,  writing  and  lecturing  in  support  of  the
Xational  government.  From  1865  till  his  death
he  resided  in  Xorth  Billerica.  and  constantly  sup
plied  adjoining  churches.  He  was  a  successful  lec
turer,  spoke  several  languages,  was  a  member  of


480


NASSAU-SIEGEN


NAST


many  learned  societies,  and  at  one  time  edited
the  "  New  England  Historical  and  Genealogical
Register."  He  published  "Songs  for  the  School-
Room"  (Boston.  1842);  '•Chivstomathie  Fran-
caise"  (1849);  "Memoir  of  Rev.  Nathaniel  Howe"
(1851) ;  "  Thou  Shalt  Not  Steal  "  (1852) ;  "  Strength
and  Beauty  of  the  Sanctuary "  (1854) :  "  Congre
gational  Hymn  Book"  (1857):  "Congregational
Hymn  and"  Tune  Book"  (185S);  "Our  Obliga
tions  to  Defend  our  Country,  and  Sermons  on  the
War"  (1861);  "Songs  for  Social  and  Public  Wor
ship  "  (1862) ;  "  Eulogy  on  Edward  Everett  "  (1865) ;
"Fountains  of  Salvation''  (1865);  "Eulogy  on
Abraham  Lincoln"  (1865);  '•  Eulogy  on  Sir  Charles
Henry  Frankhind  "  (1865) ;  "  Gazetteer  of  Massachu
setts  "  (1872);  "Life  of  Henry  Wilson"  (1872):
"  Lives  of  Moody  and  Sankey  "  (1872);  and  a  "  His
tory  of  Middlesex  County"  (1872).  He  also  left  in
manuscript  a  "  History  of  Hopkinton  "  and  a  "  His
tory  of  the  Nason  Family." — His  cousin,  Henry
Bradford,  chemist,  b.  in  Foxborough,  Mass.,  22
June,  1831,  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1855,  and
then  studied  chemistry  and  the  natural  sciences  at
the  University  of  Gottingen,  Germany,  where  in
1857  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  for  his  origi
nal  investigations  on  the  formation  of  ethers.  On
his  return  to  the  United  States  in  1858  he  was  ap
pointed  professor  of  natural  history  at  the  Rensse-
laer  polytechnic  institute  in  Troy,  and  in  the  same
year  he  became  professor  of  chemistry  and  natural
sciences  in  Beloit  college,  holding  both  of  these  ap
pointments  until  1866.  He  then  accepted  the  chair
of  chemistry  and  natural  science  in  the  Polytechnic
institute,  which  he  has  since  held.  He  was  ap
pointed  juror  by  the  U.  S.  government  at  the
World's  fair  in  Paris  in  1878,  and  was  assigned  the
department  of  mineralogy  and  metallurgy.  In  1880
he  was  called  to  the  place  of  chemist  of  the  Stand
ard  oil  company,  and  since  has  devoted  much  at
tention  to  the  abatement  of  nuisances  arising  from
smoke,  odors,  and  other  products  of  refineries,  and
also  to  the  improvement  of  methods  for  treatment
of  crude  oil.  Prof.  Nason  received  the  degree  of
M.  D.  from  Union  in  1880,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from
Beloit  in  the  same  year,  and  in  1887  was  appointed
director  of  Pratt  institute,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  He  is
a  member  of  the  chemical  societies  of  Berlin  and
New  York,  and  since  1878  has  been  a  fellow  of  the
London  chemical  society.  His  publications  include
"Table  of  Reactions  for  Qualitative  Analysis"
(Troy,  1865);  a  translation  of  Wohler's  "Hand
book  of  Mineral  Analysis"  (Philadelphia,  1868);
"  Table  for  Qualitative  Analysis  in  Colors  "  (Troy,
1870):  an  edition  of  Elderhorst's  "  Blow-pipe  Anal
ysis"  (Philadelphia,  1873;  revised  ed.,  1880);  and
"  Biographical  Record  of  Officers  and  Graduates  of
Rensselaer  Polytechnic  Institute  "  (1887).

NASSAU-SIEGEN,  John  Maurice,  Prince  of
(nas-sow-zee'-gen),  Dutch  soldier,  b.  in  Delft,  Hol
land,  in  1604;  d.  in  Cleves,  Germany,  29  Dec.,
1679.  From  early  youth  he  showed  military  talent
and  participated  in  the  war  against  the  Spaniards,
especially  in  the  siege  of  Breda  in  1625.  In  1636
he  was  appointed  by  the  stadtholder,  Henry  of
Orange,  governor-general  of  the  Dutch  possessions
in  Brazil,  and  immediately  after  his  arrival  he  be
gan  a  campaign  against  the  Spanish-Portuguese
forces,  which  he  defeated  in  repeated  encounters.
Believing  himself  strong  enough  to  hold  his  own
he  despatched  part  of  his  forces  to  attack  the  Por
tuguese  possessions  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  and
continued  to  extend  his  conquests  with  the  aid  of
the  natives  who  were  opposed  to  Spanish  rule.
But  he  received  a  serious  check  in  the  attack  on
Sao  Salvador,  being  obliged  to  raise  the  siege  with


the  loss  of  many  of  his  best  officers.  On  receiving
re-enforcements  in  1638,  and  with  the  co-opera
tion  of  the  Dutch  fleet,  which  defeated  the  Span
ish-Portuguese  squadrons  in  sight  of  Bahiaa  Todos
os  Santos,  he  captured  the  latter  city.  When  in
1640  Portugal  recovered  its  independence  from
Spain  under  the  Duke  of  Braganza,  the  Prince  of
Nassau-Siegen,  anticipating  an  alliance  with  the
latter,  and  believing  that  a  treaty  of  peace  with
Portugal  would  leave  Holland  in  possession  of  the
conquered  territory,  hastened  his  operations,  and,
to  give  occupation  to  the  host  of  adventurers  that
had  assembled  under  his  colors,  he  despatched  an
expedition  against  the  Spanish  possessions  on
Plate  river  and  Chili,  meanwhile  visiting  the  con
quered  provinces  and  arranging  their  administra
tion.  In  1643  he  was  recalled  and  returned  with
great  riches  to  Holland,  where  he  was  made  gen-
eral-in-chief  of  cavalry  and  governor  of  the  for
tress  of  Wcsel.  The  Elector  of  Brandenburg  made
him  afterward  grand  master  of  the  Teutonic  order
and  governor  of  Cleves,  where  he  established  mag
nificent  gardens.  In  the  Paris  library  there  are
two  folio  volumes  containing  a  fine  collection  of
colored  prints  of  Brazilian  animals  and  plants,
which  were  executed  by  order  of  the  prince,  arid
accompanied  with  a  short  explanation  by  him.
Gaspar  van  Baerle  describes  the  prince's  govern
ment  in  America  in  his  "  Rerum  in  Brazilia  gesta-
rum  Ilistoria"  (Amsterdam,  1647).

NAST,  Thomas,  caricaturist,  b.  in  Landau,
Bavaria,  27  Sept.,  1840.  He  was  brought,  to  the
United  States  by  his  father  in  1846.  When  a  boy
of  fourteen  he  spent  about  six  months  in  the  draw
ing  classes  of  Theo
dore  Kaufmann,
and  then,  with  no
other  preparato
ry  art-instruction,
was  engaged  as  a
draughtsman  on
an  illustrated  pa
per.  In  1860  he
went  to  England
as  special  artist  of
a  New  York  weekly
paper,  and  thence
he  went  to  Italy,
where  he  followed
Garibaldi,  making  f*jr'
sketches  for  the
'•'  New  York  Illus
trated  News,"  the
"London  Illustrat
ed  News,"  and  "  Le
Monde  illustre  "  of
Paris.  He  returned  to  New  York  in  1861,  and  in
July,  1862,  began  drawing  war  sketches  for  "Har
per's  Weekly."  His  very  first  political  caricature,  an
allegorical  design  that  gave  a  powerful  blow  to  the
peace  party,  was  a  success;  it  brought  him  at  once
into  public  notice,  and  he  immediately  became  pop
ular.  Besides  his  work  for  "  Harper's  Weekly,''  by
which  he  is  best  known,  he  has  drawn  for  other  comic
papers,  has  illustrated  several  books,  notably  those
of  "  Petroleum  V.  Nasby,"  and  for  several  years
after  1872  he  issued  "Nast's  Illustrated  Almanac."
In  1866  he  executed  a  series  of  sixty  caricatures  of
well-known  men  in  water-colors  for  "  Bal  d'opera."
and  in  1873  he  lectured  in  the  principal  cities  of
the  United  States,  drawing  caricatures  on  the  stage.
by  way  of  illustration,  in  black  and  white,  and  also
with  colored  crayons.  He  appeared  again  on  the
lecture  platform  in  1885,  executing  landscapes  in
oil  and  other  sketches  with  extreme  rapidity,  and  a


NAST


XAVAILLES


481


third  time  in  1887. In  his  particular  line,  pictorial  '
satire,  Xast  stands  in  the  foremost  rank,  and  his
talent  in  that  respect  has  been  productive  of  some
excellent  results,  as  in  the  overthrow  of  the  Tweed  j
ring  in  Xew  York  city. He  has  always  been  a  Re-  |
publican,  but  in  1884  he  gave  the  Democratic  can-  I
didate  his  support. Mr.  Xast's  friends  in  the  U.  j
S.  army  and  navy  presented  him  in  1879  with  a
testimonial  in  the  shape  of  a  silver  cup.

NAST,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stuttgart,
Germany,  15  June.  1807.  He  was  educated  at  the
University  of  Tubingen  with  a  view  to  entering
the  ministry,  but  preferred  literary  pursuits,  and
after  his  graduation  was  connected  with  the  press.
Mr.  Xast  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1828,
taught  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  and  subse
quently  became  a  professor  in  Kenyon  college,
Ohio.  He  united  with  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  in  1835.  was  licensed  to  preach,  and  at  the
conference  of  that  body  in  1837  was  appointed  to
establish  a  German  mission  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.
He  proved  so  successful  in  that  enterprise  that  in  j
the  course  of  twenty  years  German  Methodist
churches  were  established  in  almost  every  state  in
the  Union,  and  in  various  parts  of  Germany,  Nor
way,  and  Sweden.  Since  1859  he  has  edited  the
German  publications  of  the  Methodist  church,  and
since  1840  has  been  in  charge  of  the  "  Chris
tian  Apologist,"  the  organ  of  his  branch.  He  has
translated  a  large  number  of  religious  works  into
German,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Christological
Meditations "  (Cincinnati,  Ohio,  1858) ;  a  com
mentary  on  the  Xew  Testament  in  German  (1860) :
the  '•  Gospel  Records "  (1866) ;  "  Christologische
Betrachtungen  "  (1866);  and  "Das  Christenthum
und  seine  Gegensatze  "  (1883).

NATIYIDADE,  Jose  da  (nah-te-ve-dah'-deh),
Brazilian  clergyman,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  19  March,
1669 ;  d.  in  the  monastery  of  Sao  Bento,  9  April,
1715.  He  entered  the  Benedictine  order,  became
an  eloquent  preacher,  and,  such  an  excellent  lo
gician  that  he  was  named  O  Subtil.  He  took  his
degree  as  doctor  of  theology  at  the  University  of
Coimbra,  and  on  his  return  to  Brazil  became  abbot
of  the  monastery  at  Bahia.  and  afterward  provin
cial.  He  left  three  printed  sermons  and  a  book  of
canonical  regulations  and  moral  reflections,  which
are  in  the  Imperial  library.

NAU,  Jacques  Jean  David,  called  L'OLON-
NOIS,  French  buccaneer,  b.  in  Sables-d'Olonne,
France,  about  1634 ;  d.  on  the  coast  of  Colombia,
in  1671.  The  surname,  by  which  he  is  best  known,
was  derived  from  his  birthplace.  He  entered  the
merchant  service  when  very  young,  and.  after
spending  several  years  in  the  Antilles,  joined  the
buccaneers  in  1653.  He  won  the  admiration  of
his  companions  by  his  reckless  bravery,  was  soon
in  command  of  a  vessel,  and  his  captures  were  so
valuable  and  numerous  that  he  was  styled  the
"  scourge  of  the  Spaniards."  His  first  successes
were  followed  by  calamities,  and  he  lost  all  he  had
won  in  a  shipwreck,  but  the  governor  of  Tortuga.
who  profited  by  his  enterprises,  furnished  him  with
another  vessel.  He  then  attempted  a  descent
on  the  coast  near  Campeche,  but  was  defeated.
His  followers  were  taken  or  slain,  and  he  escaped
only  by  smearing  his  body  with  blood  and  lying
among  the  dead,  afterward  reaching  Tortuga  in  a
boat,  assisted  by  some  slaves  whom  he  had  prom
ised  their  freedom  if  they  would  aid  him.  He
was  soon  off  the  coast  of  Cuba,  and  with  two
canoes,  manned  by  twenty-five  men,  he  captured
a  Spanish  vessel  with  ten  guns  and  a  crew  of
ninety.  He  killed  all  his  prisoners  except  one,
whom  he  sent  to  the  governor  of  Havana  with  a
VOL.  iv. — 31


message,  saying  that  he  would  treat  all  Spaniards
in  the  same  way,  and  that  he  would  never  be  taken
alive.  Returning  to  Tortuga  in  1666,  he  joined
Michel  Le  Basque,  another  freebooter,  and  the
reputation  of  the  two  buccaneers  attracted  so
many  followers  that  they  were  able  to  arm  six  ves
sels  manned  by  400  men.  After  taking  several
prizes,  they  captured  the  defences  of  Maracaibo,
and  forced  the  city  to  pay  a  heavy  ransom.  They
then  sailed  for  the  harbor  of  Gonaives,  in  Santo
Domingo,  where  they  divided  their  booty,  more
than  400,000  crowns.  Nau  soon  squandered  his
share,  and  formed  the  plan  of  capturing  Grenada
on  the  Lake  of  Xicaragua  in  1668.  First  direct
ing  his  course  to  the  southern,  coast  of  Cuba,  where
he  surprised  several  canoes,  he  attempted  to  gain
Cape  Gracias-a-Dios,  but  the  currents  drove  him
into  the  Gulf  of  Honduras.  He  pillaged  some
villages  on  the  coast  and  took  several  vessels,  but
his  booty  did  not  equal  his  expectations,  though  he
committed  frightful  cruelties  on  the  inhabitants
to  make  them  discover  where  they  had  hidden  their
gold,  and  he  lost  many  of  his  men.  In  1670  he
wished  to  attack  the  city  of  Guatemala,  but  his  fol
lowers  did  not  second  him,  as  it  was  too  well  de
fended,  and,  after  losing  three  months  in  inaction,
they  nearly  all  left  him.  He  was  shipwrecked
shortly  afterward  in  the  only  vessel  that  remained
to  him  on  the  rocks  of  Pearl-Key,  but  out  of
the  materials  of  his  ship  built  a  sloop,  in  which  he
reached  the  mouth  of  San  Juan  river.  On  attempt
ing  to  land  he  was  attacked  by  Indians  and  de
feated  with  loss.  After  this  check  more  of  his
followers  abandoned  him,  and  he  was  shortly  after
ward  captured  and  eaten  by  cannibals  on  the  coast
near  the  Gulf  of  Uraba.

NAUDAIN,  Arnold,  physician,  b.  near  Dover,
Del.,  6  Jan.,  1790  ;  d.  in  "Odessa,  Del.,  4  Jan.,
1872.  His  grandfather  was  a  French  Huguenot,
who  emigrated  to  lower  Delaware  early  in  the  his
tory  of  that  colony.  Arnold  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1806,  and  at  the  medical  department
of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1810.  Dur
ing  the  war  of  1812  with  Great  Britain  he  was  sur
geon-general  of  the  Delaware  militia.  He  was
speaker  of  the  state  house  of  representatives  in
1826,  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Whig  in
1830,  and  served  in  that  body  till  his  resignation
in  1836.  He  was  collector  of  the  port  of  Wilming
ton,  Del.,  from  1841  till  1845,  but  removed  at  the
latter  date  to  Philadelphia,  and  practised  his  pro
fession  in  that  city  for  several  years.

NAY AILLES.  Charles  (nah-vi'-e),  French  pilot,
b.  in  Dieppe  about  1270 ;  d.  there  about  1330.  The
French  and  some  German  authors  name  him  as
the  discoverer  of  South  America,  where  he  is  said
to  have  landed  in  1302,  near  the  mouths  of  the
Amazon.  Alexander  von  Humboldt  asserts  that
in  the  beginning  of  the  14th  century  there  was  a
legend  in  Europe  of  a  large  continent  far  away  in
the  Atlantic  ocean  where  there  was  a  gigantic-
river  that  had  been  discovered  by  a  Dieppe  pilot,
and  Ludovico  Muratori.  in  discussing  the  origin  of
the  report,  claims  that  the  custom-houses  of
Modena  and  Ferrara  after  1306  exacted  an  enor
mous  duty  on  dye-woods,  known  under  the  name  of
Brasilly,  which  came  from  a  continent  in  the  At
lantic  ocean  that  had  been  discovered  by  a  Dieppe
pilot  named  Xavailles.  Antonio  Capmany,  in  his
history  of  the  trade  of  the  Catalonians.  also  narrates
the  discovery  of  X'availles,  and  asserts  that  he
brought  home  some  dye-woods  that  were  formerly
unknown  in  Europe,  and  that  the  Dieppe  mariners
for  nearly  a  century  had  the  monopoly  of  this
trade,  as  they  alone  knew  where  to  get  them.


482


NAVARRA Y ROCAFULL


NAVARRO  Y  PR  ADO


NAVARRA  Y  ROCAFULL,  Melehor  de  (nah-
var'-rah),  Duke  de  la  Palata.  viceroy  of  Peru,  b.
in  Aragon  about  1025;  d.  in  Portobello,  13  April.
1091.  He  was  appointed  viceroy  of  Peru,  and
sailing  from  Cadiz.  28  Jan.,  1081,  entered  Lima  on
20  Nov.,  and  received  the  government  from  Arch
bishop  Liflan  y  Cisneros  (q.  v.}.  On  20  Feb.,  1084,
he  issued  a  decree  to  protect  the  Indians  against
oppressive  church  taxes,  and  reorganized  the  Uni
versity  of  San  Marcos,  in  Lima.  During  his  govern
ment  Edward  David  (q.  v.)  and  other  pirates  in
vaded  the  Pacific  sea  in  1084,  and  began  hostilities
that  lasted  four  years,  and  cost  $1,610,000,  including
the  expense  for  the  fortifications  of  Lima.  In
October,  1G87,  there  was  an  earthquake  that  de
stroyed  the  city  and  nearly  all  the  churches,  and
the  Viceroy  and'  his  wife  did  everything  to  aid  the
victims,  expending  in  a  year  more  than  $00.000
from  their  own  resources".  He  tried  to  persuade
the  archbishop  and  the  clergy  to  contribute  to  the
reconstruction  of  the  churches,  and  the  royal  treas
ury  gave  $20.000  for  the  repairs  of  the  cathedral,
but  neither  the  prelates  nor  the  clergy  aided  the
government  in  this  work,  and  Archbishop  Lilian
especially  opposed  the  authority  of  the  viceroy.
His  appointed  successor,  the  Count  of  Canete.  died
on  the  voyage  from  Acapulco  to  Paita,  and  in  his
place  the  Count  of  Monclova  was  sent,  who  entered
Lima  and  received  the  government  on  15  Aug..
1689.  Navarra  stayed  in  Lima  until  1091  to  await
an  investigation  of  his  administration,  and  then
sailed  for  Spain  to  occupy  the  presidency  of  the
council  of  Aragon,  but  died  on  the  journey.

NAVARRETE,  Domingo  Fernando  (nah-var-
ray'-teh),  Spanish  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Pefiafiel  in
1610 ;  d.  in  Santo  Domingo  in  December,  1089.
He  became  a  Dominican  in  1030,  was  a  missionary
in  New  Spain  from  1040  till  1648.  afterward  in
Manila  for  nine  years,  and  then  went  to  Macas
sar  and  to  Canton,  lie  was  imprisoned  in  1005.
but  escaped  to  Macao  in  1009,  went  to  Rome,  and
published  a  pamphlet  against  the  Jesuit  policy  in
China,  which  received  the  pope's  approbation  (1073).
He  travelled  through  Europe,  refused  the  bishop
ric  of  China,  and  was  appointed  in  1077  archbishop
of  Santo  Domingo,  where  he  was  conspicuous  by
his  humane  policy  toward  the  Indians.  He  also
labored  to  improve  the  island,  promoted  the  build
ing  of  high-roads  and  bridges,  founded  schools,
erected  churches,  and  in  many  ways  contributed
to  the  welfare  of  the  people.  He  published  •'  Tra-
tados  historicos,  politicos  morales  y  religiosos  de
la  Monarquia  de  China"  (Madrid,  1076);  "  Epis-
tola  ad  fratres  ordinis  in  America  "  (Seville,  1087) ;
and  several  other  works  on  Chinese  institutions.

NAVARRETE,  Manuel  Maria  de,  Mexican
poet,  b.  in  Zatnora,  Mechoacan,  18  June,  1768;  d.
in  Tlalpujahua,  17  July,  1809.  He  studied  Latin
in  Mechoacan,  but  in  consequence  of  family  mis
fortunes  was  obliged  to  begin  business  in  Mexico.
He  entered  the  order  of  San  Francisco  in  the  con
vent  of  Queretaro  at  the  age  of  nineteen  years,  and
resuming  his  studies  was  soon  graduated  in  philoso
phy.  Thence  he  went  to  Morelia  and  afterward  to
Rio  Verde  and  Silao  as  a  missionary,  and  was  ap
pointed  parish  priest  of  San  Antonio  de  Tula,  where
he  gave  his  leisure  time  to  poetry.  His  first  com
positions  appeared  in  the  "  Diario  de  Mexico "  in
1805.  The  literary  society  called  "  La  Arcadia
Mexicana "  invited  him  to  become  a  member,  and
as  such  he  continued  writing  under  the  pen-name
of  "  Anfriso."  His  "  Poema  de  la  Divina  Provi-
dencia"  was  printed  in  Mexico  in  1808.  He  died
as  superior  of  the  convent  of  Tlalpujahua,  and  be
fore  his  death  burned  his  manuscripts,  but  some  of


them  were  preserved  and,  together  with  the  poems
that  appeared  m  the  "  Diario,"  were  published
under  the  title  of  "  Entretenimientos  Poeticos"
(Mexico.  1823  ;  Paris,  1825).

NAVARRETE,  Martin  Fernandez  de.  Span
ish  historian,  b.  in  Abalos,  Rioja,  9  Nov..  1765:  d.
in  Madrid,  8  Oct.,  1844.  He  studied  in  Calahorra
in  1774-'7,  and  then  in  Bergara  till  1780.  and  en
tered  the  navy  in  the  latter  year.  He  was  a  lieu
tenant  in  1783,  resigned  in  1788,  and  determined
to  devote  his  life  to  historical  research.  lie  ob
tained  admission  to  the  archives  of  Simancas,  the
Escurial  palace,  and  those  of  several  monasteries,
and  discovered  among  the  manuscripts  of  the  Duke
del  Infantado  the  sea  journals  of  Columbus.  He-
entering  the  navy  in  1793,  he  served  in  Toulon,
and  became  in  1807  attorney  of  the  admiralty
court.  At  the  time  of  the  French  invasion  he  was
professor  in  the  College  of  Santo  Isidro,  and  fled
to  Cadiz  in  1813,  resuming  his  functions  in  the  ad
miralty  in  1815.  He  left  many  manuscripts,  which
were  published  after  his  death,  and  have  become
standard  works  on  Spanish  and  South  American
history.  His  principal  writings  are  "  Resumen  del
descubrimiento  de  los  Espanoles  en  las  costas  de
California"  (Madrid,  1802):  "Colleccion  de  Viajes
y  descubrimientos  que  hicieron  por  mar  los  Espa-
fioles  desde  fines  del  Siglo  XV."  (7  vols.,  Madrid,
1825-'05) ;  and  "  Colleccion  de  document os  ineditos
para  la  historia  de  Espana "  (8  vols.,  Madrid,
1842-'G7).

NAVARRO  Y  PR  ADO,  Antonio.  Spanish  naval
officer,  b.  in  Madrid,  20  April,  1527 ;  d.  in  Saint
Sebastian.  Spain,  in  1598.  He  was  a  grandson  of
Pedro  Navarro,  Count  Oliveto  entered  the  royal
navy  in  early  life.
and  served  in  It
aly  and  the  Neth
erlands.  Accord
ing  to  Pablo  Mel-
lado  he  accom
panied  the  naval
forces  under  Pe
dro  Mcnendez  de
Aviles  to  Florida
in  1505,  took  part
in  the  expulsion
of  the  French  col
onists  that  termi
nated  with  the
capture  of  Fort
San  Mateo,  was
promoted  about
1570  vice-admiral,
and  in  1579  raised

by  Philip  II.  to  the  rank  of  admiral-in-chief  of  the
naval  forces  of  New  Spain.  In  1580,  leaving
Carthagena  on  the  Spanish  main,  he  met  with  a
terrific  storm  which  disabled  and  separated  him
from  his  fleet,  and  in  this  condition  he  was  attacked
by  three  French  corsairs,  which  he  vanquished. —
His  direct  descendant,  Jos6  Francisco  de  Navar
ro,  merchant,  b.  in  Saint  Sebastian,  Spain.  20  March,
1823,  came  to  the  United  States  in  1841,  and  re
ceived  his  English  education  at  the  Jesuit  college
in  Baltimore.  In  1844  he  went  to  South  America,
but  he  returned  to  the  United  States  after  ten
years'  residence  there  and  in  Cuba,  and  founded
a  large  commercial  house  in  New  York.  In  1803
he  established  the  first  steamship  line  to  South
America,  which  carried  the  mail  for  ten  years,  un
der  a  liberal  subsidy  from  the  U.  S.  government
and  that  of  Brazil.'  In  1878,  with  George  M.
Pullman  and  Cornelius  K.  Garrison,  he  built  the
Metropolitan  elevated  railroad  in  New  York  city,


XAZREZ


NEAL


483


and,  after  its  consolidation  with  the  other  elevated
system  to  form  the  Manhattan  road,  held  office  in
the  latter  company.  In  1884  he  undertook  and
carried  to  completion  a  block  of  apartment-houses
which  is  the  largest  in  the  United  States.  It  fronts
on  Central  park,  New  York,  and  cost  more  than
$0.000,000.  The  style  of  architecture  is  Moorish,
and  the  buildings  are  named  after  the  principal
cities  of  his  native  country.  Although  he  has  not
changed  his  nationality,  he  is  an  admirer  of  the
government  and  people  of  the  United  States,  and
has  taken  great  interest  in  all  public  matters,  po
litical,  economical,  and  philanthropic.  He  has
been  a  member  of  the  Xew  York  chamber  of  com
merce  for  more  than  Thirty  years,  and  has  been
connected  with  the  Equitable  life  insurance  com
pany.  Mr.  Xavarro  has  published  a  pamphlet  on
"Spanish  America''  in  its  commercial  relations
with  this  country  (Xew  York,  1860).

NAZREZ,  Willis,  Canadian  M.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Canada  in  1820  :  d.  in  Shelburne,  XTova  Scotia,
12  Aug.,  1875.  He  entered  the  ministry  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1850,  preached  for
several  years  in  Canada,  and  after  the  separation
of  the  Canadian  church  from  that  in  the  United
States  was  elected  bishop  of  the  colored  Canadian
Methodist  church.  He  was  also  for  many  years
editor  of  the  "  Canadian,"  the  organ  of  that  body.

N'EAI),  Benjamin  Matthias,  author,  b.  in  A*n-
trim.  Franklin  co.,  Pa.,  14  July,  1847.  He  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1870,  studied  law  in  Cham-
bersburg,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  4  June,
1872.  In  1875  he  was  appointed  state  tax  clerk  in
the  auditor  -  general's  office,  which  post  he  held
until  May,  1881,  when  he  resumed  the  practice  of
his  profession  in  Harrisburg.  In  January,  1887,
he  became  editor  of  the  Harrisburg  "  Daily  Patri
ot,"  the  Democratic  organ  at  the  state  capital.  He
has  published  "Sketches  of  Early  Chambersburg  "
(1872);  "Historical  Sketch  of  Franklin  County"
(1876);  "Historical  Xotes  on  the  Early  Govern
ment  and  Legislative  Councils  and  Assemblies  of
Pennsylvania  "  (Harrisburg,  1879) :  "  A  Brief  Re-
view  of  the  Financial  History  of  Pennsylvania,
and  of  the  Methods  of  Auditing  Public  Accounts'"
(1881) ;  "  Xead's  Guide  to  County  Officers  "  (1877) ;
and  was  one  of  the  editors  of  the  "  Colonial  and
Provincial  Laws  of  Pennsylvania  "  (1879).

NEAGLE,  John,  portrait-painter,  b.  in  Boston.
Mass.,  4  Xov.,  1796:  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa,,  17
Sept.,  1865.  Plis  parents  were  residents  of  Phila
delphia,  and  at  the  time  of  his  birth  were  tempo
rarily  visiting  in  Boston.  He  received  a  quarter's
instruction  from  Peter  Ancora,  a  drawing-teacher,
and  gleaned  some  knowledge  of  painting  from  Pet-
ticolas,  a  miniature-painter.  He  began  his  career
as  apprentice  to  a  coach-painter,  but  his  master  was
ambitious  and  took  some  lessons  in  painting  from
Bass  Otis,  from  whom  Xeagle  subsequently  received
in  two  months  all  the  instruction  he  ever  had  from
a  professional  artist.  In  1818  he  determined  to  de
vote  himself  to  portrait-painting,  and  removed  to
Lexington,  Ky.,  and  thence  to  Frankford,  Louis
ville,  and  XTew  Orleans,  but  returned  to  Philadel
phia  two  years  later.  His  first  decided  success
was  a  portrait  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Joseph  Pilmore,
which  is  in  St.  George's  hall.  Philadelphia.  In
1825  he  painted  his  celebrated  full-length  portrait
of  Patrick  Lyon.  the  blacksmith,  at  his  forge,
which  is  now  in  the  Pennsylvania  academy  of  the
fine  arts,  Philadelphia.  The  small  study  for  it  be
longs  to  the  Boston  athenaeum.  The  University
of  Pennsylvania  owns  five  of  his  most  notable
portraits,  the  Union  league,  Philadelphia,  has  his
full-length  portrait  of  Henry  Clay,  the  Philadel


phia  library  that  of  Dr.  Thomas  Parke,  and  the
Museum  of  fine  arts,  Boston,  that  of  Gilbert
Stuart,  and  the  Pennsylvania  historical  society  sev
eral  of  his  Indian  portraits.  Other  important  por
traits  by  Xeagle  are  Mathew  Carey,  Rev.  Dr.  G.
T.  Bedell,  Bishop  Meade,  of  Virginia,  Com.  James
Barron,  and  Judge  Sharswood.  This  last  is  in
the  gallery  of  the  Law  association  of  Philadelphia.
He  also  painted  numerous  dramatic  portraits,  in
cluding  one  of  Edmund  Kean  as  Richard  III.,
which  is  the  only  portrait  of  that  actor  that  was

Eainted  in  this  country.  For  several  years  before
is  death  he  had  been  unable  to  work,  owing  to  a
stroke  of  paralysis  from  which  he  never  recovered.
He  was  one  of  the  founders  and  for  many  years
president  of  the  Artist  fund  society  of  Philadel
phia,  and  was  a  man  of  close  observation  and  re
markable  individuality.  As  a  painter  he  was  a
powerful  colorist,  a  skilful  delineator  of  character,
and  a  vigorous  draughtsman,  and  unquestionably
stands  second  only  to  Gilbert  Stuart  among  Ameri
can  portrait-painters.  In  1820  he  married  a  daugh
ter  of  Thomas  Sully.

XEAL,  Daniel,  English  clergyman,  b.  in  Lon
don,  14  Dec.,  1678  :  d.  in  Bath,  England,  in  April,
1742.  He  was  for  many  years  pastor  of  an  inde
pendent  congregation  in  London,  and  delivered
lectures  on  Protestant  polemics  that  were  attended
by  the  most  learned  men  of  the  day.  He  published
a  "  History  of  Xew  England,"  containing  an  ac
count  of  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  affairs  of  the
colony  to  the  year  1700,  to  which  is  added  an  ap
pendix  containing  their  charter,  their  ecclesiastical
discipline,  and  their  municipal  laws  (2  vols,  Lon
don,  1720) ;  "  X'arrative  of  the  Inoculation  of
Small-Pox  in  Xew  England  "  (1722) ;  and  "  History
of  the  Puritans  from  the  Reformation  in  1517  till
the  Revolution  in  1688  "  (4  vols.,  London,  1732-'8 ;
new  ed.,  with  life  and  writings  of  the  author  by
Joshua  Toulmin,  Bath,  1793;  abridged  by  Edward
Payson,  1812;  American  ed.,  with  notes  by  John
0.  Choules,  Xew  York,  1844).

NEAL,  David  Dolloff,  artist,  b.  in  Lowell,
Mass.,  20  Oct.,  1837.  His  talent  for  drawing
showed  itself  at  an  early  age,  and  after  going  to
Xew  Orleans  he  attempted  in  his  leisure  there  to
improve  himself  in  the  art  that  he  had  already
determined  to  follow.  He  decided  to  go  to  San
Francisco,  and  after  working  there  for  some  time,
making  drawings  on  wood  and  occasionally  paint
ing  portraits,  he  was  enabled,  about  1862.  through
the  generosity  of  a  friend,  to  execute  his  long-
cherished  plan  of  going  to  Europe.  He  became  a
pupil  of  the  Royal  academy  in  Munich,  and  a  year
later  married  a  daughter  of  the  Chevalier  Ain-
miiller,  whose  studio  he  entered,  and  received  there
his  first  regular  lessons  in  oil-painting.  For  some
time  Xeal  devoted  himself  mainly  to  the  painting
of  interiors,  among  his  works  of  that  class  being
"  Chapel  of  the  Xonberg  Convent,  Salzburg  "
(1864):  "Chapel  of  the  Kings  at  Westminster";
"  St.  Mark's "  (1869) ;  and  "  On  the  Grand  Canal,
Venice."  But  his  original  purpose  of  devoting
himself  to  figure-painting  was  not  forgotten,  and,
when  opportunity  offered,  he  became  a  pupil  of
Alexander  Wagner,  and  about  1867  of  Carl  von
Piloty,  with  whom  he  studied  for  several  years.
His  first  figure  composition,  "James  Watt,"  was
exhibited  at  the  Royal  academy  in  London,  and  in
1875  he  painted  his"  best-known  work.  "  The  First
Meeting  of  Mary  Stuart  and  Rizzio."  When  it  was
first  exhibited,  in  1876,  it  received  the  great  medal
from  the  Royal  Bavarian  academy.  His  other
notable  works  include  •'  Retour  du  Chasse  "  (1870) ;
"The  Burgomaster"  (1873);  and  "Oliver  Crom-


484


NEAL


NEAL


well  visits  John  Milton  "  (1883).  Mr.  Neal  has  ex
hibited  in  London,  Munich,  and  New  York,  but
his  art-career  has  been  passed  principally  in  Mu
nich,  where,  with  the  exception  of  occasional  visits
to  the  United  States,  he  has  resided.

NEAL,  John,  author,  b.  in  Falmouth,  Mass,
(now  Portland,  Me.),  25  Aug.,  1793 ;  d.  there,  21
June,  1876.  He  was  of  English  descent,  and  for
two  generations  of  Quaker  stock  on  both  sides.  He
left  school  at  twelve
years  of  age,  but  ed
ucated  himself  by
continuous  reading,
which  he  systemati
cally  pursued  through
life.  Neal  was  vari
ously  employed  as
shop-boy,  accountant,
and  salesman,  and
then  taught  penman
ship,  drawing,  and
painting,  though  he
was  without  experi
ence.  Later  he  estab
lished  himself  in  the

..  dry  -  goods trade in

n  Boston,  and  then  be

s ,  ;/ s£\ , fl formed  a  partnership
</  (r/lAA/S^jZ^tsO in Baltimore with
John Pierpont, the

poet.  This  firm  failed  in  trade  in  1810,  and  dis
solved,  taking  out  of  the  business  only  a  warm  and
life-long  friendship.  Neal  then  studied  law  in  Bal
timore,  was  a  member  of  the  Delphian  club  of  that
city,  famous  for  its  wits,  and  supported  himself
by  his  pen,  copying,  indexing,  and  writing  poems,
novels,  essays,  and  criticisms  for  the  press.  His  first
productions  appeared  in  the  "  Portico"  magazine.
He  was  admitted  to  the  Maryland  bar  in  1819,  and
practised  his  profession.  In  1823  he  sailed  for  Eng
land,  as  he  said,  "  to  answer  on  the  spot  the  question
'Who  reads  an  American  book?'"  Asa  pioneer  in
American  literature  his  success  at  home  and  abroad
was  a  surprise  to  all.  Preceding  James  Fenimore
Cooper  by  several  years,  while  Nathaniel  Haw
thorne  was  yet  a  boy  and  his  compatriot,  Charles
Brockden  Brown,  less  widely  known  or  less  quickly
accepted,  Neal  attracted  and  compelled  attention
to  American  topics  and  American  writings  at  a
time  when  English  literature  was  regarded  as  a
monopoly  of  Great  Britain.  He  was  the  first  Ameri
can  contributor  to  the  English  and  Scotch  quarter
lies.  His  sketches  of  the  five  American  presidents
and  the  five  candidates  for  the  presidency  in
"  Blackwood's,"  and  a  series  of  like  articles  on
American  politics  and  customs,  won  for  the  young
author  reputation  and  money.  At  this  time,  though
in  need  of  money  and,  as  he  said,  "  hopelessly  in
debt,  but  hopeful,"  he  spent  the  whole  of  his  first
'•  Blackwood "  check  for  two  gold  pencils  that
caught  his  eye  in  a  shop-window,  and  sent  one  to
his  twin  sister,  Rachel,  who  was  then  teaching
school  in  Portland.  His  writings  attracted  the
notice  of  Jeremy  Bentham,  who  invited  and  easily
persuaded  "  Yankee  Neal "  to  come  and  live  with
him  as  one  of  his  students  and  secretaries,  where
various  literary  celebrities  were  to  be  met.  In  1827
Neal  returned  to  the  United  States,  intending  to
resume  the  practice  of  law  in  Baltimore,  but,  in
consequence  of  opposition  and  threatened  perse
cution  from  his  fellow-townsmen  when  he  visited
his  sister,  he  characteristically  sent  for  his  law-
library  and  opened  his  offices  in  his  native  place.
On  1  Jan.,  1828,  he  began  his  editorship  of  "The
Yankee,"  and  for  half  a  century  was  a  frequent


but  irregular  contributor  to  most  of  the  maga
zines  and  newspapers.  He  wrote  much  of  what
is  known  as  Paul  Allen's  "  History  of  the  Ameri
can  Revolution  "  in  a  wonderfully  short  time,  and
his  pen  remained  active  through  life.

He  was  an  earnest  opponent  of  capital  punish
ment,  more  especially  of  public  executions,  and  he
was  the  first  to  advocate  in  1838,  in  a  Fourth-of-
July  oration,  the  right  of  woman  suffrage.  He
was  abstemiously  temperate,  yet  he  wrote  in  oppo
sition  to  the  Maine  liquor  law.  He  was  a  firm  be
liever  in  physical  training,  and  established  the
first  gymnasium  in  this  country,  copied  from  the
foreign  models,  and,  being  an  expert  gymnast,
horseman,  swordsman,  and  boxer,  he  established
and  taught  classes  of  young  men,  and  even  in  his
last  years  kept  up  his  own  physical  exercise  as  his
only  medicine.  Phrenology,  mesmerism,  and  spirit
ualism,  one  after  another,  attracted  his  attention
and  examination,  and  counted  him  as  among
!  their  fairest  and  least  prejudiced  investigators.
With  a  quick  eye  and  ready  sympathy  he  sought
out,  welcomed,  and  encouraged  young  men,  or
gently  and  successfully  discouraged  those  that
afterward  were  grateful  for  his  advice.  Edgar  A.
Poe  received  his  first  encouragement  from  Mr.
Neal.  With  the  instincts  of  a  born  journalist,  he
dashed  off  novels  with  great  rapidity,  while,  in  the
stern  spirit  of  a  reformer,  he  edited  forgotten
newspapers.  He  fulminated  against  fleeting  and
frivolous  opinions,  and  whipped  into  a  light  and
airy  froth  some  of  the  graver  issues  of  life.  He
was  read  out  of  the  Society  of  Friends  in  his  youth,
as  he  says,  "  for  knocking  a  man  head  over  heels,
for  writing  a  tragedy,  for  paying  a  militia  fine,
and  for  desiring  to  be  turned  out  whether  or  no,"
but  he  became  late  in  life  an  earnest  Christian,
uniting  with  the  church  in  1850.  His  works  in
clude  "Keep  Cool"  (2  vols.,  Baltimore,  1817);
"Niagara"  (1819);  "Goldan"  (1819):  "Errata"
(2  vols.,  New  York,  1823):  "Randolph"  (1823);
"  Seventy-Six  "  (2  vols.,  Baltimore,  1823) ;  "  Logan  "
(4  vols.,  London,  1823);  "Brother  Jonathan"  (3
vols.,  1825);  "Rachel  Dyer"  (Portland,  1828);
"  Principles  of  Legislation."  translated  from  the
manuscript  of  Jeremy  Bentham,  with  biographies
of  Bentham  and  Pierre  Dumont  (Boston,  1830) :
"The  Down  Easters"  (2  vols..  New  York,  1833);
"  One  Word  More  "  (Portland,  1854) ;  "  True  Wom
anhood  "  (Boston,  1859);  "Wandering  Recollec
tions  of  a  Somewhat  Busy  Life"  (1869);  and
"Great  Mysteries  and  Little'Plagues  "  (1870).

NEAL,  Joseph  Clay,  humorist,  b.  in  Green
land,  N.  II.,  3  Feb.,  1807;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
18  July,  1847.  His
father,  who  was  a
clergyman,  died
when  the  son  was
two  years  old.  Jo
seph  passed  much
of  his  early  life  in
Pottsville,  "Pa.,  and
settled  in  1830  in
Philadelphia,  where
in  1831-'44  he  edit
ed  the  "  Pennsylva-
nian."  After  a  tour
abroad  in  1842  for
the  benefit  of  his
health  he  estab
lished  the  "  Satur-
day  Gazette,"  which
proved  remarkably
successful  and  abounded  in  humorous  satire.  In
1846  he  married  Alice  Bradley.  (See  HAVEN,


XEALE


XECKERE


485


ALICE  B.)  Xeal  possessed  much  genial  humor,
which  he  devoted  to  the  description  of  a  pecul
iar  class  of  small  spendthrifts,  inferior  pretend
ers  to  fashion,  bores,  and  loafers.  A  quaint  vein
of  speculation  ran  through  his  humorous  dia
logues.  His  first  character  sketches  were  pub
lished  in  the  "  Pennsylvanian  "  under  the  title  of
the  "  City  Worthies."  and  were  subsequently  col
lected  in  book-form  as  "  Charcoal  Sketches "
(Philadelphia,  1837'),  and  republished  in  London
under  the  auspices  of  Charles  Dickens.  They
were  followed  by  "  Peter  Ploddy  and  other  Oddi
ties  "  (1844),  and  a  second  series  of  "  Charcoal
Sketches,"  published  by  his  widow  (1849).

XEALE,  Leonard,  'archbishop,  b.  in  Port  To
bacco.  Md..  15  Oct.,  1746;  d.  in  Georgetown.  D.  C..
15  June,  1817.  He  belonged  to  an  old  Roman
Catholic  family  that  settled  in  Maryland  early  in
the  17th  century.  He  was  educated  in  the  Col
lege  of  St.  Omer,  France,  and  afterward  at  Bruges
and  Liege,  Belgium,  became  a  member  of  the  So
ciety  of  Jesus,  and  after  his  ordination  taught  in
colleges  and  officiated  as  pastor  in  different  places
in  Europe.  He  was  teaching  in  the  Jesuit  college
of  Bruges  when  that  institution  was  seized  by  the
Austro-Belgian  government,  and  he  was  expelled
with  the  other  Jesuits.  He  then  went  to  England,
where  he  had  charge  of  a  small  congregation,  but
after  several  years  he  sailed  in  1779  for  Demerara.
where  he  worked  zealously  among  the  natives  and
settlers.  At  length  his  health  was  almost  ruined
by  the  inclemency  of  the  climate  and  the  severity
of  his  labors.  He  left  Demerara  in  January,  1783,
and  after  a  perilous  voyage,  in  which  he  fell  into
the  hands  of  British  cruisers,  he  reached  the  United
States  in  April.  In  June  he  attended  a  meeting
of  the  clergy  of  Maryland  at  Whitemarsh  and  took
an  active  part  in  its  deliberations.  He  was  sta
tioned  at  St.  Thomas's  Manor  among  his  relatives
till  1793.  when  he  went  to  Philadelphia  to  attend
the  victims  of  the  yellow-fever  epidemic,  although
he  was  in  delicate  health.  He  was  incessant  in
his  attentions  to  the  sick  and  dying,  and  on  the
reappearance  of  the  pestilence  in  1797-'8  he  re
sumed  his  former  exertions  until  he  was  prostrated
by  the  disease.  While  he  was  in  Philadelphia  he
was  appointed  vicar  -  general  for  the  northern
states.  In  1799  he  was  made  president  of  George
town  college,  which  had  been  founded  a  few  years
before  by  the  Jesuits  of  Maryland.  His  experi
ence  in  European  colleges  was  of  great  service  to
this  institution,  which  made  rapid  strides  under
his  management.  He  had  intended  to  found  a
sisterhood  in  Philadelphia,  but  of  the  three  ladies
who  placed  themselves  under  his  direction  two
died  of  yellow  fever.  He  invited  Miss  Lalor,  the
survivor,  to  open  a  school  in  Georgetown  under
his  direction,  which  was  the  beginning  of  what  is
now  the  oldest  Roman  Catholic  female  academy
within  the  limits  of  the  thirteen  original  states.
By  his  exertions  other  ladies  joined  Miss  Lalor,
and  the  community  was  organized  as  the  order  of
Visitation  Xuns,  but  it  did  not  receive  the  formal
sanction  of  the  pope  until  1818.  He  was  conse
crated  bishop  of  Gortyna  in  partibus  infidelium,
1  Dec.,  1800,  and  made  coadjutor  of  the  primate
of  the  United  States.  He  attended  a  council  of
bishops  in  Baltimore  in  1810,  and  his  influence
was  felt  in  the  rules  drawn  up  by  that  body  for
the  administration  of  the  dioceses.  Bishop  Xeale
succeeded  to  the  archbishopric  of  Baltimore  in
1815.  and  in  1816  received  the  pallium.

XEALE,  Rollin  Heber,  clergyman,  b.  in  South-
ington,  Conn.,  23  Feb.,  1808;  d.  "in  Boston.  Mass..
19  Sept.,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbian


college.  Washington,  D.  C.,  in  1830,  and  at  Xewton
theological  seminary  in  1833. While  pursuing  his
studies  at  Xewton  lie  was  ordained  to  the  ministry,
and  in  1834  became  pastor  of  the  1st  Baptist  church
in  Xeeclham.  Mass. In  1837  he  was  called  to  the
j  pastorate  of  the  1st  Baptist  church  in  Boston,  and
'••  he  continued  in  that  relation  for  nearly  forty  years.
j  He  was  one  of  the  most  eloquent  and  successful
preachers  of  his  day. The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  con
ferred  on  him  by  Brown  in  1850  and  by  Harvard  in
1857. Of  the  latter  he  was  for  many  years  one  of
the  overseers. He  published  "  The  Burning  Bush  "
and  many  sermons  and  addresses. See  a  memorial
discourse  by  William  Hague  (Boston,  1880).

NEBINGER,  Andrew,  physician,  b.  in  Phila
delphia.  Pa..  12  Dec.,  1819  ;  d.  there.  12  April,  1886.
He  was  educated  in  private  schools,  and  at  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl
vania,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1850.  Previous
ly  he  had  engaged  in  the  drug  business  for  several
years.  He  attained  to  a  large  practice,  was  one  of
the  incorporators  of  Philadelphia  county  medical
society,  and  in  1880  president  of  the  state  society.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  surgeon-in-charge  of
the  Cooper-shop  volunteer  hospital  and  dispensary.
He  was  assisted  by  his  brothers,  and  their  attentions
to  the  thousands  of  soldiers  that  passed  through
the  city  on  their  way  to  the  front  or  on  their  re
turn  made  them  well  known.  Dr.  X'ebinger  re
tired  from  practice  in  1870  and  gave  his  attention
to  his  duties  in  connection  with  the  board  of  edu
cation,  of  which  he  had  been  a  member  since  1868,
and  to  the  management  of  several  charitable  insti
tutions.  To  one  of  these.  St.  Agnes's  hospital,  he
left  a  large  bequest.  He  was  the  author  of  various
medical  papers  and  addresses  to  societies.  See  a
pamphlet  memoir  by  Dr.  J.  H.  Grove  (Philadelphia,
1886). — His  brother."  George  Washington,  physi
cian,  b.  in  Philadelphia.  23  July,  1824;  d.  there,  8
March,  1868,  first  studied  pharmacy,  and  after
ward  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1862.  He  acquired  an  exten
sive  practice,  during  the  civil  war  served  for  a
time  as  a  volunteer  surgeon,  and  after  the  battle
of  Antietam  had  charge  of  all  the  hospitals  about
Hagerstown.  It  is  said  that  when  it  was  feared
that  Lee  would  advance  after  the  battle  of  Antie
tam,  Dr.  Xebinger  was  the  only  volunteer  surgeon
that  remained  at  his  post.  He  was  a  delegate  to
several  state  and  national  Democratic  conventions,
and  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1856.  In  1858  he
ran  for  congress,  as  a  Douglas  Democrat,  against
Thomas  B.  Florence,  a  Buchanan  Democrat,  but
was  not  successful.  He  was  comptroller  of  public
schools  for  many  years,  and  was  for  nine  years  one
of  the  directors  of  Girard  college.  See  'Xebinger
Memorial  "  (Philadelphia.  1883). — Another  brother,
Robert  (1828-'88),  also  became  a  physician,  and
aided  his  brothers  in  the  management  of  the  Coop
er-shop  hospital,  of  which  he  was  the  pharmacist.
The  three  brothers  were  unmarried,  and  were  men
of  fine  personal  appearance.

NECKERE,  Leo  Raymond  de,  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Wevelghem,  Belgium,  in  1800 ;  d.  in  Xew  Or
leans  in  1833.  He  studied  classics  in  the  College
of  Roulers,  West  Flanders,  and  philosophy  in  the
Seminary  of  Ghent.  In  1817  he  volunteered  for
the  Louisiana  mission  with  other  members  of  the
Lazarist  order,  which  he  had  joined.  He  remained
some  months  the  guest  of  Charles  Carroll,  of  Car-
rollton,  and  then  proceeded  west.  He  studied  the
ology  in  the  Seminary  of  Bardstown,  Ky.,  and  in
1820  entered  the  Seminary  of  the  Barrens,  which
was  conducted  by  the  Lazarists.  In  1822  he  was
raised  to  the  priesthood  before  the  canonical  age,


486


NECOCHEA


NEELY


on  account  of  his  piety  and  learning.  At  the  age
of  twenty-six  he  was  appointed  superior  of  the
Barrens,  and,  as  the  members  of  the  community
were  from  every  part  of  Europe,  lie  gave  confer
ences  in  the  chapel  of  the  seminary  in  Italian,  Eng
lish,  French,  German,  and  Walloon.  His  excessive
labors,  however,  injured  his  constitution,  and,  to  re
new  his  strength,  he  was  sent  to  New  Orleans,  where
he  became  noted  as  a  pulpit  orator.  On  his  return
to  the  Barrens  he  threw  himself  into  his  duties  as
professor  and  missionary  with  such  zeal  that  his
health  failed  again.  He  visited  his  native  country
in  1827,  stopped  at  the  Lazarist  seminary  of
Amiens,  and,  while  there,  received  an  order  to  go
to  Rome.  He  arrived  in  that  city  in  1828,  and  was
informed  that  he  had  been  nominated  bishop  of
New  Orleans.  He  begged  to  be  allowed  to  decline
the  honor,  but  without  effect.  His  dread  of  the
appointment  brought  on  a  relapse,  but  with  careful
nursing  he  recovered,  and  sailed  for  the  United
States  in  1829.  When  the  papal  rescript  arrived  in
New  Orleans  appointing  him  bishop,  he  again  insist
ed  on  declining,  but  at  last  yielded  to  a  positive  com
mand  from  Rome  to  accept  it.  and  was  consecrated
in  1830.  His  health  continued  feeble,  and  he  made
several  petitions  for  permission  to  resign  his  see,
which  were  refused.  He  was  spending  the  season
at  St.  Michel's  when  yellow  fever  broke  out  in  New
Orleans  in  1833.  Notwithstanding  the  protests  of
his  friends,  he  returned  at  once  to  the  city  and
ministered  to  the  victims  of  the  pestilence  until  he
himself  was  fatally  attacked.

NECOCHEA,  EusfCMiio  (nay-co-chay '-ah), Chilian
soldier,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayres  in  1797;  a.  in  Santiago,
Chili,  in  1807.  From  his  early  years  he  was  deeply
interested  in  the  struggle  for  the  independence  of
his  country,  and  in  1813  engaged  in  the  campaign
of  Santa  Fe.  In  1817  he  formed  part  of  the  army
of  the  Andes  as  lieutenant  of  mounted  grenadiers
under  his  brother  Mariano,  and  participated  in  the
campaign  of  Chili  till  1820,  being  promoted  major.
He  then  took  part  in  the  campaign  of  Peru  till
1823,  and  reached  the  rank  of  colonel.  In  1824  he
obtained  leave  of  absence  from  the  Peruvian  army
and  returned  to  Buenos  Ayres,  where  he  remained
till  1830.  In  that  year  he  went  back  to  Chili  and
was  appointed  intendant  of  the  province  of  Chiloe.
In  1837  he  re-entered  the  Chilian  army  and  was
made  commander  of  the  cavalry  in  the  Peruvian
expedition,  but  after  the  death  of  Vice-President
Portales  and  the  consequent  failure  of  the  expedi
tion  he  was  appointed  military  governor  of  Val
paraiso.  He  became  substitute  judge  of  the  mili
tary  court  of  appeals  in  1842,  judge  in  1846,  in
tendant  of  the  province  of  Maule  in  1849,  and  in
1850  inspector-general  of  militia  and  military  com
mander  of  the  province  of  Santiago.  Pie  was
several  times  deputy  to  congress  and  provincial
elector,  and  in  1800  was  promoted  brigadier. — His
brother.  Mariano,  Peruvian  soldier,  b.  in  Buenos
Ayres,  7  Sept.,  1790;  d.  in  Miraflores,  near  Lima,
in  1849.  In  1802  he  was  sent  to  Spain  for  his
education,  but  he  was  obliged  to  return  home  in
1811  on  account  of  the  death  of  his  father.  He
took  an  active  part  in  the  struggle  for  independ
ence,  and  was  in  the  campaigns  in  upper  Peru
from  1811  till  1814.  In  1817  he  went  to  Chili  in
the  Army  of  the  Andes  as  commander  of  a  regi
ment  of  mounted  grenadiers,  and  took  part  in  the
whole  campaign  of  Chili  under  Gen.  San  Martin.
He  accompanied  the  latter  to  Peru,  was  promoted
brigadier  for  his  valor  in  the  siege  of  Callao,  and
afterward  as  commander  of  cavalry  engaged  in  the
campaign  of  Peru,  assisting  in  the  battle  of  Junin.
0  Aug.,  1824,  where  he  was  dangerously  wounded


and  saved  from  death  by  a  Spanish  soldier  who
formerly  had  served  under  him  in  the  Army  of  the
Andes. He  was  promoted  general  of  division,  and
after  the  independence  of  Peru  was  established  re
turned  to Buenos  Ayres,  where  he took  part  as
commander  of  a  body  of  volunteer  cavalry  in  the
war  against  Brazil  in  1826-'7. In  the  latter  year
he  returned  to  Peru,  participated  in  the  war  against
Colombia,  and  was  commander  of Guayaquil in
!  1828. In  consequence  of  a  military  conspiracy  in
|  Lima,  Necochea,  with several other  officers,  was
i  summarily  ordered  to  leave  the  country  without  a
I  hearing,  and  he  returned  to  congress  his  general's
commission,  saying  that  he  wished  to  carry  from
Peru  nothing but  his honorable  wounds. Later,
when  his  innocence  was  recognized  in  Peru,  he  re
turned  to  that  country  and  received  the  rank  of
grand-marshal,  but  saw  no  more  active  service,  and
retired,  to  private  life.

NEE.  Isidore  Charles  Sigisinond  (nay),  West"
Indian  botanist,  b.  in  St.  Martin,  W.  I.,  in  1784 ;  d.
in  Paris,  France,  in  1837.  He  received  his  educa
tion  in  New  Orleans,  returned  in  1808  to  the  West
Indies,  and  in  the  spring  of  1810  went  to  South
America.  After  visiting  Guiana  and  the  important
cities  of  Brazil,  lie  sailed  for  Lima,  explored  the
Andes,  and  ascended  the  volcanoes  Pichincha  and
Chimborazo.  In  1814  he  went  to  Mexico,  where
he  sojourned  several  years,  devoting  his  time  to
researches  in  libraries.  He  then  settled  in  France
and  published  "  Flora  Mexicana,  sen  genera  et
species  plantariim  quai  in  Mexico  Crescent"  (2
vols.,  Paris,  1827);  "Les  volcans  des  Andes  de
I'Equateur ;  tine  ascension  du  Pichincha  et  du  Chim-
borazo "  (1829);  "  Memoire  sur  les  hieroglyphes
Mexicains"  (1830);  and  "Etudes  sur  1'aiialogic
de  1'ecriture  cunique  et  des  hieroglyphes  Egyptiens
et  Mexicains"  (1832).

NEEDHAM,  Francis  Jack,  Earl  of  Kilmosey,
British  soldier,  b.  in  County  Down,  Ireland.  15
April,  1748;  d.  there,  21  Nov.,  1832.  He  was  a
cornet  in  the  18th  dragoons  in  1762,  captain  of  the
17th  dragoons  in  1774,  served  throughout  the
American  Revolution,  engaging  in  the  blockade  of
Boston,  and  in  the  Jersey  and  Virginia  campaigns,
and  surrendering  with  Cornwallis  at  Yorktown.
He  became  colonel  and  aide-de-camp  to  the  king
in  1793,  the  next  year  was  adjutant-general  to
Lord  Moira  in  the  expedition  to  the  coast  of
France,  served  throughout  the  Irish  rebellion,  and
participated  in  the  battle  of  Vinegar  Hill.  He  was
commissioned  major-general  in  1795,  lieutenant-
general  in  1802,  and  general  in  1812,  and  received
the  patent  of  his  earldom  in  1822.

NEELY,  Henry  Adams,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Fayetteville,  N.  Y.,  14  May,  1830.  lie  was  gradu
ated  at  Geneva  (now  Hobart)  college  in  1849,
studied  theology  under  Bishop  De  Lancey,  and
meanwhile  was  tutor  in  the  college  in  1850.  He
was  ordained  deacon  in  Trinity  church,  Geneva,
N.  Y.,  by  Bishop  De  Lancey,  i9  Dec.,  1852,  and
priest  in  Trinity  church,  Utica,  N.  Y..  by  the  same
bishop,  18  June,  1854.  He  became  rector  of  Cal
vary  church,  Utica,  in  1853.  After  two  years'  ser
vice  he  accepted  a  call  to  Christ  church,  Rochester.
N.  Y.,  in  1855,  and  held  that  post  until  1802,  when
he  became  chaplain  of  Hobart  college.  In. 1864  he
removed  to  New  York  city,  having  been  chosen  as
sistant  minister  in  Trinity  parish,  with  special
charge  of  Trinity  chapel.  He  received  the  degree
of  S.  T.  D.  from  Hobart  in  1866,  and  the  same  from
Bishops'  college,  Quebec,  Canada,  in  1875.  Having
been  elected  second  bishop  of  Maine,  he  was  con
secrated  in  Trinity  chapel,  New  York,  25  Jan.,
1867.  On  removing  to  Maine  he  became  rector  of


NEGLEY


NEILL


487


St.  Luke's  church,  Portland,  which  was  constituted
the  cathedral  parish  of  the  diocese.  Not  long  af
terward  a  proper  cathedral  church  was  erected,
and  was  consecrated,  18  Oct.,  1877.  Bishop  Neely
has  published  a  few  occasional  sermons,  several  ad
dresses  to  his  convention,  and  various  contribu
tions  to  current  church  literature.

NEGLEY,  James  Scott,  soldier,  b.  in  East
Liberty,  Alleghany  co.,  Pa.,  26  Dec.,  1826.  He
was  educated  at  Western  university,  enlisted  in
the  1st  Pennsylvania  regiment  in  1846,  and  served
in  most  of  the  important  engagements  during  the
Mexican  war,  at  the  conclusion  of  which  becom
ing  a  farmer  and  horticulturist.  He  raised  a  bri
gade  of  three  months'  volunteers  at  the  begin
ning  of  the  civil  war,  was  commissioned  briga
dier-general  of  volunteers  in  April,  1861,  served
in  Alabama  and  Tennessee  with  the  Army  of  the
Ohio,  and  at  the  battle  of  Lavergne,  7  Oct..  1862,
was  in  command,  defeating  the  Confederates  un
der  Gen.  Richard  H.  Anderson  and  Gen.  Nathan
B.  Forrest.  lie  was  promoted  major-general  for
gallantry  at  Stone  River,  29  Nov..  1862.  was  en
gaged  in  the  Georgia  campaign,  and  at  the  battle
of  Chickamauga,  19-20  Sept.,  1863,  held  Owen's
Gap.  He  settled  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  after  the  war
and  represented  that  city  in  congress  in  1869-'75
and  in  1885-' 7,  being  elected  as  a  Republican.  He
then  removed  to  New  York  city.

NEGREIROS,  Andre  Vidal  de  (nay-gray -e-
ros),  Brazilian  patriot,  b.  in  Parahyba  early  in  the
17th  century  ;  d.  in  Olinda,  10  Jan.,  1681.  "in  1636
he  successfully  defended  Bahia  against  Prince
Maurice  of  Nassau  (q.  v.),  and,  after  the  capture  of
that  place  by  the  Dutch  in  1638,  he  again  expelled
them.  After  the  re-establishment  of  Portuguese
independence  in  1640,  when  the  Dutch  were  not
willing  to  surrender  their  conquests  to  the  Portu
guese,  with  whom  the  states-general  had  concluded
a  treaty  of  peace,  Negreiros  left  for  Pernambuco  in
1644  to  incite  an  insurrection,  which  began  on  13
June.  He  openly  took  the  direction  of  the  patriot
forces,  and  after  repeated  victories  shut  up  the
invaders  in  their  fortified  posts.  But  the  Portu
guese  government  did  not  aid  the  patriots,  and
they  were  forced  to  resort  to  guerilla  warfare.  In
1646  Negreiros  was  called  to  the  province  of  Rio
Grande,  and  in  a  short  time  vanquished  the  Dutch
there  and  in  Parahyba,  winning  the  two  battles  of
Guarapes  in  1648  and  1649.  At  last  the  Dutch
held  only  the  fortress  of  Recife,  and  in  1634  Negre
iros  attacked  them  there,  and  forced  the  commander
to  sign  on  26  Jan.  the  capitulation  of  Campinha  de
Taborda,  by  which  he  evacuated  the  city  of  Recife
and  the  provinces  of  Hamaraca,  Rio  Grande,  and
Parahyba.  As  the  principal  cause  of  this  triumph.
Negreiros  was  commissioned  to  carry  the  notice  of
the  expulsion  of  the  Dutch  to  Portugal,  and  King
John  IV.  made  him  a  grandee  and  governor  of
Maranhao.  Later  he  was  governor-general  of  An
gola,  where  he  won  the  victory  of  Anabouillo,  but
returned  after  a  few  years  to  his  native  country.

NEGRIER,  Jules  Cesar  Antonin  (nay-gre-
ay),  French  missionary,  b.  in  Macon  in  1516 ;  d.  in
Lima,  Peru,  in  1571.  He  was  a  Franciscan,  and
was  sent  about  1540  to  the  Indians  of  New  Spain,
but  removed  later  to  South  America  and  resided
for  twenty-five  years  in  Peru.  He  left  two  curious
manuscripts,  which  were  afterward  published  in
Paris,  •'  Histoire  du  grand  voyage  fait  a  la  Nou-
velle  Espagne,  et  dans  le  royaume  communement
appele  Perou,  des  nations  qui  habitait  ces  regions,
des  mceurs  dicelles,  et  autres  choses  interessantes  "
(2  yols.,  Paris,  1603) ;  and  "  Le  bref  recit  de  la  con-
quete  faiete  par  les  Espagnols  du  royaume  de


Perou,  avec  1'histoire  de  1'enorme  rangon  payee  par
le  souverain.des  Incas,  et  des  vicissitudes  du  Mar
quis  Pizarre  "  (1604).

NEHLIG,  Victor  (nay-lig),  artist,  b.  in  Paris.
France,  in  1830.  He  was  the  pupil  of  Leon  Cog-
niet  and  Abel  de  Pujol,  came  to  the  United  States
in  1856,  and,  after  residing  for  some  time  in  Ha
vana,  Cuba,  settled  in  New  York.  Here  he  was
elected  an  associate  of  the  National  academy  in
1863  and  academician  in  1870.  He  returned  to
Europe  in  1872.  Mr.  Nehlig's  paintings  are  char
acterized  by  admirable  drawing  of  the  figure,  and
he  has  done  some  effective  work  in  the  way  of
book  illustration.  His  principal  works,  many  of
which  are  illustrative  of  American  history,  are
"  The  Cavalry  Charge  of  St.  Harry  B.  Hidden  ''
(1863).  in  the  New  York  historical  society ;  "  The
Artist's  Dream  "  ;  "  The  Captive  Huguenot  "  :
"  Gertrude  of  Wyoming  "  ;  "  Hiawatha  and  Minne-
haha  "  ;  "  Armorer  in  the  Olden  Time  "  ;  "  Battle
at  Antietam  " ;  "  Battle  of  Gettysburg  "  :  "  Wait-

j  ing  for  my  Enemy":  "Serenade";  "The  Bravo"
(1870);  "Mahogany  Cutting"  (1871);  and  "The
Princess  Pocahontas"  (1869-'72).

NEILL,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  9
July,  1819;  d.  there,  11  Feb.,  1880.  His  father,
Henry,  was  a  well-known  physician  of  Philadel
phia.  The  son  was  graduated  in  arts  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1837  and  in  medicine
in  1840.  He  began  practice  in  Philadelphia,  spent
a  short  time  in  the  West  Indies  in  1841,  and  in
1842  was  appointed  assistant  demonstrator  of  anat
omy  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  where  in
1845  he  became  demonstrator.  In  1847  he  was
elected  surgeon  to  Wills  hospital  and  lectured  on
anatomy  at  the  Medical  institute  of  Philadelphia,
and  in  1849  he  was  appointed  physician  to  the
Southeastern  cholera  hospital,  where  his  method  of
treatment  formed  the  basis  of  a  report  that  was

i  published  by  the  College  of  physicians  and  sur
geons.  He  "was  elected  professor  of  surgery  in
Pennsylvania  college.  Gettysburg,  in  1854,  surgeon
to  the"  Philadelphia  hospital  in  1855,  surgeon  in
charge  of  military  hospitals  in  Philadelphia  in  1861,
and  organized  the  first  eight  general  hospitals
of  that  city.  In  1862  he  was  commissioned  sur
geon  of  U.  S.  volunteers,  and  in  1863  appointed
medical  director  of  the  forces  from  Pennsylvania.
The  same  year  he  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel
for  meritorious  services.  Dr.  Neill  established  the
hospital  at  Dickinson  college  after  the  bombard
ment  of  Carlisle,  also  the  hospitals  at  Hagerstown,
and  was  afterward  appointed  port  surgeon  at  Phil
adelphia.  In  1874  he  became  professor  of  clinical
surgery  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  which
chair  he  resigned'in  May,  1877.  In  addition  to
many  articles  in  medical  journals  he  wrote  "  Neill
on  the  Veins"  (Philadelphia.  1852);  and,  in  con
nection  with  Prof.  Francis  G.  Smith,  "  Neil!  and
Smith's  Compend  of  Medicine"  (Philadelphia,
1848).— His  brother.  Edward  Duffleld,  author,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  9  Aug.,  1823,  after  studying  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  was  graduated  at  Am-
herst  in  1842.  He  studied  theology  at  Andover  and
Philadelphia,  was  a  Presbyterian  minister  in  St.
Paul,  Minn.,  in  1849-'60,  and  has  been  pastor  of  the
Reformed  Episcopal  church  of  that  city  since  1884.
He  was  superintendent  of  public  instruction,  and
chancellor  of  the  University  of  Minnesota  in
1858-'61 ;  chaplain  of  the  1st  Minnesota  regiment,
and  hospital  chaplain  in  1861-'4  :  secretary  to  the
president  of  the  United  States  for  signing  land
patents  in  1864-'9:  and  U.  S.  consul  at  Dublin.
Ireland,  in  1869-'70.  He  was  president  of  Mac-
alester  college,  Minneapolis,  in  1873-'84,  and  since


488


NE1LL


NEILSON


1884  has  been  professor  of  history,  literature,  and
political  economy  in  that  institution.  He  has  re
ceived  the  degree  of  I).  D.  from  Lafayette  college.
His  principal  works  are  "  History  of  Minnesota"
(Philadelphia,  1858) ;  "  Terra  Marine,  or  Threads  of
Maryland  Colonial  History"  (1807);  "Virginian
Company  of  London  "  (Albany,  1808) ;  "  English
Colonization  of  America  "(London,  1871);  "Found
ers  of  Maryland  "  (Albany,  1870) :  '•  Virginia  Ve-
tusta,  the  Colony  under  James  the  First"  (1885) ;
"  Virginia  Carolornm  "  (1880) ;  and  "  Concise  His
tory  of  Minnesota "  (Minneapolis,  1887).  He  has
written  many  articles  for  historical  magazines,  and
has  been  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  publica
tions  of  the  Minnesota  historical  society. — Another
brother,  Thomas  Hewson,  soldier,  b. 'in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  9  April,  1820;  d.  there,  12  March,  1885,
passed  two  years  in  the  University  of  Pennsyl
vania,  and  was  then  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1847.  He
was  assigned  to  the  infantry,  and  served  on  fron
tier  duty  till  the  civil  war,  with  the  exception  of
the  years  1853-'7,  when  he  was  assistant  professor
of  drawing  at  West  Point.  He  was  promoted  1st
lieutenant,  31  July,  1850,  and  captain,  1  April,
1857,  and,  after  doing  duty  in  the  mustering  and
organization  of  regiments  early  in  the  civil  war,
became,  on  17  Feb.,  1802,  colonel  of  the  23d  Penn
sylvania  volunteers.  He  served  through  the  penin
sular  campaign,  where  he  was  brevetted  major,  U.  S.
army,  for  gallantry  at  Malvern  Hill,  commanded  a
brigade  in  the  Maryland  campaign,  where  he
guarded  the  crossings  of  the  Potomac  in  Septem
ber  and  October,  1802,  and  on  29  Nov.  was  com
missioned  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  He  was
in  the  Rappahannock  campaign,  received  the  brevet
of  lieutenant-colonel  for  his  services  at  the  battle
of  Chancellorsville,  was  engaged  at  Gettysburg
after  a  forced  march  of  thirty-five  miles,  and  took
part  in  the  succeeding  operations  of  the  Army  of
the  Potomac  till  the  autumn  of  1804,  being  brevet
ted  colonel  for  gallantry  at  Spottsylvania.  He  was
acting  inspector-general  in  Sheridan's  Shenandoah
campaign,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war  received  the
brevets  of  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,  and  major-
general  of  volunteers.  He  then  served  in  various
capacities  till  18G9,  when  he  was  made  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  1st  infantry  and  commanded  the  gen
eral  recruiting  depot  at  Governor's  island,  N.  Y.,
till  1871,  when,  having  been  transferred  to  the  Gth
cavalry,  he  commanded  that  regiment  on  the  fron
tier,  operating  against  the  Cheyenne  Indians  in
1874-'5.  He  was  commandant  of  cadets  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  from  1875  till  1879,  when
he  became  colonel  of  the  8th -^cavalry,  and  on  2
April,  1883,  he  was  retired  for  "disability  in  the
line  of  duty."  He  was  a  very  handsome  man,  and
was  popularly  known  as  "  Beau  Neill."

NEILL,  William,  clergyman,  b.  near  McKees-
port,  Alleghany  co.,  Pa.,  in  1778 ;  d.  in  Philadel
phia,  8  Aug.,  1800.  His  parents  having  been  killed
by  Indians  while  he  was  a  child,  he  was  brought  up
by  relatives.  He  was  educated  in  the  academy
that  afterward  became  Jefferson  college,  Pa.,  and
at  Princeton,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1803.  He
afterward  was  a  tutor  there  till  October,  1805,  when
he  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  presbytery  of  New
Brunswick.  He  held  pastorates  at  Cooperstown,
N.  Y.,  in  1805,  then  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  till  1810,  and
in  Philadelphia  till  1824,  when  he  became  president
of  Dickinson  college,  and  so  remained  till  1829.
He  was  secretary  and  general  agent  of  the  Presby
terian  board  of  education  in  1829-'31,  a  minister  at
Germantown,  Pa.,  in  1831-'42,  and  after  that  date
resided  in  Philadelphia  till  his  death.  Union  col


lege  conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1812.
He  edited  "  The  Presbyterian  "  for  several  years,
contributed  papers  to  religious  periodicals,  and
published  "  Lectures  on  Biblical  History  "  (Phila
delphia,  1840) ;  "  Exposition  of  the  Epistle  to  the
Epnesians  "  (1850) ;  "  Divine  Origin  of  the  Christian
Religion  "  (1854) ;  and  "  Ministry  of  Fifty  Years,
with  Anecdotes  and  Reminiscences  "  (1857).

NEILSON,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  New  Brunswick,
N.  J.,  11  March,  1745  ;  d.  there,  3  March,  1833.  He
was  educated  at  Philadelphia,  and  afterward  en
gaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  at  New  Brunswick  in
l709-'75.  He  raised  a  company  at  the  beginning
of  the  Revolution,  became  its  captain,  was  appointed
colonel  of  the  2d  regiment  of  Middlesex  militia  in
August,  1770.  On  21  Feb.,  1777,  he  was  made
brigadier-general  of  militia,  and  in  1779  he  was
placed  in  command  of  the  New  Jersey  militia  in
the  northern  part  of  the  state.  He  was  a  delegate
from  New  Jersey  to  the  Continental  congress  in
1778-'9,  and  afterward  to  the  State  convention  to
ratify  the  Federal  constitution.  In  1787  he  had
been  elected  a  delegate  to  the  Federal  convention,
but  failed  to  attend.  In  1800  and  1801  he  repre
sented  New  Brunswick  in  the  state  assembly,  after
which  he  retired  from  public  life.  He  was  one  of
the  share-holders  of  Alexander  Hamilton's  manu
facturing  company,  established  in  1792  at  Pater-
son,  N.  J.,  of  which  William  Duer  was  elected
•  governor  and  Col.  John  Bayard  deputy  governor.

NEILSON,  John,  Canadian  journalist,  b.  in
Balmaghie,  Kirkcudbrightshire,  Scotland,  17  July,
'.  1770;  d.  in  Quebec,  1  Feb.,  1848.  When  he  was
I  fourteen  years  of  age  he  joined  his  brother  Samuel
in  Quebec,  and  in  1797  he  took  charge  of  the
"  Quebec  Gazette."  He  was  elected  to  the  provin
cial  assembly  for  Quebec  county  in  1818,  in  1822
and  1828  was  a  delegate  to  London  to  oppose  the
reunion  of  Upper  and  Lower  Canada,  and  on  29
March,  1830,  received  the  thanks  of  the  house  of
assembly  for  his  services  while  in  England.  In
1835  Mr.  Neilson  was  again  sent  on  a  mission  to
the  home  government.  In  1840  he  was  elected  to
the  parliament  of  Canada,  and  in  1844  he  became
speaker  of  the  legislative  council.

NEILSON,  Lillian  Adelaide,  English  actress,
b.  near  Saragossa,  Spain,  3  March,  1850 ;  d.  in
Paris,  15  Aug.,  1880.  She  was  born  of  English
parents,  and  spent  the  early  part  of  her  life  in  Lon
don.  In  1805  she  made  her  debut  at  the  theatre  in
Margate  as  Julia  in  "  The  Hunchback,"  and  in
July  of  the  same  year  appeared  as  Juliet  at  the
Royalty  theatre,  London.  Thereafter  she  acted  in
the  larger  houses  of  London  and  other  cities  Avith
success,  and  became  an  attractive  performer.  Her
first  visit  to  this  country  was  in  November,  1872,
when  she  played  Juliet  at  Booth's  theatre,  New
York  city,  and  afterward  made  the  usual  dramatic
tour  through  the  country  with  pecuniary  profit.
She  returned  to  the  United  States  in  1875,  1877,
and  1879,  each  time  with  success.  In  1872  Miss
Neilson  married  in  England  a  Mr.  Low,  from  whom
she  afterward  was  divorced.  Without  much  power
or  originality,  Miss  Neilson  was  a  fine  representa
tive  of  the  youthful  heroines  of  Shakespeare.

NEILSON,  William  George,  metallurgical  en
gineer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa,,  12  Aug.,  1842.  He
was  graduated  at  the  Polytechnic  college  of  Penn
sylvania  in  1802,  and  at  once  directed  his  attention
to  the  manufacture  of  iron  and  steel.  After  filling
several  professional  engagements,  he  became  con
nected  with  the  Elizabethtown  forges  in  1809,  and
in  1870  with  the  Pennsylvania  steel  company.  In
1871  he  was  appointed  general  manager  of  the  Lo
gan  iron  and  steel  company,  and  in  1877  manager


NEILSON


NELSON


489


of  the  Standard  steel  company,  which  place  he  still
tills.  His  services  were  called  for  by  the  Baldwin
locomotive-works  in  1878  in  order  to  aid  them  in
their  shipment  of  locomotives  to  Russia.  Mr.
Neilson  has  been  active  in  the  American  institute
of  mining  engineers  as  an  official,  and  in  1870  he
was  secretary  of  the  centennial  committee  of  that
organization.  In  addition  to  various  reports  for
the  American  iron  and  steel  association  he  pub
lished  in  1868  a  chart  illustrative  of  the  material
progress  of  the  United  States,  showing  the  costs  of
certain  staple  products  during  a  series  of  years.

NEILSON,  William  Hude,  broker,  b.  in  New
York  city,  7  May,  1816 ;  d.  in  Far  Rockaway,
Queens  co.,  N.  Y.,  30  Dec.,  1887.  He  received  a  liberal
education,  and  early  engaged  in  business  in  his
native  city,  where  his  life  was  spent.  When  the
Open  board  of  brokers  and  the  old  Stock  exchange
were  consolidated,  largely  through  his  efforts,  he
was  chosen  president  of  the  new  exchange,  and  re-
elected  for  two  succeeding  terms.  As  president  of
the  Hannibal  and  St.  Joseph  railroad  company,  he
extricated  that  corporation  from  debt  and  placed
it  on  a  stable  foundation.  For  forty  years  he  took
an  active  part  in  municipal  affairs,  especially  those
relating  to  the  educational  interests  of  the  city,
and  to  church  work  chiefly  in  the  direction  of  Sun
day-schools.  He  was  president  of  the  board  of
education  from  1855  till  1858,  and  again  in  1873-'6,
for  years  serving  as  chairman  of  the  committee  on
normal  schools.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Com
mittee  of  Seventy  during  the  campaign  against
Tweed,  and  was  active  in  promoting  every  impor
tant  measure  of  public  reform.

NEISSER,  George,  clergyman,  b.  in  Sehlen,
Moravia,  11  April,  1715;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
in  November,  1784.  He  was  the  son  of  George  and
Susanna  Neisser,  who  fled  from  Moravia  to  Herrn-
hut,  in  Saxony,  in  1723,  and  were  among  the  first
of  those  Moravian  refugees  through  whom  the
ancient  unitas  fratrum  was  renewed.  George  ac
companied  his  parents  in  their  flight,  was  educated
at  Ilerrnhut,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty  years  joined
a  company  of  Moravian  immigrants  who  settled  in
Georgia  in  1735.  They  were  under  the  leadership
of  Bishop  David  Nitschmann,  and  sailed  across
the  ocean  in  the  same  vessel  with  John  and  Charles
Wesley,  upon  whose  hearts  a  deep  impression  was
made  by  the  faith  and  courage  that  the  Moravians
displayed  in  the  midst  of  a  terrible  storm.  Neisser
remained  but  a  short  time  in  Georgia.  'In  1737  he
went  to  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1748  was  ordained  a  |
deacon  and  entered  the  service  of  the  Moravian  |
church.  He  labored  in  New  York  city,  Philadel
phia,  York,  and  then  in  Philadelphia  again.  His
remains,  originally  buried  in  the  old  Moravian
church-yard  of  the  last-named  city,  were  removed  j
in  1886  to  the  historic  Moravian  burial  ground  at
Bethlehem,  Pa.  Neisser  left  behind  many  valuable
manuscripts  relating  both  to  the  history  and  the
music  of  his  church.  Among  them  is  a  list  of  all
the  Moravian  and  Bohemian  refugees  that  left  their
native  country  and  constituted  the  nucleus  of  the
Removed  Brethren's  or  Moravian  church.

NELATON,  Hector  Marie  Louis  (nay-lah-
tong),  South  American  explorer,  b.  in  Demerara  in
1775 ;  d.  near  Cayenne  in  1827.  He  received  his
early  education  in  Guiana,  but  finished  his  studies
in  Paris.  He  obtained  in  1794  an  appointment  in
the  colonial  administration,  was  secretary  to  Gov.
Victor  Hugues  (q.  v.),  and  negotiated  the  capitula
tion  with  the  English.  -  For  his  conduct  on  this
occasion  he  was  indicted  for  treason,  but  the  ac
quittal  of  Hugues  caused  the  prosecution  to  be
abandoned,  and  retiring  to  private  life  he  explored


the  Guianas  for  seven  years,  and  went  afterward  to
Brazil.  When  Guiana  was  restored  to  the  French
in  1817,  Nelaton  went  to  Paris  and  tried  to  obtain
his  reinstatement  in  the  colonial  administration,
but,  failing,  he  returned  to  his  native  country  and
practised  Taw  in  Cayenne  till  his  death.  He  pub
lished  "  Histoire  des  voyages  entrepris  a  la  Guiane
a  la  recherche  de  1'Eldorado,  pendant  la  seizieme
et  dixseptieme  siecle  "  (4  vols.,  Paris,  1819);  "Me-
moire  au  roi  sur  la  capitulation  de  la  Guiane "
(1819) ;  "  Memoires  et  documents  pour  servir  a
rhistoire  de  la  Guiane  pendant  1'administration  de
Victor  Hugues  "  (1825) :  "  Statistique  commerciale,
agricole  et  medicale  de  la  Guiane  Francaise  et
Hollandaise "  (Cayenne,  1825);  "Journal  de  voy
age  a  travers  la  Guiane  et  le  Bresil "  (1826) ;  and
several  less  important  works.

NELIGAN,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ireland
early  in  the  19th  century  ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
30  Jan.,  1880.  He  was  a  brother  of  the  celebrated
surgeon  of  the  same  name.  He  was  graduated  at
Dublin  university  in  1830,  ordained  a  minister  of
the  Anglican  church  in  1835,  and  was  appointed
rector  of  Milton  Mowbray,  but  united  with  the
Roman  Catholic  church,  went  to  the  Irish  college
of  the  propaganda,  Rome,  in  1850,  and  after  his
ordination  came  to  New  York  in  1854.  He  was
made  professor  in  St.  Joseph's  seminary,  Fordham,
and  assistant  pastor  of  St.  Columba's,  New  York.
He  was  subsequently  vicar-general  of  the  Bahama
islands.  Mr.  Neligan  published  several  religious
works,  among  them  "  Rome  and  her  Institutions
and  Churches "  (New  York),  "  Saintly  Charac
ters,"  "  The  Rosary,"  and  a  "  Manual  for  Con
fraternities."

NELL,  William  Cooper,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  20  Dec.,  1816 ;  d.  there,  25  May,  1874.  He
was  of  African  descent.  He  was  graduated  at
Boston  grammar-school,  winning  a  medal  for
scholarship,  read  law  with  William  I.  Bowditch,
and  was  prepared  for  admission  to  the  bar,  but  by
advice  of  Wendell  Phillips  would  not  take  the  oath
of  allegiance  to  the  constitution  with  slavery.  He
became  a  clerk  in  the  Boston  post-office  in  1861,
being  the  first  colored  man  to  hold  a  post  under
the  National  government,  and  remained  there  till
his  death.  Mr.  Nell  was  active  in  his  efforts  for
the  improvement  of  his  race,  obtaining  equal  school
privileges  for  the  colored  youth  of  Boston,  and
forming  many  literary  societies.  Besides  several
pamphlets,  he  published  "  Services  of  Colored  Amer
icans  in  the  Wars  of  1776-1812  "  ;  and  "  Colored
Patriots  of  the  American  Revolution,"  with  an  in
troduction  by  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe  (Boston,  1855).

NELLES,  Samuel  Sobieski,  Canadian  educa
tor,  b.  in  Mount  Pleasant,  Ont,,  17  Oct..  1823;  d.
in  Cobourg,  17  Oct.,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at
Wesleyan  university  in  1846,  entered  the  ministry  of
the  Methodist  church  in  1847,  and  preached  succes
sively  at  Port  Hope,  Toronto,  and  London,  Canada.
He  was  appointed  president  of  Victoria,  college  in
September,  1850,  and  held  that  office  till  his  death.
Queen's  university  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1860,  and  Victoria  university  that  of  LL.  D.  in
1873.  He  was  the  author  of  a  text-book  on  logic.

NELSON,  Charles  Alexander,  librarian,  b.  in
Calais,  Me.,  14  April.  1839.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1860,  studied  civil  engineering  at  Law
rence  scientific  school  and  library  science  at  the
College  library  in  Boston,  but  engaged  in  teaching.
In  1864-'5  he  was  a  civil  engineer  in  government
service  at  New  Berne.  N.  C.  He  afterward  engaged
in  business  there,  and  was  several  times  elected  to
civil  offices.  From  1874  till  1881  he  was  connected
with  the  book-trade  in  Boston,  and  was  employed


490


NELSON


NELSON


in  literary,  library,  and  editorial  work.  For  six
years  he  was  the  Boston  correspondent  of  the
"  American  Bookseller,"  and  since  1876  he  has  been
on  the  editorial  staff  of  "Zion's  Herald."  He  has
written  "  Waltham,  Past  and  Present,  and  its  In
dustries  "  (1879),  and  "  Weston  "  in  Samuel  A.
Drake's  "  History  of  Middlesex  County,  Mass."
(1880).  Mr.  Nelson  has  given  special  study  to  li
brary  economy,  and  since  1881  has  had  charge  of
the  '"  Catalogue  of  the  Astor  Library  (Continua
tion),  Vol.  I.-1II.  (1886-7),"  and  is  now  (1888)  at
work  on  the  fourth  and  last  volume.  He  was  one
of  the  fftunders  and  is  now  (1888)  secretary  of  the
New  York  library  club.

NELSON,  Daniel  Thurber,  physician,  b.  in
Milford,  Mass.,  16  Sept.,  1839.  He  was  graduated
at  Amherst  in  1861,  and  at  Harvard  medical  school
in  1865.  Meanwhile,  in  1861-'2,  he  was  a  medical
cadet  at  the  Massachusetts  general  hospital,  and  in
1862-'5  acting  assistant  surgeon  in  the  armies  of
the  James  and  of  the  Potomac.  Dr.  Nelson  then
established  himself  in  Chicago  and  engaged  in
general  practice,  giving  special  attention  to  gyne-
cology.  In  1866  he  was  elected  professor  of  phys
iology  and  histology  at  Chicago  medical  college,
which  chair  he  then  held  until  1880,  and  in  1881
he  was  made  adjunct  professor  of  gynecology  at
Rush  medical  college.  He  is  also  attending  physi
cian  at  Mercy  hospital.  Dr.  Nelson  has  invented
an  improved  trivalve  speculum  and  other  surgical
instruments.  His  publications  have  been  restricted
to  contributions  to  the  medical  journals.

NELSON,  Henry  Addison,  clergyman,  b.  in
Amherst,  Mass.,  31  Oct.,  1820.  He  was  graduated
at  Hamilton  college  in  1840,  and  was  pastor  of  the
1st  Presbyterian  church  at  Auburn  from  1846  till
1856,  pastor  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in  1856-'68,  and
professor  of  theology  in  Lane  seminary  in  1868-'74.
Since  the  last  date  he  has  been  pastor  of  the  First
church,  Geneva,  N.  Y.  He  was  moderator  of  the
general  assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  church  at
Rochester  in  1867.  He  has  published  "  Seeing
Jesus"  (Philadelphia,  1869)  and  "  Sin  and  Salva
tion  "  (New  York,  1881).

NELSON,  Hugh,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Larne,  County  Antrim,  Ireland,  25  May,  1830.  He
was  educated  in  his  native  place,  and  came  to  Brit
ish  Columbia  in  June,  1858.  He  engaged  in  mer
cantile  business  until  1866,  when  he  became  a  part
ner  in  a  lumbering  firm  at  Burraid  inlet.  He  repre
sented  New  Westminster  in  the  British  Columbia
legislature  from  November,  1870,  till  its  dissolu
tion  in  1871,  when  that  province  entered  the  con
federation.  He  was  elected  to  the  Dominion  par
liament  for  his  former  constituency  in  November,
1871,  and  re-elected  by  acclamation  in  1872.  Mr.
Nelson  was  a  member  of  the  Canadian  senate  from
12  Dec.,  1879,  until  8  Feb.,  1887,  when  he  was  ap
pointed  lieutenant-governor  of  British  Columbia.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Yale  convention,  and
among  the  first  to  advocate  the  union  of  British
Columbia  with  Canada.  He  received  a  diploma  of
honor  for  services  that  he  rendered  in  connection
with  the  International  fisheries  exhibition  in  Lon
don.  England,  in  1883.

NELSON,  John,  patriot,  b.  in  Massachusetts
about  1660  ;  d.  there,  4  Dec.,  1721.  He  was  a  near
relative  of  Sir  Thomas  Temple  and  headed  the  party
that  took  Gov.  Andros  prisoner  in  1689.  Hutchin-
son  says  that  he  was  not  allowed  any  share  in  the
subsequent  government,  on  account  of  his  being  an
Episcopalian.  When  on  a  trading- voyage  to  Nova
Scotia  he  was  taken  by  the  French,  and  impris
oned  in  Quebec.  While  there  he  wrote  a  letter
dated  26  Aug.,  1692,  to  the  court  of  Massachusetts,


which  gave  particular  information  of  the  designs
of  the  French,  in  consequence  of  which  he  was  sent
to  France,  where  he  remained  in  prison  two  years.
When  he  had  found  means  to  inform  Sir  Purbeck
Temple  of  his  condition,  a  demand  was  soon  made
for  his  release  or  exchange.  The  immediate  effect
of  this  was  his  transfer  to  the  Bastile ;  but  he  was
finally  discharged,  and  returned  to  his  family  after
an  absence  of  ten  or  eleven  years.

NELSON,  Roger,  soldier,  b.  in  Fredericktown,
Md.,  in  1735;  d.  there,  7  June,  1815.  He  was  a
brigadier-general  of  the  Revolutionary  army,  and
was  severely  wounded  at  Camden,  where  he  was
left  for  dead  on  the  field.  After  the  peace  he
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Frederick-
town,  Md.,  and  attained  to  eminence.  He  was
elected  to  congress  in  1804,  served  till  1810,  and
from  the  latter  date  till  his  death  was  associate
judge  of  the  5th  judicial  district  of  Maryland. —
His  son,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Fredericktown,  Md.,
1  June,  1791;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  8  Jan.,  1860,
was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in  1811,  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1813,  and  began  practice  in
his  native  town.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Democrat  in  1820,  served  in  1821-'3,  was  U.  S.
minister  to  Naples  in  1831-'2,  and  in  1843-'5  was
attorney-general  of  the  United  States.

NELSON,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Hebron,  Wash
ington  co.,  N.  Y.,  10  Nov.,  1792;  d.  in  Coopers-
town,  N.  Y.,  13  Dec.,  1873.  He  was  of  Scotch-Irish
lineage ;  his  ancestor  emigrated  to  this  country  in
1760.  settling  in  Sa
lem,  N.  Y.  Samuel
was  graduated  at
Middlebtiryinl813,
studied  law  in  Sa
lem  under  Chief-
Justice  Savage,  and
in  1817  was  admit
ted  to  the-  bar  of
Madison,  N.  Y.  In
trying  his  first  suit
in  the  court  of  com
mon  pleas  he  de
tected  an  error  in
practice  on  the  part
of  Ids  opponent,
procured  a  stay  of
proceedings,  and
ultimately  gained  his  cause.  This  success  gave  him
reputation  and  clients.  His  first  appearance  in  poli
tics  was  in  1820,  when  he  was  a  presidential  elector.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  State  constitutional  con
vention  in  1822,  in  which  he  advocated  the  excision
of  the  property  qualification  of  voters,  was  circuit
judge  in  1823-'31,  at  the  latter  date  became  asso
ciate  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  New  York,
and  in  1837  was  elevated  to  the  chief  justiceship,
presiding  for  eight  years.  He  was  a  member  of
the  State  constitutional  convention  in  1844  which
made  the  office  of  judge  elective,  and  in  1845  was
appointed  by  President  Tyler  to  succeed  Judge
Smith  Thompson  on  the  supreme  bench  of  the
United  States.  In  this  court  his  decisions  com
manded  the  respect  of  bar  and  bench.  In  the
famous  Dred  Scott  case  he  concurred  with  the  de
cision  of  Chief-Justice  Taney,  urging  that  if  con
gress  possessed  power  under  the  constitution  to
abolish  slavery,  it  must  necessarily  possess  the  like
power  to  establish  it.  During  the  civil  war  his
conservatism  as  well  as  his  life-long  political  affini
ties  led  him  to  regret  what  he  considered  the  en
croachments  of  the  military  on  the  civil  power,  but
his  relations  with  the  administration  were  harmo
nious,  and  his  loyalty  was  unquestioned.  In  1871


NELSON


NELSON


491


he  was  appointed  by  President  Grant  to  serve  on
the  joint  nigh  commission  to  arbitrate  the  "Ala
bama  "  claims  on  the  part  of  the  United  States.
This  duty  required  a  temporary  cessation  of  his  at
tendance  on  the  bench,  and  exposure  during  the
meetings  of  the  commission  caused  an  illness  that
compelled  his  resignation  in  October,  1872.  Judge
Nelson  was  of  a  grave  and  dignified  appearance,
slow  in  forming  his  judgments  and  reluctant  to
express  them  if  they  were  unfavorable.  He  re
ceived  the  degree  of  LL.  U.  from  Columbia  in  1841.
— His  son.  Rensselaer  Russell,  jurist,  b.  in  Coop-
erstown,  N.  Y.,  12  May,  1826,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1846,  studied  law,  and  in  1849  was  admit
ted  to  the  New  York  city  bar.  He  removed  to  St.
Paul,  Minn.,  in  1850,  became  associate  justice  of
the  supreme  court  of  the  territory  in  1857,  and  in
1858  U.  S.  district  judge  of  the  state  of  Minnesota,
which  office  he  still  (1888)  holds.  In  1875  an
opinion  that  he  delivered  on  the  civil  rights  bill
attracted  attention  from  the  liberality  of  its  views.

NELSON,  Samuel  Kelsey,  clergyman,  b.  near
Jonesborough,  Washington  co.,  Tenn.,  9  Oct.,
1787 ;  d.  in  Tallahassee,  Fla.,  7  May,  1827.  He  was
graduated  at  Washington  college  in  1803,  after
ward  went  to  Kentucky,  taught  for  a  short  time,
and  then  studied  law,  which  he  abandoned  for
theology,  and  was  licensed  in  the  Presbyterian
church  in  1807.  In  1809  he  became  pastor  of  the
Danville,  Ky.,  church.  He  was  one  of  the  princi
pal  founders  of  Centre  college,  Danville,  and  of
the  Kentucky  asylum  for  the  deaf  and  dumb  at
that  place.  —  David,  clergyman,  b.  near  Jones-
borough,  Tenn.,  24  Sept.,  1793;  d.  in  Oakland,  111.,
17  Oct.,  1844.  He  was  educated  at  Washington
college,  Va.,  and  studied  medicine  at  Danville,  Ky.,
and  Philadelphia,  where  he  was  graduated.  He
went  to  Canada  with  a  Kentucky  regiment  as  sur
geon  in  the  war  of  1812,  subsequently  accompanied
the  army  of  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson  to  Alabama  and
Florida,  and  after  the  establishment  of  peace  set
tled  in  practice  in  Jonesborough.  He  had  early  in
life  made  a  profession  of  religion,  but  had  relapsed
into  infidelity.  Becoming  convinced  anew  of  the
truth  of  Christianity,  he  left  a  lucrative  profes
sional  career  to  enter  the  Presbyterian  ministry,
and  was  licensed  in  April,  1825.  He  preached  for
nearly  three  years  in  Tennessee,  and  at  the  same
time  was  connected  with  the  "Calvinistic  Maga
zine  "  at  Rogersville.  In  1828  he  succeeded  his
brother  Samuel  as  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  Danville,  Ky.,  and  in  1830  he  removed  to
Missouri  and  established  Marion  college,  twelve
miles  from  Palmyra,  of  which  he  became  presi
dent.  In  1836,  in  consequence  of  the  slavery  ques
tion,  Dr.  Nelson,  who  was  an  ardent  advocate  of
emancipation,  removed  to  the  neighborhood  of
Quincy,  111.,  and  established  an  institute  for  the
education  of  young  men.  In  addition  to  articles
for  the  religious  press,  he  published  "  Cause  and
Cure  of  Infidelity  "  (New  \ork,  1836),  which  has
been  republished  in  London  and  elsewhere.

NELSON,  Thomas,  merchant,  b.  in  Penrith,
Scotland,  20  Feb.,  1677;  d.  in  Yorktown,  Va.,  7
Oct.,  1745.  He  emigrated  to  this  country  about
1690,  settled  in  Virginia,  and  founded  the  town  of
York,  where  he  built  the  first  custom-house  in  the
colonies,  one  of  the  earliest  brick  buildings  in  the
state.  His  dwelling  was  well  known  as  the  "  Nel
son  House."  The  bricks  and  ornamentations  were
brought  from  England.  The  house  shown  in  the
engraving  was  built  near  the  site  of  the  original
house,  by  William  Nelson,  in  1740.  This  building,
which  is  still  (1888)  in  the  family,  is  in  excellent
preservation,  as  is  his  tomb,  an  elaborately  carved


marble  mausoleum,  covered  with  heraldic  designs.
He  accumulated  a  large  fortune  in  merchandise,
and  left  sev
eral  sons,  of
whom  Thom
as  was  at  the
head  of  the
moderate  par
ty,  and  re
ceived  forty-
five  votes  in
the  conven
tion  for  Vir
ginia's  first
governor,  but
was  defeat
ed  by  Patrick
Henry.  lie
wTas  chosen  to

the  privy  council,  and  for  thirty  years  was  its
secretary.  When  the  Revolution  began  he  retired
from  public  life,  being  too  old  to  engage  in  the
straggle.  His  house  at  Yorktown  was  Comwal-
lis's  headquarters,  but  was  subsequently  destroyed
by  the  Americans  during  the  bombardment  of  the
town. — Another  son,  William,  governor  of  Vir
ginia,  b.  in  Yorktown,  Va.,  in  1711;  d.  there,  19
Nov.,  1772,  added  to  his  inherited  property  by  the
accumulation  of  many  years  of  successful  mercan
tile  ventures,  purchased  large  landed  estates,  and
became  a  great  proprietor.  He  was  a  member  of  the
executive  council,  subsequently  president  of  that
body,  and  in  the  interval  that  elapsed  between  the
administration  of  Lord  Botetourt  and  Lord  Dun-
more  filled  the  office  of  governor.  He  also  pre
sided  over  the  general  or  supreme  court  of  law
and  equity  for  the  province,  and  was  one  of  the
ablest  judges  of  his  time.  His  manner  of  living  is
shown  by  his  remark  in  a  letter  to  a  friend,  that  he
had  just  bought  Lord  Baltimore's  six  white  coach-
horses,  and  meant  to  give  his  own  six  black  ones  a
run  in  Hanover  meadows. — William's  son.  Thomas,
signer  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  b.  in
Yorktown,  Va.,  26  Dec.,  1738 ;  d.  in  Hanover  coun
ty,  Va.,  4  Jan.,  1789,  was  sent  to  Eton  at  fourteen
years  of  age,  and  subse
quently  to  Cambridge,
where  he  was  gradu
ated.  He  returned  to
the  United  States  in
1761,  and  on  his  home
ward  voyage  was  elect
ed  to  the  house  of  bur
gesses.  About  a  year
afterward  he  married
Lucy,  daughter  of  Col.
Philip  Grymes,  of  Mid
dlesex  county,  and  in
herited  a  large  landed
estate  and  £30,000,  and
dispensed  a  wide  hospi
tality.  He  was  a  dele
gate  in  1774  to  the

house  of  burgesses,  over  which  Peyton  Randolph
presided,  and  when  that  body  was  dissolved  by
Lord  Dunmore,  because  it  had  passed  resolutions
against  the  Boston  port  bill,  was  one  of  the  eighty-
nine  members  that  declared  against  the  unwarrant
ed  invasion  of  their  rights,  and  recommended  the
appointment  of  deputies  to  meet  in  a  general  con
gress.  He  was  returned  to  the  next  house  of  bur
gesses,  was  a  member  of  the  first  general  conven
tion,  which  met  in  Williamsburg,  1  Aug.,  1774,
and  of  that  of  March,  1775,  when  he  earnestly  ad
vocated  the  organization  of  a  military  force  in  the


r


492


NELSON


NELSON


province.  At  the  third  convention,  which  met  in
the  following  July,  he  was  elected  colonel  of  the
2d  Virginia  regiment,  but  resigned  on  being  chosen
to  the  Continental  congress.  In  a  letter  to  his  kins
man,  John  Page,  afterward  governor  of  Virginia,
dated  Philadelphia,  13  Feb.,  1770,  he  says :  "  We  are
carrying  on  a  war  and  no  war ;  they  seize  our  prop
erty  on  land  and  sea,  and  we  hesitate  to  retaliate
because  we  have  a  few  friends  in  England.  Away
with  such  squeamishness,  say  I !  One  of  our  rev
erend  fathers  in  God  refused  to  ordain  a  young
gentleman  who  went  from  this  country  because
he  was  a  '  rebellious  American,'  so  that  unless  we
submit  to  parliamentary  oppression  we  shall  not
have  the  gospel  of  Christ  preached  among  us.
But  let  every  man  worship  under  his  own  vine
and  fig-tree."  He  was  an  active  member  of  the
State  constitutional  convention  in  May,  1770,  and
on  4  July  signed  the  Declaration  of  Independence.
He  was  compelled  by  a  sudden  and  violent  illness
to  resign  his  seat  in  congress  in  May,  1777.  On
returning  to  Virginia  he  became  county  lieutenant,
and  in  August  of  that  year,  on  the  approach  of  the
British  fleet,  he  was  appointed  commander-in-chief
of  the  state  forces.  In  obedience  to  the  call  of
congress  for  volunteer  troops,  to  be  equipped  at
the  individual  expense  of  men  of  property,  he

raised  a  troop  of
cavalry,  became
their  banker,  and
accompanied  them
to  Philadelphia.
On  resuming  his
duties  in  the  legis
lature,  he  strong
ly  opposed  the
proposition  to  se
questrate  British
property,  on  the
ground  that  it
would  be  an  un
just  retaliation  of
public  wrongs  on
private  individu
als.  He  was  again
in  congress  in  1779,
but  was  again
compelled  to  resign  by  sudden  indisposition,  and
in  May  was  called  upon  to  organize  the  militia  to
repel  a  marauding  expedition  of  the  enemy.  In
June,  1780,  the  state  of  Virginia  called  for  $2,000-
000  to  be  placed  in  the  Continental  treasury  to  en
able  congress  to  make  provision  for  the  French
fleet.  By  his  personal  exertions  Nelson  endeav
ored  to  raise  the  money,  but  to  his  appeals  he  con
stantly  received  the  reply  :  "  We  will  not  lend  the
government  a  shilling,  but  we  will  lend  you,
Thomas  Nelson,  all  we  possibly  can."  He  there
fore,  on  his  personal  security,  raised  the  greater
part  of  the  loan,  which  he  subsequently  was  obliged
to  redeem  at  a  great  sacrifice,  and  for  which  he  re
ceived  no  compensation  from  the  government.  He
also  advanced  money  to  pay  two  Virginia  regi
ments  that  had  been  ordered  to  the  south,  but
had  refused  to  march  until  their  arrears  were  dis
charged.  He  became  governor  in  June,  1781,  and
opposed  the  ravages  of  the  enemy  with  all  the
militia  he  was  able  to  muster.  At  the  siege  at
Yorktown  he  commanded  the  Virginia  militia,  and
again  displayed  his  disinterested  patriotism  by
ordering  that  the  artillery  fire  be  directed  on
his  own  mansion,  which  he  supposed  was  the
headquarters  of  Cornwallis.  When  the  siege  ter
minated,  Gen.  Washington  in  his  general  orders
thus  spoke  of  his  conduct :  "  The  general  would


be  guilty  of  the  highest  ingratitude  if  he  forgot  to
return  his  sincere  acknowledgments  to  his  excel
lency,  Gov.  Nelson,  for  the  succors  which  he  re
ceived  from  him,  to  whose  activity,  emulation,  and
bravery  the  highest  praises  are  due."  The  remain
der  of  Nelson's  life  was  passed  in  retirement.  His
vast  estate  went  for  his  public  debts,  and  no  rec
ompense  was  ever  made  to  his  family  for  what  he
had  expended,  lie  is  buried  at  Yorktown,  in  an
unmarked  grave,  but  during  the  administration  of
Gov.  Henry  A.  Wise  his  statue,  by  Crawford,  was
placed,  with  those  of  five  other  patriots,  on  the
Washington  monument  in  Richmond,  Va.  The
earliest  portrait,  painted  in  London  by  Chamber-
lin,  in  1754,  represents  him  as  a  youth  of  sixteen  ;
the  later  portrait  is  from  a  drawing  in  the  posses
sion  of  Dr.  Thomas  Addis  Emmet. — Another  son
of  William,  Robert,  patriot,  b.  in  Yorktown,  Va.,
in  1743  ;  d.  in  Malvern  Hill,  Va.,  4  Aug.,  1818,  was
graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in  1769,  served  in
:  the  Revolutionary  army,  and  was  captured  by  Col.
Tarleton  in  June,  1781.  He  was  an  ardent  patriot,
1  and,  with  all  his  brothers,  sacrificed  his  property
j  in  the  cause  of  his  country.  He  was  professor  of
j  law  in  William  and  Mary  college  in  1813-'18. —
I  Another  son,  William,  patriot,  b.  in  Yorktown,
|  Va.,  in  1700;  d.  at  his  residence,  Malvern  Hill,  Va.,
;  8  March,  1813,  was  graduated  at  William  ami  Mary
in  1770.  in  February  of  that  year  was  commissioned
major  of  the  7th  Virginia  regiment,  and  was  cap
tured  by  Tarleton  with  his  brother  Robert.  He  was
professor  of  law  at  William  and  Mary  college  from
1803  until  his  death. — Thomas  the  signer's  son,
lluirh.  diplomatist,  b.  in  Virginia,  30  Sept.,  1708;
d.  in  Albemarle  county,  Va.,  18  March,  1830,  was
graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in  1790,  was  a
member  of  the  state  house  of  representatives,  and
its  speaker,  and  also  a  judge  of  the  general  court.
lie  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Pinckney  ticket
in  1809,  was  elected  to  congress  from  Virginia,
and  served  by  successive  re-elections  from  4  Nov.,
1811,  till  14  Jan.,  1823,  when  he  resigned.  He  was
then  appointed  United  States  minister  to  Spain,
and  served  from  15  Jan.,  1823,  till  23  Nov.,  1824.

NELSON,  Thomas  Amos  Rogers,  congress
man,  b.  in  Roane  county,  Tenn.,  19  March,  1812:  d.
in  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  24  Aug.,  1873.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  East  Tennessee  college  in  1828,  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1832,  and  appointed  U.  S.  district  at
torney  for  the  1st  district  of  Tennessee  the  next
year,  lie  canvassed  this  district  as  a  candidate
for  elector  on  the  Clay  ticket  in  1844  and  for  Gen.
Taylor  in  1848.  Mr.  Nelson  was  appointed  U.  S.
minister  to  China  in  1851,  but  declined,  and  in
1858  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serv
ing  in  1859-'01.  During  the  civil  war  he  adhered
to  the  Union,  and  at  its  close  he  did  much  to  con
ciliate  conflicting  factions.  He  was  one  of  the
counsel  that  defended  President  Johnson  on  his
impeachment  in  1808.  and  in  1870  was  elected  a
judge  of  the  state  supreme  court,  but  resigned  af
ter  one  year's  service.

NELSON,  Thomas  Henry,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Mason  county,  Ky..  12  Aug.,  1824.  He  studied
law  in  Maysville,  Ky.,  and  removed  to  Rockville
and  subsequently  to  Terre  Haute,  Ind.,  where  he
was  a  leader  of  the  Whig  party  and  afterward  a
founder  of  the  Republican  party.  He  served  sev
eral  times  in  state  and  national  conventions'  and
was  a  candidate  for  congress,  but  was  defeated.
In  18G1-'0  he  was  U.  S.  minister  to  Chili,  and  won
great  personal  popularity  by  his  bravery  in  the
rescue  of  numerous  persons  at  the  burning  of  the
Santiago  cathedral,  0  Dec.,  1804.  He  also  took  an
active  part  as  mediator  in  the  war  between  Chili


NELSON


NENGUIRU


493


and  Spain  in  1864-'G.  He  was  U.  S.  minister  to
Mexico  in  1869-'T3.  Since  the  expiration  of  his
term  of  office  he  has  practised  law  in  Washington,
D.  C.,  and  in  Terre  Haute,  Ind. — His  brother,
William,  soldier,  b.  in  Maysville,  Ky.,  in  1825;  d.
in  Louisville,  Ky.,  29  Sept.,"  1802,  entered  the  U.  S.
navy  in  1840,  commanded  a  battery  at  the  siege  of
Vera  Cruz,  and  afterward  served  in  the  Mediterra
nean.  He  became  master  in  1854,  lieutenant  in
1855,  and  in  1858  was  ordered  to  the  "Niagara,"
in  which  he  carried  back  to  Africa  the  negroes
that  were  taken  from  the  slaver  "  Echo."  He  was
on  ordnance  duty  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  at  the  be
ginning  of  the  civil  war,  was  promoted  lieutenant-
commander  in  1861,  and  was  in  charge  of  the  gun
boats  on  Ohio  river,  but  soon  exchanged  the  naval
for  military  service,  and  in  September  became
brigadier  -  general  of  volunteers.  He  organized
Camp  Dick  Robinson,  between  Garrardsville  and
Danville,  Ky.,  and  another  in  Washington,  Mason
co.,  Ky.,  was  successful  in  several  engagements  in
eastern  Kentucky,  raised  several  regiments,  com-  j
manded  the  2d  division  of  Gen.  Don  Carlos  Buell's  ;
army,  which  was  the  first  to  join  Gen.  Grant  at
the  battle  of  Shiloh,  and  was  wounded  at  Rich
mond,  Ky.  He  was  in  command  at  Louisville
when  that  city  was  threatened  by  Gen.  Braxton
Bragg,  and  in  July,  1862,  was  appointed  major-
general  of  volunteers.  He  was  shot  to  death  by
Gen.  Jefferson  C.  Davis  in  an  altercation  with  that
officer  at  the  Gait  house,  in  Louisville,  Ky.

NELSON,  Wolfred,  Canadian  insurgent,  b.  in
Montreal,  10  July,  1792;  d.  there,  17  June,  1863.
He  was  the  son  of  William  Nelson,  a  commissariat
officer  in  the  British  navy.  He  studied  medicine,
was  licensed  to  practise  in  January,  1811,  and  es
tablished  himself  at  St.  Denis,  on  Richelieu  river.
In  the  war  of  1812  Dr.  Nelson  volunteered  and
served  as  a  surgeon.  In  1827  he  successfully  con
tested  the  representation  of  Sorel  with  Attorney-
General  (afterward  Chief-Justice)  James  Stuart,  and
was  subsequently  active  in  Canadian  politics.  He
was  one  of  the  principal  promoters  and  leaders  of
the  rebellion  of  1837,  and  presided  over  the  meet
ing  of  the  "  Four  counties  "  at  St.  Charles  on  28
Oct.,  when  resolutions  inimical  to  the  British  gov
ernment  were  adopted  and  armed  resistance  to  con
stituted  authority  was  finally  determined  upon.
A  troop  under  Col.  Charles  S.  Gore  was  despatched
to  arrest  Dr.  Nelson  and  other  insurgents ;  but  he
and  his  friends  retreated  to  his  residence  at  St.
Denis,  where  with  a  small  force  of  the  inhabitants  a
successful  resistance  was  made.  Shots  were  fired,
but  the  insurgents  being  strongly  posted  in  a
stone-house,  the  troops  were  forced  to  retreat.  Soon
afterward  a  force  of  1,000  insurgents  were  defeated
at  St.  Charles  by  a  body  of  loyalist  troops  under
Col.  George  A.  Wetherail.  After  this  disaster,  the
flight  of  Louis  J.  Papineau,  the  leader  of  the  re
bellion,  and  the  approach  of  British  troops,  Dr.
Nelson  attempted  to  escape,  but  was  arrested  and
kept  in  confinement  until  he  was  sentenced  to  im
prisonment  for  life  in  the  Bermudas.  The  house
of  lords  having  declared  the  transportation  of  Dr.
Nelson  and  his  companions  illegal,  he  was  permit
ted  to  leave  the  island,  and  came  to  the  United
States,  1  Nov.,  1838.  He  settled  in  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,
and  practised  medicine  until  August,  1842,  when,
an  amnesty  having  been  declared,  he  returned  to
Montreal  and  resided  there  till  his  death.  In  1844
he  was  elected  by  his  old  friends  on  Richelieu  river
to  represent  the  county  of  that  name,  and  was  re-
elected  to  the  next  parliament.  Declining  a  third
election,  he  was  appointed  in  1851  an  inspector  of
prisons,  which  office  he  held  till  December,  1859,


when  he  became  chairman  of  the  board  of  prison
inspectors.  During  the  ship  fever  of  1847  he  had
rendered  great  service  to  the  poor,  sick,  and  dying
immigrants  at  the  risk  of  his  own  life,  and  during
the  cholera  years,  as  chairman  of  the  board  of
health,  he  was  also  zealous.  He  was  twice  elected
mayor  of  the  city  of  Montreal,  and  repeatedly
chosen  president  and  vice-president  of  the  Medical
board  and  college  of  surgeons  for  Lower  Canada.
— His  brother,  Robert,  surgeon,  b.  in  Montreal  in
January,  1794 ;  d.  in  Gifford's,  Staten  island,  1
March,  1873,  studied  medicine,  and  attained  emi
nence  as  a  surgeon.  He  served  during  the  war  of
1812,  and  in  1827  was  elected,  with  Louis  J.  Papi
neau,  to  represent  Montreal  in  parliament.  He
was  known  to  sympathize  with  the  insurgents,  but
did  not  participate  actively  in  the  uprising  of  1837.
After  the  encounter  between  his  brother  and  the
royal  troops  at  St.  Denis,  Robert  was  arrested  and
imprisoned,  but  he  was  afterward  admitted  to
bail.  He  then  went  to  the  United  States,  and  in
1838  invaded  Canada  at  the  head  of  600  men  and
concentrated  his  force  at  Napierville.  He  styled
himself  "  president  of  the  provisional  government."
Heai'ing  of  the  approach  of  the  British  under  Sir
James  Macdonell,  he  retreated  toward  the  frontier,
but  made  a  final  stand  in  a  church,  from  which  he
was  dislodged,  and  fled  to  the  United  States,  leav
ing  fifty  killed  and  an  equal  number  wounded.  He
went  afterward  to  California,  and  in  1862  was  a
consulting  surgeon  in  New  York.  In  addition  to
articles  in  medical  journals,  he  wrote  an  account  of
the  Asiatic  cholera  that  prevailed  in  Canada  in  1832
and  translated  Hupeland's  "System  of  Medicine."
— Robert's  son,  Charles  Eugene,  physician,  b.  in
Montreal,  28  March,  1837,  was  educated  in  London
and  Cheltenham,  England,  and  at  the  Napoleon
college,  Paris.  In  1858  he  began  the  study  of
medicine  in  London,  was  graduated  in  1863,  and
the  same  year  began  practice  with  his  father  in
New  York.  In  1883  he  became  editor  of  the  New
York  "  Planet,"  in  1885  assistant  editor  of  the
"  Eastern  Medical  Journal,"  Worcester,  Mass.,  and
in  1886  its  editor.  He  has  founded  the  Robert
Nelson  gold  medal  (commemorative  of  his  father)
in  connection  with  the  medical  school  of  Lennox-
ville  university,  Canada.  Dr.  Nelson  invented  a
rectal  bougie,  which  bears  his  name.  He  has  con
tributed  many  articles  to  the  "  New  York  Medi
cal  Journal,"  "  New  England  Medical  Monthly,"
"Canada  Medical  Record,"  and  other  similar  pro
fessional  publications,  and  is  the  author  of  a  life
of  his  father,  which  was  published  in  the  "New
York  Medical  Register "  for  1873.

NENGUIRU,  or  LANGUIRU,  Nicolao,  better
known  as  NicoLlo  I.,  b.  in  Paraguay  about  1720;
d.  in  the  mission  of  Conceicao  in  1773.  He  was  a
half-breed,  and  held  the  office  of  magistrate  of
Conceicao  in  1754,  when  the  Jesuits  refused  to  sur
render  the  missions  that  had  been  ceded  by  the
treaty  of  Madrid  to  Portugal,  and,  arming  the
Guarani  Indians,  appointed  Nicolao  nominal  com
mander,  in  order  to  hide  their  disobedience  to  the
royal  order.  The  enemies  of  the  Jesuits  in  Europe
took  advantage  of  this  action  to  destroy  their  in
fluence  with  King  Ferdinand  VI.,  and  asserted,
according  to  Robert  Southey  in  his  "History  of
Brazil,"  that  the  Jesuits,  renouncing  their  allegiance
to  Spain,  had  set  up  an  empire  of  their  own  under
the  rule  of  King  Nicolao  1.  This  story  was  spread
with  much  zeal,  and  even  money,  struck  in  the
new  king's  name,  was  circulated  in  Europe,  while
Martin  Dobrizhoffer  asserts  that  at  that  time  no
money  was  in  use  in  the  missions,  that  there  was
no  mint  in  Paraguay,  and  that  the  coins  were


494


NERAZ


NESMITII


struck  in  Quito  by  order  of  the  Spanish  authorities.
Nicolilo  was  a  humble,  inoffensive  person,  desirous
to  avoid  the  notoriety  that  attached  to  his  office,
for  which  he  was  totally  unfit,  and  his  name  ap
pears  only  once  in  the  history  of  the  war  of  the
missions,  in  1755.  when  he  interfered  in  behalf  of
a  poor  Jesuit  at  Yapeya.  When  the  Guaranis  made
their  submission  to  Freire  de  Andrada  in  1756,
Nicolao  presented  himself  to  the  Spanish  author
ities  at  Andaonegui,  and,  his  innocence  being
proved,  was  restored  to  his  former  post  in  Concei-
cilo,  and  the  whole  story  of  King  Js  icolao  was  offi
cially  declared  to  be  a  fiction  in  the  "  Gazeta  de  j
Madrid"  (1708).  Nevertheless  the  romantic  history
of  the  fictitious  king  came  to  be  popularly  believed
through  a  French  work  entitled  "Histoire  de
Nicolas  I.,  roi  de  Paraguay  et  empereur  des  Mame-
lucs,"  purporting  to  be  issued  in  Sao  Paulo  in
1756,  but  probably  printed  in  Germany.  In  this
book  he  is  called  Nicolas  Robiouni,  of  Spanish
birth,  and  his  career  is  described  as  full  of  crimes,
but  Southey  declares  it  to  be  a  tissue  of  falsehoods
and  the  fabrication  of  some  ignorant  impostor.

NERAZ,  Jean  Claude,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Anse,  department  of  the  Rhone,  France,  in  1829.
He  followed  a  classical  course  in  the  College  of
St.  Godard,  then  entered  the  seminary  at  Alix,
and  finished  his  theological  studies  in  the  Sulpitian
seminary  of  Lyons.  He  emigrated  to  the  United
States  in  1852,  and  was  ordained  priest  by  Bishop
Odin  on  19  Feb.,  1853.  His  first  missionary  labors
were  in  Nacogdoches,  Tex.,  and  his  mission  com
prised  the  northeastern  part  of  the  state  as  far  as  lied
river.  In  1864  he  was  removed  to  southern  Texas,
and  was  pastor  of  Liberty  county  till  1866,  when
he  was  appointed  assistant  at  San  Antonio.  He
was  transferred  in  1868  to  Laredo,  where  he  built
a  convent  and  a  church,  and  in  1873  he  was  again
stationed  in  San  Antonio  and  given  charge  of  the
church  of  San  Fernando.  He  was  appointed  vicar-
general  of  the  diocese  of  San  Antonio  in  1875,  and
on  the  death  of  Bishop  Pellicer  was  made  adminis
trator  of  the  see.  He  was  then  nominated  second
bishop  of  San  Antonio,  and  consecrated  on  8  May,
1881.  He  was  present  at  the  third  council  of  Balti
more  in  1884.  Under  the  auspices  of  Bishop  Neraz
a  college  was  founded  in  Travis  county  by  the  priests
of  the  Holy  Cross  and  an  academy  at  Halletsville
by  the  Sisters  of  the  Incarnate  Word.  His  diocese
lias  fifty-one  priests,  fifty  churches,  eight  chapels,
three  academies,  two  colleges,  twenty-six  parochial
schools,  and  three  charitable  institutions.

NERINCKX,  Charles  (ner'-inks),  clergvman,  b.
in  Herffelingen,  Belgium,  2  Oct.,  1761 ;  d.  in  St.
Genevieve,  Mo.,  8  Aug.,  1824.  He  was  educated  at
the  University  of  Louvain  and  the  Theological
seminary  of  Mechlin,  was  ordained  in  1785,  and  in
1786  appointed  vicar  of  the  metropolitan  church
of  St.  Romualdus,  Mechlin.  When  the  army  of  the
French  republic  entered  Belgium  in  1797,  an  order
was  issued  for  his  arrest,  and  for  the  next  four
years  he  was  obliged  to  secrete  himself.  In  1800
he  applied  to  Bishop  Carroll  for  permission  to
labor  in  the  United  States,  and,  on  the  receipt  of  a
letter  assuring  him  of  welcome,  he  embarked  at
Amsterdam  and  reached  Baltimore  in  August,
1804.  In  July,  1805,  he  was  sent  to  assist  Father
Stephen  T.  Badin  (q.  v.),  who  was  the  only  priest
in  Kentucky.  In  April,  1806,  he  visited  Vin-
cennes,  where  he  engaged  for  a  time  in  missionary
work.  Father  Nerinckx  was  known  among  his  co
religionists  as  the  "  church-builder."  During  his
nineteen  years  on  the  Kentucky  mission  he  built
ten  churches,  laboring  with  his  own  hands  on  some
of  them.  Father  Nerinckx  is  regarded  as  sharing


with  Father  Badin  the  credit  of  consolidating
the  Roman  Catholic  church  in  Kentucky.  A  ride
of  twenty  miles  without  breaking  his  fast  was
with  him  a  common  occurrence,  and  he  never  al
lowed  himself  more  than  a  few  hours'  sleep  after
the  most  exhausting  labors.  Although  he  had
charge  of  but  six  congregations  in  Kentucky,  the
stations  that  he  served  were  scattered  over  the
whole  extent  of  the  state.  Sometimes  in  swim
ming  rivers  at  flood-tide  he  was  swept  from  his
horse  and  saved  himself  only  by  his  great  physical
strength.  In  1808  he  was  appointed  bishop  of
New  Orleans,  but  declined  the  honor.  Father  Ne
rinckx  visited  Europe  twice  in  the  interest  of  his
church  in  Kentucky,  for  which  he  thus  obtained
over  $15.000.  He  was  the  founder  of  the  Institute
of  Friends  of  Mary  at  the  Foot  of  the  Cross,  better
known  as  the  Sisterhood  of  Loretto.  The  sisters
were  soon  in  charge  of  institutions  for  the  educa
tion  of  girls;  but  the  rules  that  he  established  for
their  guidance  were  looked  on  as  excessively  severe,
and  a  dispute  between  him  arid  Father  (afterward
Bishop)  Chabrat  on  this  point  led  to  his  withdrawal
from  Kentucky  in  June,  1824.  He  went  to  the
convent  of  Bethlehem,  in  Perry  county.  Mo.,  a
branch  house  of  his  Loretto  sisterhood,  intending
to  prepare  for  missionary  work  among  the  Indians.
He  erected  a  house  in  Bethlehem  for  the  education
of  twelve  Indian  girls,  for  whose  tuition  the  U.  S.
government  had  agreed  to  pay;  but  the  contract
was  not  fulfilled,  owing  to  the  death  of  the  priest
<  in  a  few  days.  See  "  Life  of  the  Reverend  Charles
Nerinckx,"  by  the  Rev.  Camillas  I*.  Maes  (1880).

NESBITT,  John Maxwell,  merchant, b.  in
'  Ireland  in  1728;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  22  Jan..  1802.
He  came  to  this  country  in  early  life,  settled  in
Philadelphia,  and became  one  of  the  chief mer-
I  chants  of  that  city. He  was  the  paymaster  of  the
j  Pennsylvania navy from 14 Sept., 1775, till 1
:  March,  1778,  and  treasurer  of  the  Pennsylvania
1  board  of  war  during  the  Revolution. lie  enlisted
in  1777  in  the  city  troop,  with  which  he  served
!  during  its  campaign  in  New  Jersey,  in  17H8  was
j  appointed  one  of  the  committee  to  settle  the  ac
counts  of  the  council  of  safety,  in  1780  assisted  in
forming  the  Pennsylvania  bank  to  supply  provis
ions  for  the  army,  subscribed  £5,000  to  its  funds,
and  was  chosen  one  of  its  five  inspectors. In  1781
he  joined  with  Robert  Morris  and  others  in  form
ing  the  Bank  of  North  America,  and  he  served  in
|  its  directorship  from  its  organization  until  1792,
when  he  became  one  of  the  founders  of  the  In
surance  company  of North  America,  the oldest
fire  and  marine  insurance  company  in  the  United
States,  was  chosen  its  first  president,  and  served
four  years. He  was  one  of  the  port-wardens  in
1788,  and  in  1790  an  alderman. In  1793  he  was
one  of  a  committee  of  merchants  to  collect  infor
mation  respecting  the  capture  or  detention  of  ves
sels  belonging  to  citizens  of  the  United  States  by
the cruisers  of nations at  war,  and  to  lay the
same  before  the  president. He  was  a  founder  of
the  Friendly  society  of  St.  Patrick  (afterward  An
cient  order  of  Hibernians)  in  1771,  of  which  he  was
chosen  vice-president,  and  in  1773  president.

NESMITH,  James  Willis,  senator,  b.  in  New
Brunswick,  Canada,  23  July,  1820;  d.  in  Polk
county,  Oregon,  17  June,  1885.  He  was  left  an
orphan  at  an  early  age,  received  no  education,  and
was  forced  to  earn  his  livelihood.  He  removed  to
the  United  States,  and  in  1843  went  with  the  first
emigrants  to  Oregon,  where  he  took  an  active  part
in  forming  the  provisional  government.  He  was
made  a  judge  in  1845,  having  studied  law  during
two  years  in  Oregon  City.  He  commanded  as  cap-


XESMITH


XETZAHUALCOYOTL


495


tain  two  expeditions  against  the  Indians  during
the  Cayuse  war  of  1848,  and  the  Yakima  war  in
1855.  In  1853-'5  he  was  U.  S.  marshal  for  Oregon.
He  was  appointed  superintendent  of  Indian  affairs
for  Oregon  and  Washington  territories  in  1857,  and
was  elected  U.  S.  senator  for  the  term  from  1861
till  1867.  serving  on  the  committees  on  military
and  Indian  affairs,  a  special  committee  that  was
appointed  to  visit  the  Indian  tribes  of  the  west,
and  those  on  commerce  and  Revolutionary  claims.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  union  con
vention  of  1866,  and  subsequently  was  appointed
U.  S.  minister  to  Austria,  but  was  not  confirmed.
While  engaged  in  farming  in  Oregon  he  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Democrat  to  fill  a  vacancy,  serving
from  1  Dec..  1878,  till  3  March,  1875.

NESMITH,  John,  manufacturer,  b.  in  London
derry,  X.  H.,  3  Aug.,  1793 ;  d.  in  Lowell,  Mass.,  15
Oct.,  1869.  After  serving  an  apprenticeship  in  a
country  store  he  entered  into  business  with  his
brother  Thomas,  and,  removing  to  Xew  York,  be
came  a  successful  merchant.  In  1831  he  settled  in
Lowell,  Mass.,  and  invested  largely  in  real  estate,
purchasing  the  Gedney  estate  in  Belvidere  with  its
large  mansion,  the  Old  Yellow  House,  which  was
erected  in  1750,  and  is  still  in  possession  of  his  fam
ily.  He  then  laid  out  several  streets,  giving  his
name  to  one  of  them,  and  his  purchase,  being  made
soon  after  the  formation  of  the  Merrimac  manufac
turing  company,  secured  him  much  wealth.  Pie  was
a  large  owner  in  the  Merrimac  woollen-mills  com
pany,  and  made  a  large  sum  by  obtaining  the  sup
ply  of  water  in  Winnipiseogee  and  Squam  lakes  as
reservoirs  for  the  Lowell  mills  in  dry  seasons.  He
secured  the  site  for  the  city  of  Lawrence,  and  also
the  control  of  water-power  there.  Mr.  Xesmith
invented  a  machine  for  making  wire-fences,  and
another  for  making  shawl-fringe.  He  held  various
political  offices  in  Lowell,  and  contributed  largely
to  the  pecuniary  support  of  the  anti-slavery  move
ment.  He  served  as  an  elector  on  the  Lincoln
tickets  of  1860  and  1864,  was  lieutenant-governor  of
Massachusetts  in  1862,  declined  a  re-election  in  1863.
and  was  appointed  collector  of  internal  revenue
for  his  district  in  1863,  holding  this  office  until  a
few  days  before  his  death.  He  provided  in  his  will
for  the  foundation  of  a  "  Xesmith  Fund  "  for  the
support,  education,  and  maintenance  of  the  indigent
blind  of  Xew  Hampshire,  and  also  bequeathed
money  for  a  public  park  in  Franklin,  X.  II.

NES3IOND,  Georges  Henry  Emile  de  (nes-
mond),  Flemish  explorer,  b.  in  Oudenarde  in  1793 ;
d.  in  Paris  in  1852.  He  served  in  the  French  army
during  the  last  years  of  the  reign  of  Xapoleon  I.,
and  afterward  was  professor  of  mathematics  and
geology  in  Mons,  Louvain,  and  Paris.  In  1840  he
was  sent  to  explore  Central  America,  where  he
remained  for  several  years.  He  made  a  particular
study  of  volcanoes,  remained  several  months  in  San
Salvador,  studied  the  geological  formation  of  the
district  of  La  Union  in  the  Bay  of  Fonseca,  and
later  went  to  Mexico.  He  published  ''Voyage
scientifique  dans  1'Amerique  Centrale "  (2  vols.,
Paris,  1847) ;  "  Etudes  sur  les  couches  geologiques
des  terrains  du  district  de  la  Union  dans  la  Baie  de
Fonseca "  (2  vols.,  1849) ;  and  "  Etudes  sur  les
volcans  de  1'Amerique  Centrale  "  (3  vols.,  1850).

NESMOND,  Jean  Baptiste  du  Bnc  de  (nes-
mong),  West  Indian  administrator,  b.  in  Trois
Ilets  in  1717;  d.  in  Paris  in  1795.  After  finishing
his  studies  in  Paris  he  entered  the  colonial  admin
istration,  where  he  held  several  important  offices  ;
presided  in  1761  at  the  foundation  of  a  board  of
agriculture  in  Fort  de  France,  and  in  the  same  year
was  elected  deputy  of  the  colonists.  A  paper  on


colonial  administration  that  he  presented  to  the
king  on  his  arrival  in  Versailles  received  high  ap
probation  :  he  was  chosen  a  director  of  the  Company
of  the  Indies,  and  in  1763  president  of  the  admin
istration  of  the  West  Indies,  which  post  he  held  till
his  resignation  in  1770.  His  papers  on  colonial
administration  attracted  attention,  and  contributed
much  toward  the  adoption  of  the  protective  colonial
policy  that  was  in  force  in  the  French  possessions
till  the  reign  of  Xapoleon  III.  Madame  Xecker  in
her  "Melanges"  mentions  Buc  de  Xesmond  as  one
of  the  ablest  and  most  witty  men  of  the  eighteenth
century. — His  son,  Louis  Francois.  West  Indian
administrator,  b.  in  Trois  Ilets  in  1779:  d.  in  Paris,
12  Dec.,  1827,  served  several  years  in  France,  but
returned  to  Martinique  at  the  beginning  of  the
revolution,  was  elected  president  of  the  colonial
assembly,  and  rendered  great  service  in  quelling
several  insurrections.  The  monarchist  army  mean
while  defeated  the  patriots,  and  marching  to  St.
Pierre  threatened  to  burn  the  city  in  case  of  resist
ance,  but  Xesmond  saved  the  city  by  his  firmness.
He  assisted  afterward  in  the  pacification  of  the
colony,  fought  gallantly  against  the  English,  and
through  his  influence  obtained  from  Admiral  Coch-
rane  in  1806  a  convention  that  left  the  administra
tion  of  the  colony  to  the  French.  Louis  XVIII.
appointed  him  colonial  intendant  in  1814,  and  he
held  that  office  for  thirteen  years,  encouraging
agriculture,  promoting  commerce  and  industry,  and,
in  opposition  to  his  father's  teachings,  advocating
a  policy  of  free  trade  with  the  United  States.  In
1827  he  was  elected  to  the  chamber  of  deputies,  but
he  died  soon  after  his  arrival  in  Paris.

NETTLETON,  Ashael.  clergyman,  b.  in  Xorth
Killingworth,  Conn..  21  April,  '1783;  d.  in  East
Windsor,  Conn.,  16  May,  1844.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1809,  studied  theology,  was  licensed  in
1811,  and  ordained  as  an  evangelist  in  1817.  His
preaching  was  so  effective  that  he  relinquished  his
intention  of  becoming  a  missionary,  and  from  1812
till  1822  served  as  a  revivalist  in  Connecticut,.
Massachusetts,  and  Xew  York.  In  1827  he  went
to  Virginia  for  his  health,  returning  in  1829,  and
preached  in  Xew  York  and  Connecticut  until  1831.
He  then  went  to  Great  Britain,  and  soon  after  his
return  in  1832  was  appointed  professor  of  pastoral
duty  in  the  newly  organized  seminary  at  East
Windsor,  Conn.,  and,  although  he  did  not  accept
this  office,  he  settled  there  and  lectured  occasionally
to  the  students.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Hampden  Sidney  and  Jefferson  colleges,  Pa.,
in  1839.  Dr.  Xettleton's  sermons  were  chiefly  ex
temporaneous,  and  in  his  later  years  he  opposed
the  doctrines  of  the  Xew  Haven  school  of  theology.
He  compiled  a  book  entitled  "  Village  Hymns  "
(Xew  York,  1824).  His  "  Remains  and  Sermons  "
were  edited  by  Rev.  Bennet  Tyler,  D.  D.  (Hartford,
1845),  who  also  published  a  "  Memoir  "  (1844).  which
was  reprinted  with  additions  by  Rev.  Andrew  A.
Bonar  under  the  title  of  "  Xettleton  and  His
Labors  "  (Edinburgh,  1854).

NETZAH  UALCO  TOTL  (net-sah-wal-co'-yot-tle),
king  of  Acolhuacan  or  Texcoco,  Mexico,  b.  in  Tex
coco  in  1403 ;  d.  there  in  1470.  He  was  a  son  of
Ixtlixochitl  (q.  •?•.),  sixth  king  of  Acolhuacan.  and
Matlazahuatzin.daughterof  King  Huitzilihuitl.and
was  educated  by  the  wisest  men  of  Texcoco.  When
he  was  scarcely  fifteen  years  old,  he  was  with  his
father  on  a  hunting  expedition,  when  their  estates
were  invaded  by  Tetzotzomoc,  king  of  Atzcapot-
zalco.  and  his  father  was  murdered,  while  he
escaped  by  hiding  in  the  branches  of  a  tree.  Later,
through  protection  of  his  uncle,  Chimalpopoca.  he.
obtained  permission  to  return  to  Texcoco,  where  he


496


NETZAII UALCOYOTL


NEUMANN


lived  quietly  in  the  palace  of  his  forefathers,  de
voting  himself  to  study.  When  Maxtla  succeeded
his  father  Tetzotzomoc,  and  killed  Chimalpopoca.
in  1427,  fearing  the  popularity  of  Netzahualcoyotl,
he  sent  assassins  to  murder  him,  but  the  latter
escaped,  and,  taking  refuge  in  the  mountains  of
Tlaxeala,  was  hunted  by  the  emissaries  of  Maxtla
for  several  years  like  a  wild  beast.  But  at  last  the
neighboring  monarchs  of  Mexico  and  Tlaltelolco
and  the  republics  of  Tlaxeala  and  Huexotzingo
formed  an  alliance  in  1430  and  called  •'Netzahual
coyotl  to  the  command  of  the  allied  army.  After
a  short  and  bloody  campaign  he  defeated,  captured,
and  killed  the  usurper  Maxtla,  destroying  Atzcapot-
zalco  and  restoring  the  legitimate  monarchy  of
Texcoco.  One  of  his  first  acts  after  recovering  his
throne  was  to  proclaim  a  general  amnesty,  lie
reformed  the  tribunals,  and  established  a  supreme
court  at  Texcoco,  for  which  he  formed  a  code  of
laws  that  consisted  of  eighty  articles,  of  which
thirty-four  have  been  preserved  in  tradition,  lie
was  a  patron  of  science  and  literature,  and  assem
bled  many  learned  men  at  the  court  of  Texcoco.
That  city" soon  became  the  centre  of  civilization  of
that  part  of  the  New  World,  and  has  been  styled
by  historians  the  Athens  of  America.  He  was  an
adept  in  astronomy  and  natural  history,  and  for
the  advancement  of  the  latter  science  ordered  a
•collection  of  paintings  to  be  made  of  all  the  animals
and  plants  in  Anahuac,  part  of  which  was  used  by
the  scientist  Francisco  Hernandez  (q.  v.)  for  his
work  on  the  natural  history  of  New  Spain.  Netza
hualcoyotl  was  also  an  excellent  poet,  and  a  philos
opher  far  in  advance  of  his  time.  By  study  he
had  come  to  recognize  one  God,  whom  under  the
name  of  Tlogue  Nahuague  he  celebrated  in  a  series
of  sixty  odes.  These  have  been  partially  translated
by  his  descendant,  Fernando  de  Alba  Ixtlilxotchitl
(q.  v.),  and  highly  praised  for  their  beauty.  Some
of  the  cities  formerly  belonging  to  the  kingdom  of
Atzcapotzalco  revolted  against  his  authority,  but
he  subdued  them,  and  greatly  extended  the  limits
of  his  empire,  being  appointed  chief  of  the  con
federacy  of  Mexico,  Tlaltelolco,  and  Acolhuacan.
He  had  also  considerable  knowledge  of  engineer
ing,  and  superintended  the  construction  of  the
flike  that  was  erected  after  the  inundation  of
Mexico  in  1440,  by  order  of  Montezuma  I.  The
latter  years  of  his  reign  were  troubled  by  several
revolts  that  were  headed  by  his  four  sons  by
his  first  wife.  He  was  forced  to  execute  them,
and,  having  no  legitimate  successor,  he  fell  into  a
deep  melancholy  and  sought  distraction  in  the
chase.  In  one  of  these  expeditions  he  fell  in  love
with  the  wife  of  a  cacique  of  Tepechpan.  Sending
the  latter  on  a  warlike  expedition  against  Tlaxeala,
in  which  he  perished,  Netzahualcoyotl,  after  the
death  of  his  second  wife,  married  the  princess,  and
by  her  had  a  son,  Netzahualpilli,  whom  he  indicated
as  his  successor. — His  son,  Netzahualpilli  (net-sa-
wal-pil'-le),  king  of  Texcoco,  b.  in  Texcoco  in  1462  ;
d.  in  his  palace  of  Tecotzingo  in  1516,  was  pro
claimed  king  under  a  council  of  regency,  but  when
he  came  of  age  he  assumed  the  government  and
followed  the  example  of  his  father  as  a  wise  and
powerful  monarch,  continuing  to  embellish  his
capital  and  to  be  a  patron  of  learning.  He  had  also
inherited  his  father's  taste  for  astronomy,  and
erected  near  Texcoco  an  observatory,  of  which  the
remains  still  exist.  There  he  gave  himself  to  astro
logical  studies,  and  by  his  calculations  thought
that  he  had  discovered  that  within  a  few  years
powerful  invaders  from  a  foreign  and  unknown
country  would  arrive  to  overthrow  the  dynasties  of
Anahuac.  Saddened  by  this  discovery  and  by  the


continuous  strife  between  his  four  sons,  ho  retired
from  public  life.  Some  of  his  tributary  provinces
revolted,  and  the  title  of  chief  of  the  allied  armies
of  Anahuac  was  wrested  from  him  by  Montezuma
II.  He  died  three  years  before  the  arrival  of  Cor
tes,  and  his  son,  Cacamatzin,  was  his  successor.

NEUENDORFF,  Adolph  Heinrich  Anton
Miii;' ii us,  musician,  b.  in  Hamburg,  Germany,  13
June,  1843.  He  came  to  New  York  with  his  par
ents  in  1854.  Two  years  later  he  had  instruction
on  the  violin  from  Joseph  Weinlich.  After  serving
as  chorus-master  and  member  of  an  orchestra  before
he  was  sixteen,  he  studied  theory  and  composition
with  Gustav  Schilling,  under  whose  direction  he
also  made  his  first  appearance  as  a  pianist  at
Dodworth  hall  in  1859.  After  a  two-years'  trip  to
South  America,  he  became  conductor  of  the  orches
tra  at  the  German  theatre  in  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  and
in  1864  was  chorus-master  of  Carl  Anschiitz's  Ger
man  opera  company.  Later  he  succeeded  Anschiitz
as  conductor,  and  in  1867  became  music-director
of  the  New  Stall t  theatre,  New  York.  In  1870-'!
he  brought  a  German  company  from  Europe,  pro
duced  "  Tannhauser  "  and  "  Lohengrin,"  the  latter
being  seen  for  the  first  time  in  America.  In  1872
he  brought  Theodor  Wachtel  to  this  country,  and,
with  Carl  Rosa,  gave  a  season  of  Italian  opera  at
the  Academy  of  music.  In  that  year  he  also  es
tablished  the  Germania  theatre  in  New  York,  of
which  he  was  manager  for  eleven  years.  During
that  time  he  was  also  organist  of  a  church  and
conductor  of  a  choral  society.  In  1875  he  gave  a
season  of  German  opera  with  Wachtel  and  Madame
Pappenheim,  conducted  the  Beethoven  centennial
concerts,  and  went  to  the  first  Wagner  festival  at
Bayreuth  as  correspondent  for  the  "  New  Yorker
Staats-Zeitung."  In  1878  Neuendorff  succeeded
Theodore  Thomas  as  conductor  of  the  New  York
philharmonic.  In  1881  he  transferred  his  German
theatre  to  the  building  that  had  been  vacated  by
Lester  Wallack  ;  but  the  change  proved  disastrous,
and  he  lost  a  fortune  in  two  years.  He  has  di
rected  operas  and  concerts  in  all  the  large  cities  of
the  Union.  His  compositions  include  two  sym
phonies  and  three  operas,  "The  Rat-Charmer  of
Hamelin  "  (1880) ;  "  Don  Quixote  "  (1882) ;  "  Prince
Waldmeister"  (1887);  and  numerous  other  instru
mental  and  vocal  works.

NEUMANN,  John  Nepomncene,  II.  C.  bish
op,  b.  in  Prachatitz,  Bohemia,  28  March,  1811  ;  d.
in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  5  Jan.,  1860.
lie  studied  in
the  gymnasium  of
Budweis  in  1823-
'31,  and  in  the  the
ological  semina
ry  there  for  two
years,  after  which
he  finished  his
theological  stud
ies  at  Prague  in
1835.  His  desire
always  had  been
to  labor  among
his  countrymen  in
the  United  States,
and,  after  meet-
ing  with  many  ob
stacles,  he  arrived  in  New  York  on  31  May,  1836,
and  was  ordained  priest  by  Bishop  Dubois  on  25
June.  He  was  appointed,  a  few  days  after,  to
take  charge  of  the  missions  around  Niagara  Falls.
He  next  went  to  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  and  thence  to
Williamsville,  near  that  place,  where  he  completed


NEUMANN


XEUVILLE


497


the  building  of  a  church.  He  also  attended  various
places  within  a  radius  of  fifty  miles,  and  taught
for  nearly  a  year,  his  parishioners  being  too
poor  to  pay  a  teacher.  He  also  began  the  study  of
medicine,  for  which  an  extensive  knowledge  of
botany  served  him.  While  journeying  through  the
forests  on  his  missionary  duties  he  searched  for
flowers  and  plants  to  be  used  in  compounding
medicines,  and  also  found  means  to  form  a  valu
able  collection,  which  he  afterward  forwarded  to  the
museum  at  Munich.  In  1840  he  was  prostrated  by
an  intermittent  fever,  and  he  then  sought  admit
tance  at  the  Redemptorist  convent  in  Pittsburg,
Pa.,  on  18  Oct.,  and  two  years  later  he  made  his
vows,  being  the  first  Redemptorist  that  professed
in  the  United  States.  He  spent  the  two  following
years  in  giving  missions  in  Maryland,  Virginia,  and
Pennsylvania.  He  was  appointed  in  1844  superior
of  the  Redemptorist  convent  of  Pittsburg,  and
built  the  church  of  St.  Philomena.  the  whole  super
intendence  of  which  devolved  on  him.  He  also
wrote  a  catechism  and  a  Bible  history  for  the  use
of  schools,  spending  night  hours  on  these  com
pilations  when  the  day's  work  was  over.  At  the
same  time  he  composed  manuals  for  the  various
confraternities  of  the  Redemptorist  churches.  Be
fore  leaving  Pittsburg  he  had  nearly  finished  a  new
Redemptorist  convent  and  novitiate.  He  was
appointed  superior  of  the  American  province  on  15
Dec..  1846.  and  during  his  provincialship  Redemp
torist  foundations  were  made  and  churches  were
erected  under  his  direction  in  the  chief  cities  of  the
United  States.  In  1847  he  intrusted  the  three
female  schools  under  his  jurisdiction  in  Baltimore
to  the  School-sisters  of  Notre  Dame,  who  had  just
arrived  from  Bavaria,  and  his  zeal  in  spreading
this  order  throughout  the  United  States  entitles
him  to  be  regarded  as  its  founder  in  this  country.
In  1849  he  laid  down  his  office  and  was  made  con-  |
suitor  to  the  provincial.  In  1851  he  was  made
rector  of  St.  Alphonsus's  church,  Baltimore,  and  in
the  same  year  was  appointed  bishop  of  Philadel
phia.  After  vainly  endeavoring  to  decline  the
office  he  was  consecrated  by  Archbishop  Kenrick
on  20  March,  1852.  He  set  about  erecting  churches
wherever  they  were  needed,  and  during  the  first
five  years  of  his  episcopate  he  opened  more  than
fifty.  In  some  parishes  where  there  was  a  feeling
against  ecclesiastical  authority  he  restored  peace
by  his  prudence  and  firmness.  At  his  death  paro
chial  schools  in  his  diocese  had  increased  from  a
few  to  more  than  a  hundred.  He  also  founded  St.
Joseph's  college  in  Susquehanna  county,  and  various
academies  and  hospitals.  The  Sisters  of  the  third
order  of  St.  Francis  owe  their  existence  to  Bishop
Neumann.  They  now  have  twenty-five  convents
and  over  200  professed  sisters,  who  are  principally
engaged  in  nursing  the  sick  at  their  own  homes.
In  1854  he  visited  Rome  to  take  part  in  the  defini
tion  of  the  dogma  of  the  immaculate  conception,
and  after  his  return  he  devoted  his  energies  to  the
•completion  of  the  cathedral  of  Philadelphia,  which
had  been  begun  by  his  predecessor.  In  1858  it  was
opened  for  worship.  It  was  said  of  him  that  in  the
eight  years  of  his  episcopate  he  had  accomplished
the  work  of  twenty.  To  a  great  sanctity  of  life  he
added  a  high  degree  of  learning  and  scholarship.
He  could  converse  freely  in  at  least  twelve  modern
languages.  The  Roman  Catholics  of  his  diocese
believed  after  his  death  that  many  wonderful  cures
were  effected  through  his  intercession.  In  1884
steps  were  taken  toward  his  canonization.  See
"  Life  of  Right  Rev.  John  Neumann.  D.  D.,"  by
Rev.  Eugene  Grimm,  from  the  German  of  Rev.
John  A.  Berger  (New  York,  1884).
VOL.  iv.— 32


NEUMANN,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Brussels,
Belgium,  in  1647;  d.  in  Mexico,  1  May,  1732.  He
studied  in  Olmutz,  and  afterward  entering  the
Society  of  Jesus  asked  to  be  sent  to  the  American
mission,  and  embarked  for  Mexico  in  1678.  He
was  appointed  superior  of  New  Biscay  after  his
arrival,  and  spent  several  years  in  preaching  to  the
Indians  of  California.  He  wrote  "  Brief  R.  P.
Yesephi  Neumann  S.  Y.  an  P.  Franc  Stovvasser,
geschrieben  zu  Sisokitschik  in  Neu-Biscaja  in  Nord-
America,"  which  was  published  in  the  '•  Weltbott  "
of  Stocklein,  and  "Historia  Seditionum,  quas  ad-
versus  Societatis  Jesu  Missionaries  moverunt  na-
tiones  Indicae  "  (Prague,  1730).

NEUV1LLE,  Jean  Gruillaume,  Baron  Hyde
de,  French  statesman,  b.  in  the  Castle  of  Neuville,
near  Charite-sur-Loire,  24  Jan.,  1776;  d.  in  Paris,
28  May,  1847.  After  studying  in  the  College  Car
dinal  Lemoine,  in  Paris,  he  entered  political  life  at
the  age  of  sixteen.  He  became  one  of  the  most
trusted  agents  of  the  exiled  Bourbon  princes,  and
after  the  coup  d'etat  of  9  Nov.,  1799,  he  had,  under
the  name  of  Paul  Xavier,  an  interview  with  Bona
parte,  in  which  conditions  for  the  restoration  of
Louis  XVIII.  were  discussed.  During  the  consu
late  and  empire  he  practised  medicine  in  Lyons
under  the  name  of  Roland,  and  obtained  a  gold
medal  for  the  propagation  of  vaccine ;  but  in  1806
Napoleon  consented  to  refund  Neuville's  confis
cated  estate  on  condition  that  he  should  go  to  the
United  States,  and  the  latter  settled  near  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  where  his  house  became  a  place
of  refuge  for  French  exiles.  In  1813  he  was  instru
mental  in  deciding  his  friend,  Gen.  Moreau  (q.  v.),
to  accept  the  propositions  of  the  emperor  of  Rus
sia.  Neuville  returned  to  France  in  April.  1814,
and  was  given,  by  Louis  XVIII..  a  mission  to
London  to  offer  the  mediation  of  France  between
Great  Britain  and  the  United  States.  In  Decem
ber  of  the  same  year  he  went  to  Rome  and  had
several  secret  interviews  with  Prince  Lucien.  a
brother  of  Napoleon,  the  purpose  of  which  was  to
decide  the  latter  to  leave  Elba  and  go  to  the
United  States ;  but  the  secret  transpired  through
an  indiscreet  secretary,  and  Napoleon,  taking
alarm,  left  suddenly  for  France.  In  1815  he  was
elected  to  the  chamber  of  deputies,  and  on  14
Jan.,  1816.  appointed  minister  and  consul-general
for  the  United  States.  He  arrived  in  Wash
ington  in  August  following,  was  received  with
favor  by  President  Madison,  and  soon  became  a
leader  in  society.  The  influence  he  thus  acquired
enabled  him  to  negotiate  a  very  favorable  treaty  of
commerce  and  navigation,  which  was  signed.  24
June.  1822.  and  several  articles  of  which  are  still
in  force.  Louis  XVIII.  created  him  a  baron,  and
in  1821  gave  him  the  grand  cross  of  the  Legion  of
honor  as  a  reward  for  his  services.  He  was  recalled
late  in  1821,  and  re-elected  deputy  in  1822.  In  1823
he  became  ambassador  to  Lisbon,  where  he  rescued
the  old  king,  John  VI.,  who  had  been  imprisoned
by  his  son.  and  was  created  Count  de  Pembosta.
He  was  returned  to  the  chamber  of  deputies  in
1824  and  1827.  and  as  secretary  of  the  navy  in  the
Martignac  cabinet.  1828-'30.  greatly  improved  the
colonial  system  of  France,  and  prohibited  the  slave-
trade  in  its  American  possessions.  Under  Louis
Philippe  he  lived  quietly  upon  his  estate  of  1'Etang,
near  Sancerre.  but  in  1837  he  took  an  active  part
in  the  discussion  of  a  new  treaty  of  commerce
with  the  United  States,  and  caused  several  pam
phlets  to  be  printed  on  the  subject.  He  published
"  Eloge  historique  du  General  Moreau  "  (New  York,
1814)  and  "  Observations  sur  le  commerce  de  la
France  avec  les  Etats-Unis  "  (Paris,  1837).


498


NEUVILLE


XEVES


NEUVILLE,  Philippe  Bnache  (le  la,  French
geographer,  b.  in  Neuville-en-Pont,  7  Feb.,  1700;  d.
in  Paris,  24  Jan.,  1773.  He  was  a  pupil  of  Guil-
laume  Delisle,  and  succeeded  him  in  the  Academy
of  sciences  in  1730.  He  invented  a  new  system  of
geography,  which,  although  defective  in  many  in
stances,  contributed  greatly  toward  the  progress  of
that  science,  and  popularized  it.  By  a  careful
study  of  the  map  of  the  earth  he  became  convinced
that  a  connection  existed  in  Bering  strait  between
Asia  and  America,  and  he  placed  on  his  map  the
peninsula  of  Alaska  and  the  Aleutian  islands  long
before  their  discovery.  After  reading  the  narrative
of  Admiral  do  Fuent'e  (q.  i1.),  he  drew  a  chart  of  the
western  coast  of  North  America,  then  almost  un
known,  which  was  valuable  to  navigators.  He  af
firmed  also  that  a  continent  or  large  islands  existed
in  the  vicinity  of  the  south  pole.  Among  his  works
are  "  Considerations  geographiques  et  physiques
sur  les  decouvertes  nouvelles  dans  la  grande  mer,''
which  contains  a  chart  of  the  western  coast  of
North  America  (Paris,  1754);  "Le  parallele  des
fleuves  des  quatre  parties  du  monde  pour  servir
a  determiner  la  hauteur  des  montagnes  "  (1757);
'  Memoire  sur  la  traversee  de  la  mer  glaciale  arc-
tique,"  which  contains  his  hypothesis  of  an  Alas
kan  peninsula  (1759);  and  "Considerations  geo
graphiques  sur  les  terres  australes  et  antarc-
tiques"  (1761). — His  nephew,  Jean  Nicolas,  b.  in
Neuville-en-Pont,  15  Feb.,  1741 ;  d.  in  Paris,  21
Nov.,  1825,  taught  geography  to  Louis  XVI.,  Louis
XVIII.,  and  Charles  X.,  was  afterward  keeper  of
the  marine  charts  and  log-books  in  the  navy  de
partment,  and,  being  elected  to  the  Academy  of
sciences  in  1782,  prepared  the  charts  for  the  unfor
tunate  expedition  of  La  Perouse  (q.  v.)  to  the
South  sea.  Among  his  works  are  "  Memoire  sur
la  terre  des  Arsacides,"  in  which  he  claims  that
Surville  discovered  the  Salomon  islands  before
Mendana  de  Neyra  (Paris,  1781);  and  "Considera
tions  sur  les  limites  meridionales  de  la  Guiane
Francaise"  (1797),  in  which  he  urged  the  govern
ment  to  claim  a  tract  of  land  150  miles  large,  which
he  affirmed  belonged  to  Guiana.  This  work  con
tained  also  a  map  of  Guiana  which  provoked  com
plications  with  Portugal,  and  the  "  Directory  "  was
at  one  time  on  the  eve  of  declaring  war  with  the
latter  country.  The  difficulties  that  were  raised
by  Buache  de  la  Neuville's  work  were  brought  to
an  end  only  under  the  reign  of  Louis  Philippe.  He
also  wrote  "  Memoire  sur  les  decouvertes  faites
par  la  Perouse  "  (1798);  "  Recherches  sur  File  Juan
de  Lisboa"  (1801);  "Recherches  sur  1'ile  Antilla  et
sur  1'epoque  de  la  decouverte  de  I'Amerique "
(1806) ;  and  "  Observations  sur  quelques  iles  situees
entre  le  Japon  et  la  Californie  "  (1809).

NEUVILLE,  Chevalier  de  la,  soldier,  b.  about
1740;  d.  about  1800.  In  1777  he  and  his  younger
brother  Normiont  arrived  in  this  country  and
offered  their  services  to  congress.  He  had  been
for  more  than  twenty  years  an  officer,  brought  let
ters  that  recommended  him  for  his  zeal,  activity,
and  knowledge  in  the  French  service,  and  also
bore  high  testimonials  to  Gen.  Washington.  On
14  May,  1778.  he  was  appointed  an  inspector  of
the  army  under  Gen.  Horatio  Gates,  with  the
promise  of  rank  according  to  his  merit  at  the  end
of  three  months.  He  was  a  good  officer  but  a
strict  disciplinarian,  and  was  not  popular  with  the
army.  Failing  to  receive  promotion  to  the  rank
he  expected  after  six  months'  service,  he  applied
for  permission  to  retire,  which  was  granted,  and  on
4  Dec.,  1778,  congress  passed  an  order  that  a  cer
tificate  be  given  him  by  the  president  in  these
words:  "  M.  de  la  Neuville,  having  served  with


fidelity  and  reputation  in  the  army  of  the  United
States,  in  testimony  of  his  merit,  a  brevet  commis
sion  of  brigadier  has  been  granted  him  by  con
gress,  and,  on  his  request,  he  is  permitted  to  leave
the  service  of  the  States  and  return  to  France."
He  formed  a  strong  attachment  for  Gen.  Gates
while  under  his  command,  and  corresponded  with
him  after  leaving  the  country.  In  one  of  his  let
ters  he  says  that  he  had  applied  for  permission  to
return  to  America  in  vain,  and  announced  his  in
tention  of  doing  so,  "  not  as  a  general  but  as  a
philosopher,"  and  of  purchasing  a  residence  near
that  of  Gen.  Gates.  He  did  not  revisit  this  coun
try,  and  his  subsequent  history  is  lost. — His  brother,
Normiont,  served  in  two  campaigns  with  credit,
was  appointed  a  major,  and  afterward  lieutenant-
colonel  by  brevet,  and  returned  to  France  in  1779.

NEU-WlED,  Alexander  Maximilian  (noy-
veet),  Prince  of,  b.  in  Neu-Wied,  Germany,  23
Sept.,  1782 ;  d.  there,  3  Feb.,  1867.  He  served  in  the
Prussian  army  until  1806,  when  he  was  retired  as  a
major-general,  and  gave  himself  to  the  study  of
natural  science.  In  1815  he  made  a  voyage  to  Rio
Janeiro  for  the  purpose  of  exploring  the  interior  of
Brazil.  In  1816  lie  reached  the  Morro  d'Arrara,
and  found  the  tribe  of  the  Botocudos,  about  which
he  gave  exact  details  for  the  first  time.  On  account
of  the  war  among  the  different  tribes  of  the  coun
try  he  was  obliged  to  abandon  his  original  route,
and  retired  to  Villavicosa,  remaining  for  some  time
near  the  ruins  that  he  had  discovered  in  Jonassoma.
North  of  the  river  Belmonte  he  made  his  way
through  the  woods,  and  after  many  difficulties  ar
rived  in  the  province  of  Minas-Geraes.  His  delicate
health  forced  him  to  abandon  his  expedition,  but
on  arriving  at  Nazareth  he  was  detained  by  un
founded  suspicions  for  three  days,  and  robbed  of  a
large  part  of  his  collection  of  insects  and  plants.
After  this  he  resolved  to  leave  the  country,  and
embarked  for  Germany  on  10  May,  1817.  In  1833
he  travelled  through  the  western  part  of  North
America  to  the  Rocky  mountains,  collecting  a  large
quantity  of  specimens  in  natural  history,  and  having
views  taken  by  the  artists  that  accompanied  him.
His  zoological  collection,  embracing  rare  specimens
of  the  South  American  fauna,  is  now  in  the  Ameri
can  museum  of  natural  history,  New  York.  He
wrote  "Reise  nach  Brasilien  in  den  Jahren  1815-
1817"  (Frankfort,  1819-'20):  "Abbildungen  zur
Naturgeschichte  Brasiliens  "  (Weimar,  1823);  "Bei-
trage  zur  Naturgeschichte  Brasiliens''  (1824);  and
"  Reise  durch  Nordamerika  "  (Coblentz,  1838;  Eng
lish  translation,  London,  1843).

NEVADA,  EmmaWixom,  singer,  b.  in  Nevada
City,  Cal.,  in  1861.  Her  name  is  Wixom,  but  she
has  adopted  that  of  her  native  city  for  her  stage
name.  She  was  educated  at  Austin,  Texas,  and  in
San  Francisco,  and,  after  studying  in  Vienna  under
Mme.  Marchesi,  first  appeared  at  Her  Majesty's
theatre,  London,  in  1880,  and  subsequently  with
success  in  the  principal  European  cities.  She  has
an  extensive  repertoire,  including  principally  Ital-.
ian  operas,  but  she  has  also  appeared  in  oratorio
in  England.  She  sang  in  "  La  Sonnarnbula  "  at  her
first  appearance  in  New  York  in  1884.

NEVES,  Jos6  Joaquim  de  Andrade  (nay-ves),
Baron  do  Triumpho,  Brazilian  soldier,  b.  in  Rio
Pardo,  22  Jan.,  1807;  d.  in  Asuncion,  Paraguay,  6
Jan.,  1869.  At  the  beginning  of  the  revolution  in
1835  he  took  up  arms  on  the  side  of  the  govern
ment,  and  before  1843  participated  in  fourteen
battles,  finally  accomplishing  the  pacification  of
his  province.  During  the  war  with  Juan  Manuel
de  Rosas  he  served  as  commander  of  the  7th  brigade
of  cavalry  in  Uruguay  in  1851-'2,  and  was  pro-


NEVILLE


KEVIN


499


raoted  brigadier  in  1858.  When  the  Brazilian
forces  invaded  Uruguay  in  December,  18(54,  he
formed  a  body  of  volunteer  cavalry  in  Rio  Grande
do  Sul,  and  as  commander  of  the  3d  brigade  par
ticipated  in  the  siege  of  Montevideo.  He  took  part
from  the  beginning  with  his  brigade  in  the  ensuing
war  against  Paraguay,  and  after  1867  was  the  com
mander  of  the  van-guard,  defeating  the  enemy  in
the  battles  of  Arroio  Hondo  and  Potrero  Ovelha,
capturing  the  town  of  Pilar,  and  being  created
Baron  do  Triompho  in  1867.  On  19  Feb.,  1868,
when  it  was  resolved  to  force  the  passage  of  Hu-
inaita  by  the  fleet,  Neves  received  orders  to  attack
the  redoubt  of  Estabelecimiento  at  the  same  time
and  took  it  by  storm.  In  August,  1868,  the  advance
northward  was  determined  upon,  and  there,  and  in
the  Chaco,  Neves  had  occasion  to  use  his  cavalry
with  advantage.  On  11  Dec.,  in  the  battle  of  Avahi,
he  outflanked  the  enemy  on  the  left,  and  by  his
cavalry  charges  contributed  to  the  victory,  in  con
sequence  of  which  the  Paraguayans  abandoned  the
position  of  Villeta  and  took  shelter  in  the  fortified
camp  of  Lomas  Valentinas.  On  21  Dec.,  after  a
successful  reconnoissance  of  Potreiro  Marmore,
Neves  captured  the  first  redoubt,  but  was  seriously
wounded.  He  was  carried  to  Asuncion  after  the
enemy  had  abandoned  the  fortified  camp,  and  died
there  in  the  palace  of  the  dictator  Lopez.

NEVILLE,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Prince  Will
iam  county,  Va.,  in  1731 ;  d.  on  Montours  island,
near  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  29  July,  1803.  He  was  en
gaged  in  Braddock's  expedition  in  1755.  and  then
settled  near  Winchester,  Va.,  where  he  was  sheriff.
In  1774  he  was  a  delegate  from  Augusta  county  to
the  Provincial  convention.  He  served  at  Tren
ton,  Princeton,  Germantown,  and  Monmouth.  as
colonel  of  the  4th  Virginia  regiment,  in  the  Revo
lutionary  war,  after  which  he  was  a  member  of
the  executive  council  of  Pennsylvania.  Holding
the  office  of  U.  S.  inspector  under  the  excise  law,  he
was  engaged  in  suppressing  the  whiskey  insurrec
tion  in  1794. — His  son,  Presley,  soldier,  b.  in
Pittsburg  in  1756 ;  d.  in  Fairvievv,  Ohio,  1  Dec.,
1818,  was  graduated  at  the  College  of  Philadel
phia  in  1775,  and  served  throughout  the  war  of
the  Revolution,  part  of  the  time  as  aide-de-camp
to  Lafayette.  He  was  taken  prisoner  at  the  cap
ture  of  Charleston  in  1780,  and  subsequently  be
came  brigade-inspector  and  a  member  of  the  as
sembly.  From  1792  till  1818  he  was  a  merchant
in  Pittsburg,  and  married  a  daughter  of  Gen.  Dan
iel  Morgan. — Presley's  son,  Morgran,  author,  b.  in
Pittsburg,  Pa.,  in  1786;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  in
1839,  edited  the  "  Pittsburg  Gazette,"  and  removed
to  Cincinnati  about  1824.  He  became  secretary  of
an  insurance  company  there  and  contributed'  to
the  periodicals  of  that  city.  He  acquired  a  wide
reputation  by  his  tale  of  '•  Mike  Fink,  the  Last  of
the  Boatmen,"  published  in  the  "  Western  Souve
nir  "  for  1829.  He  was  a  pioneer  of  literature  in
the  west,  a  skilful  musician,  and  a  patron  of  art.

NEVIN,  Edwin  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ship-
pensburg,  Cumberland  co.,  Pa..  9  May,  1814.  His
father  served  in  the  defence  of  Baltimore  in  1812,
and  represented  Cumberland  county  in  the  conven
tion  of  1837-'8  to  remodel  the  state  constitution.
The  son  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  college,  Pa.,  in
1833,  and  at  Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1836,
when  he  was  licensed  to  preach.  He  had  charge  of
churches  in  Portsmouth  and  Portland,  Ohio,  from
1830  till  1841,  when  he  became  president  of  Frank
lin  college,  Ohio,  and  secured  there  the  erection  of  a
new  building.  Subsequently  he  held  charges  in  Mt.
Vernon  and  Cleveland,  Ohio,  of  a  Reformed  church
in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  and  of  the  1st  Reformed  church


in  Philadelphia,  but  afterward  retired  from  active
duties.  Franklin  college,  Ohio,  gave  him  the  de
gree  of  D.  D.  in  1870.  His  works  include  "  Mode
of  Baptism  "  (Mt.  Vernon,  Ohio,  1847) ;  "  Warning
against  Popery  "  (Cleveland,  1851) :  "  Faith  in  God,
the  Foundation  of  Individual  and  National  Great
ness  "  (1852) ;  "  The  Man  of  Faith  "  (Boston,  1856) ;
"History  of  all  Religions"  (Philadelphia,  1872);
"  The  City  of  God  "  (Lancaster,  Pa.,  1868) ;  "  The
Minister's  Handbook  "  (Philadelphia,  1872)  ^'Hu
manity  and  its  Responsibilities "  (1872) ;  and
"Thoughts  about  Christ"  (1882).  He  now  has
ready  for  publication  (1888)  "  A  Handbook  of
Church  History"  and  a  volume  of  poetry  entitled
"  Carmina  Cordis." — His  brother.  Alfred,  clergy
man,  b.  in  Shippensburg,  Pa.,  14  March,  1816,  was
graduated  at  Jefferson  college  in  1834,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1837,  and  in  1840  was
graduated  at  Western  theological  seminary,  Alle-
ghany,  Pa.  He  held  pastorates  in  Cedar  Grove,
Charnbersburg,  Lancaster,  and  Philadelphia,  but  in
1861  he  resigned  to  publish  and  edit  the  "  Stand
ard."  a  weekly  religious  newspaper,  which  was
merged  into  the  "  Northwestern  Presbyterian  "  at
Chicago  in  1866.  He  was  editor  of  the  "  Presby
terian  Weekly  "  in  1872-'4.  and  chief  editor  of  the
"Presbyterian  Journal"  from  1875  till  1880.  He
was  lecturer  in  the  National  school  of  oratory,
Philadelphia,  in  1878-'80.  Since  1855  he  has  fre
quently  been  a  commissioner  to  the  general  assem
blies  and  synods  of  his  church,  and  he  is  a  member
of  various  historical  and  literary  societies.  Lafay
ette  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1855,  and
Western  theological  seminary  that  of  LL.  D.  in
1873.  In  addition  to  sermons  and  addresses,  he  is
the  author  of  "  Christian's  Rest "  (Lancaster,  Pa.,
1843) ;  "  Spiritual  Progression  "  (Charnbersburg,
1848) ;  "  Churches  of  the  Valley "  (Philadelphia,
1852) ;  '•  Guide  to  the  Oracles  "  (Lancaster,  1857) ;
"  Words  of  Comfort  for  Doubting  Hearts  "  (New
York,  1867) ;  "  Commentary  on  Luke  "  (Philadel
phia,  1867) ;  "  The  Age  Question  "  (1868) ;  "  Popu
lar  Commentary "  (1868) ;  "  The  Voice  of  God  "
(1873) ;  "  Sabbath-School  Help  "  (1874) ;  "  Notes  on
Exodus "  (1874) :  "  Men  of  Mark  of  Cumberland
Valley,  Pa.  "  (1876) :  "  Notes  on  the  Shorter  Cate
chism  "  (1878) ;  "  Glimpses  of  the  Coming  World  "
(1880);  "Triumph  of  Truth"  (1880);  "Prayer-
Meeting  Talks  "  (1880) ;  "  Parables  of  Jesus  "  (1881) ;
"Letters  to  Col.  Robert  G.  Ingersoll"  (1882):
"  How  they  Died  "  (1883) ;  "  Folded  Lambs  "  (1885) ;
and  "Twelve  Revival  Sermons"  (1885).  He  has
edited  the  "Presbyterian  Encyclopaedia "  (1884)
and  a  Presbyterian  "year-book  for  1887-'8  (1887). —
Another  brother,  David  Robert  Bruce,  editor,  b.
in  Shippensburg,  Pa.,  28  Nov.,  1828,  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1848,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1850.  For  many  years  he  was  con
nected  with  the  Philadelphia  "press,  was  assistant
editor  of  the  "  Presbyterian  Encyclopaedia  "  (Phila
delphia,  1884),  and  publisher  and  editor  of  "  Con
tinental  Sketches  of  Distinguished  Pennsylvanians  "
(1876).— Edwin  Henry's  son.  William  Chaiming,
author,  b.  in  New  Athens.  Ohio,  1  Jan.,  1844.  re
ceived  his  education  in  Boston,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1871.  He  established  and  edited  the
"  Evening  Express  "  in  Philadelphia  in  1873,  and
was  connected  with  the  editorial  staff  of  the  Phila
delphia  "  Press  "  in  1877-'8,  and  that  of  the  "  Even
ing  News"  in  1881-'4.  In  addition  to  numerous
essays  and  criticisms,  he  is  the  author  of  "  History  of
All  "Religions  "  (Philadelphia,  1871);  "  The  Life  of
Rev.  Albert  Barnes,  D.  D."  (1871) ;  "  The  Blue  Ray
of  Sunlight,  a  Scientific  Inquiry  "  (1877):  "  Ghouls
and  Gold  "  (1885) ;  "  A  Wild-Goose  Chase  "  (1885) ;


500


NEVIN


NEWBERRY


"  Bennie's  Mother"  (1885);  "Joshua  Whitcomb's
Tribulation  "  (1886) ;  "  In  the  Nick  of  Time  "  (1886) ;
"A  Summer-School  Adventure"  (1887);  and  "A
Slight  Misunderstanding"  (1877).  He  now  (1888)
has  ready  for  publication  "  A  Layman's  The
ology." — "Edwin  Henry's  cousin,  John  William
son,  clergyman,  b.  near  Strasburg,  Franklin  co..  Pa.,
20  Feb.,  1803  ;  d.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  6  June,  1880,  was
graduated  at  Union  in  1821,  and  at  Princeton  theo
logical  seminary  in  1826.  He  occupied  the  chair
of  oriental  and  biblical  literature  during  the  ab
sence  of  Dr.  Charles  Hodge  in  Europe  in  1826-'8,
in  1828  was  licensed  to  preach,  and  in  1829  was  ap
pointed  professor  of  Hebrew  and  biblical  litera
ture  in  the  recently  established  Western  theologi
cal  seminary  in  Alleghany  City,  Pa.,  where  he  re
mained  ten  years.  In  1840  he  accepted  a  professor
ship  in  the  theological  seminary  of  the  German  Re
formed  church  in  Mercersburg,  Pa.,  and  was  shortly
afterward  made  president  of  Marshall  college  in  that
town.  In  1843  he  published  a  tract  entitled  "  The
Anxious  Bench,"  which  provoked  a  remarkable
and  serious  controversy  in  the  church  on  the  sub
ject  of  revivals,  and  led  to  what  has  been  called
the  "  Mercersburg  theology."  He  resigned  his
post  in  the  theological  seminary  in  1851,  and  the
presidency  of  Marshall  college,  on  its  removal  to
Lancaster  and  its  consolidation  with  Franklin  col
lege  in  1853.  In  1801  he  became  professor  of  his
tory  and  aesthetics  in  Franklin  and  Marshall  col
lege,  of  which  he  was  president  in  18GG-'76,  after
ward  retiring  to  private  life.  He  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Jefferson  college  in  1839,  and  that  of
LL.  D.  from  Union  college  in  1873.  Dr.  Nevin's
writings  display  a  strong  love  of  controversy.
From  1849  till  1853  lie  edited  the  "  Mercersburg
Review"  in Chamberslmrg,  Pa.,  and,  in  addition  to
a  large  number  of  pamphlets,  he  was  the  author  of
"  Biblical  Antiquities  "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1827) ;
."  The  Mystical  Presence  "  (1840) ;  and  "The  His
tory  and"  Genius  of  the  Heidelberg  Catechism  "
(Chambersburg,  1847);  and  contributed  largely  to
religious  journals.  He  was  chairman  of  a  commis
sion  to  prepare  a  liturgy  for  the  Reformed  church,
which  was  embodied  in  two  works :  "  A  Liturgy  or
Order  of  Worship,  prepared  and  published  by  the"  Di
rection  and  for  the  Use  of  the  German  Reformed
Church  in  the  United  States  of  America  "  (Philadel
phia,  1858),  and  "  An  Order  of  Worship  for  the  Re
formed  Church  "  (1807).  This  revised  liturgy  has
since  been  in  constant  use  in  the  Reformed  church.
— John  Williamson's  son,  William  Wilberforce,
editor,  b.  in  Alleghany,  Pa.,  1  March,  1830,  was  grad
uated  at  Franklin  and  Marshall  college  in  1853,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1807.  He
served  as  captain  and  assistant  adjutant-general
of  U.  S.  volunteers  in  1801-'5,  was  editor  of  the
"  Philadelphia  Press  "  and  president  of  the  "  Press  "
publishing  company  from  1867  till  1878,  and  since
1880  has  been  a  director  in  various  railroad  compa
nies.  He  has  been  largely  engaged  in  railway  build
ing  m  Mexico.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Vignettes  of
Travel "  (Philadelphia,  1880).— Another  son.  Rob
ert  Jenkins,  clergyman,  b.  in  Alleghany,  Pa,,  24
Nov.,  1839,  was  graduated  at  Franklin  and'Marshall
college  in  1859.  In  1801-'o  he  served  in  the  civil  war,
rising  to  the  rank  of  captain  and  brevet  major.  He
took  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in
18G7-'8,  became  rector  of  the  Church  of  the  Nativity,
Bethlehem,  Pa.,  in  1808,  and  since  1809  has  been  rec
tor  of  St.  Paul's  American  church  in  Rome,  Italy,
which  he  built.  In  1873-'4  he  represented  his
church  in  the  reunion  conferences  that  were  called
by  Dr.  DOllinger  at  Bonn,  Germany,  was  commis
sary  to  the  bishop  of  Edinburgh  in  establishing  Old


Catholic  reform  in  Paris  under  Father  Hyacinthe,
and  in  1887  to  the  bishop  of  New  York  for  all  mat
ters  pertaining  to  the  Protestant  Episcopal  cathe
dral  to  be  erected  in  New  York  city.  Union  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1874,  and  Hobart  that  of
LL.  D.  in  1887.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Reunion  Con
ferences  at  Bonn  "  (New  York,  1875)  and  "  St.  Paul's
within  the  Walls"  (1877). — John  Williamson's
daughter,  Blanche,  sculptor,  b.  in  Mcrcersburg,
Pa.,  25  Sept.,  1841,  was  educated  by  tutors  at  her
home  and  in  Europe,  and  studied  art  in  Philadel
phia,  Rome,  Venice,  and  Florence.  In  addition  to
numerous  portrait-busts,  she  has  executed  statues
of  "Maud  Mailer"  (1875);  "Eve";  "Cinderella"
(1870) ;  and  "  Gen.  Peter  Muhlcnberg  "  (1887),  which
is  in  the  capitol  in  Washington.

KEVINS,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  13  Oct.,  1797  ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  14  Sept.,
1835.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1816,  studied
at  Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1816-'19,  and
from  his  ordination  in  1820  until  his  death  was
pastor  of  the  1st  Presbyterian  church  of  Balti
more.  In  1834  he  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  I),
from  Princeton.  His  contributions  to  the  "  New
York  Observer"  were  published  in  two  volumes,
entitled  "  Thoughts  on  Popery  "  (New  York,  1835),
and  "  Practical  Thoughts  (1835).  Selections  from
his  manuscripts,  entitled  "  Select  Remains,"  were
published,  with  a  memoir,  by  Rev.  William  T.
Plumer,  D.  D.  (New  York,  1836),  and  a  volume
of  his  sermons  (1837).

NEW,  Anthony,  congressman,  b.  in  Gloucester
county.  Va.,  in  1747  ;  d.  in  Elkton,  Todd  co.,  Ky.,

2  March,  18S3. He  was  a  colonel  in  the  Revolu
tionary  army  and  was  elected  to  congress  from  Vir
ginia  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  2  Dec.,  1793,  till

3  March.  1805. He  then  removed  to  Elkton,  Ky.,
and  was  elected  to  congress  from  that  state,  serv
ing  in  1811-'13,  1817-'19,  and  1821-'3.

NEW,  John  (  hill l;i nl.  financier,  b.  in  Vernon,
Jennings  co.,  Ind.,  6  July,  1831.  lie  was  gradu
ated  at  Bethany  college,  \*a.,  in  1851,  studied  law,
and  in  1856  was  appointed  clerk  of  Marion  county
courts.  In  1861  he  became  quartermaster-general
of  Indiana,  and  served  through  the  civil  war  until
his  election  to  the  state  senate.  He  was  also  finan
cial  secretary  to  Gov.  Oliver  P.  Morton,  and  in  1805
became  cashier  in  the  First  national  bank  of  Indian
apolis,  of  which  he  was  afterward  president.  In
1875-'G  he  was  U.  S.  treasurer,  and  he  served  as
assistant  secretary  of  the  treasury  from  1882  till  his
resignation  in  1884.  Since  1874  he  has  been  a
member  of  the  Republican  national  committee,  and
was  chairman  of  the  Republican  state  committee
of  Indiana  during  the  presidential  canvasses  of
1880  and  1884.  In  1878  he  became  editor  and  pro
prietor  of  the  Indianapolis  "Daily  Journal."

NEWBERRY,  John  Strong,  geologist,  b.  in
Windsor,  Conn.,  22  Dec.,  1822.  He  was  graduated
at  Western  reserve  college  in  1846  and  at  Cleve
land  medical  college  in  1848,  alter  which  he  spent
nearly  two  years  in  study  and  travel  abroad.  Early
in  1851  he  settled  in  Cleveland,  and  there  began
the  practice  of  medicine,  which  he  continued  until
1855.  In  May  of  that  year  he  was  appointed  act
ing  assistant  surgeon  and  geologist  to  the  explor
ing  party  under  Lieut.  Robert  S.  Williamson  that
was  sent  to  examine  the  country  between  San  Fran
cisco  and  Columbia  river,  and  his  reports  on  the
geology,  botany,  and  zoology  of  northern  California
are  contained  in  the  sixth  volume  of  the  "  Reports
of  Explorations  and  Surveys  to  ascertain  the  most
Practical  and  Economical  Route  for  a  Railroad  from
the  Mississippi  River  to  the  Pacific  Ocean,  made  in
1853-6  "  (Washington,  1857).  He  accompanied


XEWBERRY


XEWBERRY


501


Lieut.  Joseph  C.  Ives  in  the  exploration  and  navi
gation  of  Colorado  river.  Entering  at  its  mouth,
the  party  ascended  it  by  steamer  500  miles  to  the
entrance  of  the  great  caiion,  and  spent  nearly  a

year  in  exploring
the  canon  above
this  point.  His  ob
servations  formed
the  most  interest-
jg?JB  ing  material  that

/<£ '^PIW  Was gathered bv

the  expedition,  and

fully  half  of  the
"  Report  upon  the
Colorado  River  of
the  West  explored
in  1857-'8"(  Wash
ington,  1861)  was
written  by  him.  On
the  completion  of
this  work  Dr.  New-
berry  was  assigned
to  an  expedition
for  the  exploration
of  the  San  Juan
and  upper  Colorado  rivers  under  the  command  of
Capt.  John  X.  Ma-comb.  In  this  service  he  spent  the
summer  of  1859  in  travelling  over  parts  of  southern
Colorado,  Utah,  northern  Arizona,  and  Xew  Mexico,
studying  a  large  area  of  country  that  was  before
unknown,  but  has  since  proved  to  be  rich  in  miner
als  and  to  be  covered  with  the  traces  of  an  ancient
civilization.  This  information,  whose  publication
was  long  delayed,  was  incorporated  hi  a  "  Report
of  the  Exploring  Expedition  from  Santa  Fe  to  the
Junction  of  the  Grand  and  Green  Rivers  "  (Wash
ington,  1876).  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the
U.  S.  sanitary  commission  on  14  June,  1861,  al
though  still  on  duty  in  the  war  department.  His
medical  knowledge  and  experience  in  the  army  led
to  his  becoming  an  important  member  of  that
commission.  The  first  sanitary  inspection  of
troops  in  the  west  was  made  at  Cairo.  111.,  by  him,
in  connection  with  Rev.  Henry  W.  Bellows  and
Dr.  William  II.  Mussey.  In  September,  1861,  he
resigned  from  the  army  and  became  secretary  of
the  western  department  of  the  U.  S.  sanitary  com
mission,  having  supervision  of  all  the  work  of  the
commission  in  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi,  with
headquarters  in  Louisville,  Ky.  The  first  dis
tributing  depot  in  the  west  was  opened  in  Wheel
ing,  W.  Va.,  on  8  Oct.,  and  was  the  source  from
which  the  hospitals  at  Wheeling,  Clarksburg,
Parkersburg,  and  other  military  points  were  sup
plied  with  a  large  part  of  their  equipment.  Dr.
Xewberry  organized  the  whole  of  the  comprehen
sive  machinery  of  the  commission  in  the  large
section  that  was  committed  to  his  care,  and  by  his
practical  suggestions  and  enthusiasm  stimulated
the  formation  of  the  tributary  societies.  From  1
Sept.,  1861.  till  1  July,  I860,  he  expended  more
than  $800.000  in  money,  and  distributed  hospi
tal  stores  that  were  valued  at  more  than  £5.000.000.
During  this  time  the  names  of  more  than  850.000
soldiers  were  collected  and  recorded  in  the  hospital
directory  in  Louisville.  Ky.,  and  food  and  shelter
were  given  in  the  various  homes  of  the  commission
to  more  than  1,000.000  soldiers,  for  whom  no  other
adequate  provision  was  made.  A  full  account  of
this  work  is  given  in  his  report  of  "The  U.  S.
Sanitary  Commission  in  the  Valley  of  the  Missis
sippi"  (Cleveland.  1871).  After  the  war  he  was
appointed  professor  of  geology  and  paleontology
at  the  Columbia  college  school"  of  mines,  and  took
charge  of  that  department  in  the  autumn  of  1866.


j  This  chair  he  has  since  continued  to  hold,  and
during  his  connection  with  this  institution  he  has
i  created  a  museum  of  over  100.000  specimens,  princi
pally  collected  by  himself,  which  serve  to  illustrate
his  lectures  in  paleontology  and  economic  geology.
i  It  contains  the  best  representations  of  the  mineral
!  resources  of  the  United  States  to  be  found  any
where,  as  well  as  many  unique  and  remarkable  fos
sils.  In  1869  Dr.  Xewberry  was  appointed  state
j  geologist  of  Ohio,  which  office  he  filled  during  the
continuation  of  the  survey,  and  made  reports  on  all
of  the  counties  of  the  state.  The  results  of  his  work
are  given  in  nine  volumes,  of  which  six  are  on  the
geology,  two  on  the  paleontology,  and  one  on  the
zoology  of  the  state,  with  a  large  number  of  geo
logical  maps.  Since  the  completion  of  this  survey
he  has  been  associated  in  the  work  of  the  Xew
Jersey  geological  survey,  and  has  reported  "  On
the  Fossil  Fishes  and  Plants  of  the  Trias,"  and
••  On  the  Flora  of  the  Am  boy  Clays"  of  that  state.
In  1884  he  was  appointed  paleontologist  to  the
U.  S.  geological  survey,  and  has  had  charge  of
parts  of  the  fossil  botany  and  fishes,  concerning
which  he  has  prepared  a  monograph  on  the  "  Pa
leozoic  Fishes  of  Xorth  America,"  and  on  the  fos
sil  plants  of  the  cretaceous  and  tertiary  rocks  of
the  far  west.  Dr.  Xewberry  has  been  consulted  as
an  expert  with  reference  to  mining  property,  and  he
has  travelled  extensively  for  this  purpose  through
the  mining  districts  of  the  United  States.  During
the  World's  fair  in  Philadelphia  in  1876  he  was
one  of  the  judges,  and  in  1867  he  received  the  de
gree  of  LL.  D.  from  Western  reserve  college.  In
January,  1888,  the  Geological  society  of  London
conferred  on  him  its  Murchison  medal.  He  is  a
member  of  scientific  societies,  both  in  the  United
States  and  Europe.  In  1863  he  was  named  by
congress  one  of  the  corporate  members  of  the
Xational  academy  of  sciences,  and  in  1867  he  was
president  of  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science,  delivering  his  retiring
address  on  "  Modern  Scientific  Investigation  ;  its
Methods  and  Tendencies."  He  has  held  the  office
of  president  of  the  Xew  York  academy  of  sciences
since  1867,  and  is  also  president  of  the  Torrey  bo
tanical  club.  Besides  the  volumes  that  have  been
mentioned,  Dr.  Xewberry's  separate  papers  con
tributed  to  various  sources  include  upward  of  200
titles,  chiefly  in  the  departments  of  geology  and
paleontology,  but  also  in  zoology  and  botany.

NEWBEEBY,  Oliver,  steamboat-builder,  b.  in
East  Windsor,  Conn.,  17  Xov.,  1789;  d.  in  Detroit,
Mich.,  30  July,  1860.  He  served  during  the  war
of  1812,  and  also  during  the  Black  Hawk  war.  In
1816  he  settled  in  Buffalo.  X.  Y.,  but  in  1820  he
went  to  Detroit,  Mich.,  where  he  established  him
self  in  business,  which  he  thereafter  prosecuted
with  considerable  success.  Soon  after  his  arrival
in  Detroit  he  secured  government  contracts  to  fur
nish  all  supplies  to  the  numerous  forts  and  Indian
trading-posts  in  the  northwest.  He  was  unable  to
obtain  suitable  transportation,  and  was  compelled
to  build  a  vessel  for  his  own  use.  Afterward  he
constructed  other  vessels  during  successive  years
until  he  became  one  of  the  largest  owners  of  ship
ping  on  the  lakes.  In  1833  he  built  the '•  Michi
gan,"  his  first  steamboat,  which  was  the  largest
that  until  that  time  had  been  launched  for  the  lake
trade.  Several  warehouses  were  constructed  by
him  along  the  river  front  in  Detroit,  where  his
various  schooners,  brigs,  and  steamboats  were
loaded.  Mr.  Xewberry  was  elected  an  alderman  in
1831.  and  he  was  associated  in  the  early  history  of
Michigan  railroads.  He  was  a  man  of  strict  in
tegrity  in  his  business  and  personal  relations.  For


502


NEWBERRY


XEWCOMB


many  years  he  carried  all  of  his  business  papers  in
his  hat,  and  was  rarely  seen  uncovered. He  was
known  as  the  "  commodore  "  of  the  lakes,  and  was
sometimes called "the steamboat king."  —  His
brother,  Walter Loom  is,  merchant,  b.  in East
Windsor,  Conn.,  18  Sept.,  1804;  d.  at  sea,  6  Nov.,
1808,  was  educated  at  Clinton,  N.  Y.,  and  fitted  for
the  U.  S.  military  academy, but,  failing in  the
physical  examination,  entered  commercial  life  in
1822  with  his  brother  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y. In  1828
he  removed  to  Detroit,  Mich.,  and  there  engaged
in  the  dry-goods  business  with  great  success,  but
after  a  tour  of  observation  about  the  great  lakes
with  Gen.  Lewis  Cass  and  William  B.  Astor  bought
lands  at  various  points,  notably  at  Chicago,  whither
he  removed  in  1833,  and  entered  in  business  with
George  W.  Dole,  as  forwarding  and  commission
merchants  and  dealers  in  general  merchandise,  af
terward  becoming  a  successful  banker. Mr.  New-
berry  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Merchants'
loan  and  trust  companies  bank,  and  long  one  of  its
directors. He  was  also  a  director  and  president  of
the  Galena  railroad  (now  the  Great  Northwestern
railroad). Mr.  Newberry  was  for  many  years  in  the
school  board  and  twice  its  chairman,  and  for  six
years  he  was  president  of  the  Chicago  historical
society. In 1841  he  was  active  in  founding  the
Young  men's  library  association  of  Chicago,  was
its  first  president,  and  made  the  first  contribution
of  books  to  its  collection. He  visited  Europe  in
1868,  and  died  on  his  homeward  voyage. By  his
will  half  of  his  real  estate,  or  more  than  $2,000,000,
was  left  under  certain  conditions  to  found  a  li
brary,  to  be  named  for  him,  and  located  in  the
north  division  of  Chicago. At  the  death of  his
widow  in  December,  1885,  his  two  daughters  hav
ing  died  unmarried,  this  bequest  became  available.
It  is  largely  in  real  estate  that  is  not  fully  devel
oped,  and  likely  to  increase  greatly  in  value. The
first  report  of  the  trustees  of  the  Newberry  library,
issued  in  January,  1888,  showed  that  as  a  site  for
the  library  building  the  block  formerly  occupied
as  the  Newberry  family  homestead  had  been  chosen.
Meanwhile  temporary  quarters  had  been  selected
and  William  F.  Poo'le  appointed  librarian. The
sum  of  $15,000  had  already  been  expended  in  the
purchase  of  books,  and  the  collection  now  numbers
more  than  6,000  volumes  with  about  5,000  pam
phlets. George  P.  A.  Healy,  the  artist,  has  pre
sented  to  the  library  a  collection  of  nearly  fifty
portraits, mostly of eminent Americans, which
form  the  beginning  of  a  future  art  gallery. — His
nephew,  John  Stoughton,  lawyer,  b.  in  "Water-
ville,  N.  Y.,  18  Nov.,  1826 ;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  2
Jan.,  1887,  was  graduated  at the  University of
Michigan  in  1845,  became  a  civil  engineer,  and  en
gaged  in  the  laying  out  and  construction  of  the
Michigan  Central  railroad  on  its  line  west  of  Kala-
mazoo. He  then  studied  law  and  entered  on  the
practice  of  that profession in 1853 in Detroit,
where  he  soon  acquired  a  large  practice  in  admi
ralty  and  maritime  cases  before  the  U.  S.  courts.
Eventually  he  made  a  specialty  of  that  department
of  law,  in  which  he acquired  the  distinction  of
being  one  of  the  foremost  authorities  in  the  west.
In  1864  he  became  associated  with  James  McMillan
(q.  v.)  in  the  organization  of  the  Michigan  car  com
pany,  a  corporation  that ultimately  became the
largest  firm  of  car-builders  in  the  United  States,
controlling  similar  factories  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and
London,  Ont. He held the office  of  president,
vice-president,  or  director  in  more  than  a  score  of
incorporated  companies  that  gave  employment  to
more  than  5,000  men.  thus  materially  aiding  in
the  development  of  Michigan. His  time  became


gradually  absorbed  in  the  care  of  these  enterprises
until  he  entirely  relinquished  his  law-practice.  In
1862  he  was  appointed  provost-marshal  for  Michi
gan,  and  served  for  two  years,  during  which  time
he  had  charge  of  two  drafts,  with  the  forwarding
of  conscripts  and  enlisted  soldiers  to  the  seat  of
war.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,
and  served  from  18  March,  1879,  till  4  March,  1881,
but  refused  a  renomination  in  order  to  give  his
attention  more  exclusively  to  his  business  enter
prises.  Mr.  Newberry  accumulated  a  large  fortune,
and  gave  $100.000  toward  the  building  of  a  pub
lic  hospital  in  Detroit.  He  bequeathed  to  various
benevolent  purposes  $600,000  in  addition  to  his
other  legacies.  He  edited  "Reports  of  Admiralty
Cases,  1842-'57  "  (New  York,  1857).

NEWCASTLE,  Thomas  Pelham  Clinton,
Duke  of,  British  soldier,  b.  in  July,  1752;  d.  17
May,  1795.  He  entered  the  army  as  ensign  in  the
12th  foot  in  March,  1769,  and  became  captain  in
the  1st  dragoon  guards  in  July,  1770.  In  April,
1775,  he  was  exchanged  into  the  1st  foot-guards.
and  came  to  this  country,  where  he  served  as  aide-
de-camp  to  his  second  cousin,  Sir  Henry  Clinton.
with  whose  despatches,  announcing  the  fall  of
Charleston,  S.  C.,  he  went  to  England  in  1780.
Subsequently  he  became  colonel  and  aide-de-camp
to  the  king,  and  was  made  major-general  in  1787.
He  succeeded  to  the  dukedom  in  1794.

NEWCOMB.  Harvey,  clergyman,  b.  in  Thet-
ford,  Vt.,  2  Sept.,  1803;'  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y..  30
Aug.,  1863.  He  removed  to  western  New  York  in
1818,  engaged  in  teaching  for  eight  years,  and
from  1826  till  1831  edited  several  journals,  of
which  the  last  was  the  "  Christian  Herald,"  in
Pittsburg,  Pa.  For  the  ten  following  years  he
was  engaged  in  writing  and  preparing  books  for
the  American  Sunday-school  union.  He  was  li
censed  to  preach  in  1840,  took  charge  of  a  Con
gregational  church  in  West  Roxbury,  Mass.,  and
subsequently  held  other  pastorates.  He  was  an
editor  of  the  Boston  "Traveller"  in  1849,  and
in  1850-'!  assistant  editor  of  the  "  New  York  Ob
server,"  also  preaching  in  the  Park  street  mission
church  of  Brooklyn,  and  in  1859  he  became  pastor
of  a  church  in  Hancock.  Pa.  He  contributed  regu
larly  to  the  Boston  "  Recorder  "  and  to  the  "  Youth's
Companion,"  and  also  to  religious  journals.  He
wrote  178  volumes,  of  which  fourteen  are  on  church
history,  the  others  being  chiefly  books  for  children,
including  "  Young  Lady's  Guide  "  (New  York,
1839) ;  "How  to  be  a  Man  "  (Boston,  1846) ;  "  How
to  be  a  Lady"  (1846);  and  "Cyclopaedia  of  Mis
sions"  (1854:  4th  ed..  1856).  He  also  was  the
author  of  "  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  North
American  Indians"  (2  vols.,  Pittsburg,  1835).

NEW'COMB,  Simon,  astronomer,  b.  in  Wallace,
N.  S.,  12  March,  1835.  He  is  the  son  of  a  teacher
of  American  descent,  whose  ancestors  had  settled
in  Canada  in  1761,  and  who  came  to  the  United
States  in  1852.  Simon  was  the  eldest  son,  and,
after  being  educated  by  his  father,  taught  for  some
time.  He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1853,  and
during  1854— '6  was  engaged  as  a  teacher  in  Mary
land.  There  he  became  acquainted  with  Joseph
Henry  and  Julius  E.  Hilgard,  who,  recognizing  his
aptitude  for  mathematics,  secured  his  appointment
in  1857  as  computer  on  the  "Nautical  Almanac."
which  was  then  published  in  Cambridge,  Mass.  He
entered  the  Lawrence  scientific  school,  and  was
graduated  in  1858,  continuing  thereafter  for  three
years  as  a  graduate  student.  In  1861  he  was  ap
pointed  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  U.  S.  navy,
and  assigned  to  duty  at  the  U.  S.  naval  observatory
in  Washington.  There  he  negotiated  the  contract


NEWCOMB


NEWELL


503


Tor  the  26-inch  equatorial  telescope  authorized  by
congress,  supervised  its  construction,  and  planned
the  tower  and  dome  in  which  it  is  mounted.  In  1871
he  was  appointed  secretary  of  the  commission  that
was  created  by  congress  for  the  purposes  of  observ
ing  the  transit  of  Venus  on  9  Dec.,  1874,  which
organized  the  expeditions  that  were  sent  out  by  the
U.  S.  government.  He  visited  the  Saskatchewan
region  in  1860  to  observe  an  eclipse  of  the  sun,  and
in  1870-'!  was  sent  to  Gibraltar  for  a  similar  pur
pose,  and  in  1882  he  observed  the  transit  of  Venus
at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  Meanwhile  in  1877  he
became  senior  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  U.  S.
navy,  with  the  relative  rank  of  captain,  and  since
that  time  has  been  in  charge  of  the  office  of  the
'•  American  Ephemeris  and  Nautical  Almanac."  A
large  corps  of  civilian  assistants  in  Washington  and
elsewhere,  as  well  as  officers  of  the  navy  who  are
detailed  to  that  office,  work  under  his  direction.
In  addition  to  these  duties,  in  1884  he  became  pro
fessor  of  mathematics  and  astronomy  in  Johns
Hopkins,  where  he  has  charge  of  the  graduate  stu
dents  in  astronomy.  Prof.  Newcomb  has  been  in
timately  associated  with  the  equipment  of  the  Lick
observatory  of  California,  and  examined  the  glass
of  the  great  telescope  and  its  mounting  before  its
acceptance  by  the  trustees.  The  results  of  his  sci
entific  work  have  been  given  to  the  world  in  more
than  100  papers  and  memoirs.  Concerning  these,
Arthur  Cayley.  president  of  the  Royal  astronomical
society  of  Great  Britain,  said :  "  Prof.  Xewcomb's
writings  exhibit,  all  of  them,  a  combination,  on  the

one  hand,  of  math
ematical  skill  and
power,  and  on  the
other  of  good  hard
work,  devoted  to
the  furtherance  of
astronomical  sci
ence."  His  work
has  teen  princi
pally  in  the  math
ematical  astrono
my  of  the  solar
system,  particu
larly  Neptune,
Uranus,  and  the
moon,  but  the
whole  plan  in
cludes  the  most
exact  possible  ta
bles  of  the  mo
tions  of  all  the  planets.  Among  the  most  important
of  his  papers  are  "  On  the  Secular  Variations  and
Mutual  Relations  of  the  Orbits  of  the  Asteroids  "
(1860):  "  An  Investigation  of  the  Orbit  of  Neptune,
with  General  Tables  of  its  Motion  "  (1867) ;  "  An
Investigation  of  the  Orbit  of  Uranus,  with  General
Table  of  its  Motion  "  (1874) ;  "  Researches  on  the
Motion  of  the  Moon"  (1876);  "Measure  of  the  Ve
locity  of  Light "  (1884) ;  and  "  Development  of  the
Perturbative  Function  and  its  Derivative  in  Sines
and  Cosines  of  the  Eccentric  Anomaly,  and  in  Pow
ers  of  the  Eccentricities  and  Inclinations"  (1884).
In  1874  Columbian  university  of  Washington  con
ferred  on  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.,  and  in  1875  he
received  a  similar  honor  from  Yale,  also  from  Har
vard  in  1884,  and  from  Columbia  in  1887,  while  on
the  300th  anniversary  of  the  founding  of  the  Uni
versity  of  Leyden,  in  1875,  that  institution  gave
him  the  degree  of  master  of  mathematics  and  doc
tor  of  natural  philosophy,  and  on  the  500th  anni
versary  of  the  University  of  Heidelberg,  in  1886,  he
received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  He  was  awarded  the
gold  medal  of  the  Royal  astronomical  society  in  |


1874,  and  in  1878  received  the  great  gold  Huygens
medal  of  the  University  of  Leyden,  which  is  given
to  astronomers  once  in  twenty  years  for  the  most
important  work  accomplished  in  that  science  be
tween  its  awards.  In  1887  the  Russian  govern
ment  ordered  the  portrait  of  Prof.  Newcomb  to  be
painted  for  the  collection  of  famous  astronomers
at  the  Russian  observatory  at  Pulkowa.  He  was
elected  an  associate  of  the  Royal  astronomical  so
ciety  in  1872,  corresponding  member  of  the  Insti
tute  of  France  in  1874,  and  foreign  member  of  the
Royal  society  in  1877,  and  he  also  holds  honorary
or  corresponding  relations  to  nearly  all  the  Euro
pean  academies  of  science.  In  1887  he  was  elected
one  of  the  eight  members  of  the  council  of  the  As-
tronoraische  Gesellschaft,  an  international  astro
nomical  society  that  meets  once  in  two  years.  He
was  elected  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences  in
1869.  and  since  1883  has  been  its  vice-president.  In
1876  he  was  elected  president  of  the  American  asso
ciation  for  the  advancement  of  science,  and  he  de
livered  his  retiring  address  at  the  St.  Louis  meeting
in  1878.  He  has  also  held  the  presidency  of  the
American  society  for  psychical  research.  His  liter
ary  work  includes  contributions  to  many  of  the  im
portant  reviews.  He  is  also  editor  of  the  "  American
Journal  of  Mathematics."  His  scientific  books  in
clude  "Popular  Astronomy"  (New  York,  1877),
which  has  been  republished  in  England  and  trans
lated  into  German  :  "  School  Astronomy,"  with  Ed
ward  S.  Holden  (1879 ;  "  Briefer  Course,"  1883) ;  also
a  series  of  text-books,  comprising  "  Algebra  "  (1881) ;
"Geometry"  (1881);  " Trigonometry  Logarithms "
(1882);  "School  Algebra"  (1882);  "Analytic
Geometry  "  (1884) ;  "  Essentials  of  Trigonometry  "
(1884):  and  "Calculus"  (1887).  Prof.  Newcomb
refers  to  astronomy  as  his  profession  and  to  politi
cal  economy  as  his  recreation.  In  the  latter  branch
his  books  include  "  A  Critical  Examination  of  our
Financial  Policy  during  the  Rebellion "  (New
York,  1865) ;  "  The  A  B  C  of  Finance  "  (1877)  ;  "  A
Plain  Man's  Talk  on  the  Labor  Question"  (1886);
and  "  Principles  of  Political  Economy  "  (1886).

NEWELL.  Hugh,  artist,  b.  near'  Belfast,  Ire
land,  4  Oct.,  1830.  He  began  to  study  art  at  the
age  of  nineteen,  becoming  a  pupil  in  the  South
Kensington  schools,  London,  and  also  working
under  Couture  in  Paris  and  in  Antwerp.  He
came  to  this  country,  resided  eight  years  in  Pitts-
burg.  Pa.,  where  he  was  for  some  time  principal
of  the  Women's  school  of  design,  was  for  four
years  principal  of  the  Maryland  institute  in  Balti
more,  and  then  in  1879  became  professor  of  draw
ing  in  Johns  Hopkins  university.  In  Baltimore  he
gained  gold  medals  in  1853  and  1858.  and  a  silver
one  in  1859.  He  has  exhibited  at  the  Royal
academy,  the  Society  of  British  artists,  the  National
academy  of  design,  and  the  American  water-color
society,  of  which  he  is  a  member.  His  works  in
clude  "  Smithy"  (1873) :  "  Basket  of  Grapes"  ;  "  In
the  Cottage  "Window"  (1878);  "The  Country
Musician  "  :  "  The  Binder,  Wheat-Field  in  Harvest "
(1879);  "The  Hillside";  "The  Laborer"  (1880);
"In  the  Sugar  Camp";  "In  the  Barn  "(1881);
"  Woods  in  Winter " ;  "  Husking  Corn  in  the
Field"  (1882):  "Grapes";  and  "  From  the  East
and  West  "  (1883).

NEWELL,  McFadden  Alexander,  educator,
b.  in  Belfast,  Ireland,  7  Sept.,  1824.  He  was
educated  at  the  Royal  college  of  Belfast  and  at
Trinity  college.  Dublin,  and  coming  to  this  country
in  1848  was  professor  of  natural  science  in  Balti
more  city  college.  Md.,  in  1850-'4.  and  then  held
the  same  chair  in  Lafayette  college,  Uniontown.
Pa.  He  became  principal  of  the  State  normal


504


NEWELL


NEWMAN


school  at  Baltimore  in  1865,  and  in  1868  state
superintendent  of  public  instruction,  which  office
he  still  holds.  In  1877  he  was  president  of  the  Na
tional  educational  association.  With  Prof.  William
II.  Creery  he  has  published  a  series  of  text-books,
entitled  "  The  Maryland  Series,"  and  lie  is  the  au
thor  of  annual  state  school  reports  (1868-'87).

NEWELL,  Robert  Henry,  author,  b.  in  New
York  city,  13  Dec.,  183(5.  From  1858  till  1862  he
was  literary  editor  of  the  New  York  "  Mercury,"
and  he  was  employed  as  a  writer  on  the  New  York
"  World "  from  1869  till  1874.  when  he  became
editor  of  "  Hearth  and  Home,"  a  weekly  journal,
and  held  this  post  until  1876.  He  is  the  author  of
a  series  of  papers  on  the  civil  war,  published  un
der  the  pen-name  of  Orpheus  C.  Kerr  (office-seeker)
(4  vols.,  New  York,  1862-'8) ;  "  The  Palace  Beauti
ful,  and  other  Poems  "  (1865) ;  "  Avery  Glibun.  or
Between  Two  Fires,"  an  American  romance  (1867) ;
"  The  Cloven  Foot,"  an  adaptation  of  "  The  Mystery
of  Edwin  Drood  "  to  American  scenes  and  charac
ters  (1870);  a  volume  of  poems  entitled  "  Versa
tilities"  (1871);  "  The  Walking  Doll,"  a  humorous
novel  of  New  York  life  (1872);  "Studies  in  Stan
zas"  (1882);  and  "There  was  Once  a  Man"  (1884).

NEWELL,  Samnel,  missionary,  b.  in  Durham,
Me.,  25  July,  1785  ;  d.  in  Bombay,  India,  30  March,
1821.  Ho  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1807,  at
x\ndover  theological  seminary  in  1810,  and  was  one
of  the  signers  of  the  memorandum  dated  27  July,
1810,  from  the  students  of  that  institution  that  led
to  the  formation  of  the  American  board  of  com
missioners  for  foreign  missions.  He  was  ordained
as  a  foreign  missionary  at  Salem,  with  four  associ
ates,  on  5  Feb.,  1812,  and  sailed  for  Calcutta  with
Adoniram  Judson  on  19  Feb.  On  his  arrival  the
Bengal  government  ordered  him  to  leave  the  coun
try,  whereupon  he  went  to  the  Isle  of  France,
thence  to  Ceylon,  and  finally  in  1817  joined  the
Rev.  Gordon  Hall  in  Bombay,  in  conjunction  with
whom  he  wrote  "  The  Conversion  of  the  World,  or
the  Claims  of  Six  Hundred  Millions"  (Andover,
1818). — His  wife,  Harriet  Atwood,  missionary,  b.
in  Haverhill,  Mass.,  10  Oct.,  1793  ;  d.  in  the  Isle  of
France,  30  Nov.,  1812,  married  Mr.  Newell  in
February,  1812,  and  accompanied  him  to  India,
being  one  of  the  first  female  missionaries  from  the
United  States.  Her  memoirs  by  her  husband,  with
her  letters,  entitled  "  Life  and  Writings  of  Mrs.  Har
riet  Newell,"  have  passed  through  several  editions
and  have  been  translated  into  several  languages
(New  York,  1831).

NEWELL,  William  Augustus,  governor  of
New  Jersey,  b.  in  Franklin,  Ohio,  5  Sept..  1819.
He  was  graduated  at  Rutgers  college  grammar-
school  in  1836,  studied  ^medicine,  and  settled  in
New  Jersey.  He  was  elected  to  congress  from  that
state  as  a  Whig,  serving  from  6  Dec.,  1847,  till  3
March,  1851.  From  1856  till  1860  he  was  governor
of  New  Jersey,  and  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Na
tional  Republican  convention  in  Baltimore  in  1864.
He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican  repre
sentative,  serving  from  4  Dec.,  1865,  till  3  March,
1867,  on  the  committee  on  Revolutionary  claims,
foreign  affairs,  and  war  debts  of  the  loyal  states,
and  was  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  "Loyalists'
convention  "  of  1866.  He  originated  and  procured
the  first  appropriation  by  congress  of  $10,000  for
the  Life-saving  stations  on  the  New  Jersey  coast,
and  was  superintendent  of  Life-saving  stations  in
New  Jersey  from  1861  till  1863.  He  was  defeated
as  a  candidate  for  governor  of  New  Jersey  in  1877,
and  in  1880  was  appointed  governor  of  Washing
ton  territory  for  a  term  of  four  years.  He  was  In
dian  commissioner  in  that  territory  in  1884-'6.


NEWMAN,  Francis,  statesman,  b.  in  England
early  in  the  17th  century;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
18  Nov.,  1660.  He  emigrated  to  New  Hampshire
in  1638,  and  subsequently  removed  to  the  colony
of  New  Haven,  where  he  became  secretary  under
the  first  governor.  Theophilus  Eaton.  In  1653  he
was  sent  with  others  to  wait  on  Gov.  Peter  Stuy-
vesant,  of  New  Netherlands,  to  obtain  satisfaction
for  the  encroachments  of  the  Dutch  upon  the
colony.  The  same  year  Newman  was  appointed
assistant  governor,  and  in  1854-'8  served  as  com
missioner  of  the  united  colonies.  In  the  latter
year  he  succeeded  to  the  governorship,  which  office
he  held  until  his  death.

NEWMAN,  Henry  R.,  artist,  b.  in  New  York
city  about  1833.  He  became  an  artist,  lived  in
New  York  state  in  1861-'9,  and  since  then  has
had  his  studio  in  Florence,  Italy.  He  is  noted
for  his  water-color  paintings  of  architectural  sub
jects,  landscapes,  and  flower-pieces.  During  1861-'!)
he  was  a  regular  exhibitor  at  the  Academy  of
design,  New  York,  contributing  landscapes  and
flower  and  still-life  pieces.  In  1877  he  exhibited
at  the  academy  a  "  View  of  Florence,"  and  in
Florence  in  1878  a  "  Study  of  Pink  and  White
Oleanders,"  and  "  Grapes  and  Olives."  The  same
year  he  sent  to  the  Grosvenor  gallery,  London,
"  Flowers  "  and  "  An  Architectural  Study."  Many
of  his  studies  are  Florentine  street  scenes,  and
of  one  of  these,  a  drawing  of  Santa  Maria  No
vella,  John  Raskin  wrote  to  him  in  1877:  "I
have  not  for  many  and  many  a  day  seen  the  sense
of  tenderness  and  depth  of  color  so  united,  still
less  so  much  fidelity  and  affection  joined  with  a
power  of  design,  which  seems  to  me,  though  la
tent,  very  great.  To  have  made  a  poetic  harmony
of  color  out  of  an  omnibus-stand  is  an  achieve
ment  all  the  greater  in  reality,  because  not  likely
to  have  been  attempted  with  all  one's  strength."

NEWMAN,  John  Philip,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
New  York  city,  1  Sept..  1826.  He  was  educated  at
Cazenovia  seminary,  N.  Y.,  studied  theology,  and
became  a  minister  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  in  1849.  He  spent  the  years  I860-'!  travel
ling  in  Europe,  Palestine,  and  Egypt,  and  in  uni
versity  study  abroad.  After  preaching  at  Hamil
ton  and  Albany,  N.  Y.,  and  New  York  city,  he
was  sent  in  1864  to  New  Orleans  to  labor  in  he-
half  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  the
south.  He  remained  there  five  years,  and  estab
lished  three  annual  conferences,  two  colleges,  and
a  church  paper.  He  was  called  in  1869  to  Wash
ington,  D.  C.,  where  he  organized  and  became  the
pastor  or  the  Metropolitan  memorial  Methodist
church.  From  1869  till  1874  he  was  chaplain  of
the  U.  S.  senate.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  ap
pointed  inspector  of  U.S.  consuls  in  Asia,  and  dur
ing  his  absence  from  this  country  he  again  visited
Palestine.  On  his  return  he  was  the  second  time
appointed  to  the  Metropolitan  church,  Washing
ton,  served  three  years,  and  was  then  transferred
to  the  Central  church.  New  York,  where  he  re
mained  three  years.  In  the  winter  of  1882  he  ac
cepted  a  unanimous  invitation  to  become  pastor
of  Madison  avenue  Congregational  church,  New
York  city,  where  he  served  two  years,  when  he
resigned.  He  then  visited  California,  and,  af
ter  ministering  to  Gen.  Grant  in  his  last  illness,
was  a  third  time  appointed  to  the  Metropolitan
church,  Washington,  where  he  has  served  two
years.  Dr.  Newman  has  been  thrice  elected  to  the
General  conference  of  his  denomination,  served  as
a  commissioner  in  1876  to  adjust  the  relations  of
the  Methodist  church,  north  and  south,  and  in  1881
went  to  England  as  a  delegate  to  the  Methodist


NEWMAN


NEWSAM


505


ecumenical  council.  In  1885  he  delivered  a  dis
course  at  the  funeral  of  Gen.  Grant,  and  in  1887
one  at  that  of  Gen.  John  A.  Logan.  Dr.  New
man  is  one  of  the  most  eloquent  pulpit  orators  of
his  church  and  a  popular  lecturer.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  I),  from  the  University  of  Roches
ter,  N.  Y.,  in  1863.  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  the
Grant  memorial  university  and  Otterbein  univer
sity  in  1881.  In  1888  he  was  elected  bishop.  He
is  the  author  of  "  From  Dan  to  Beersheba  "  (New
York,  1864);  "Babylon  and  Nineveh"  (1875);
••  Christianity  Triumphant  "  (1884) ;  and  "  Evenings
with  the  Prophets  on  the  Lost  Empires"  and
"America  for  Americans"  (Washington,  1887).

NEWMAN,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Banbury,
Oxfordshire,  England,  in  1602;  d.  in  Rehoboth.
Bristol  co..  Mass.,  5  July,  1663.  He  was  graduated
at  Oxford  in  1620,  took  orders  in  the  Church  of
England,  and  emigrated  to  Massachusetts  in  1636.
After  preaching  nearly  two  years  at  Dorchester,
he  became  pastor  of  the  church  at  Weyraouth,
where  he  remained  until  1643.  The  following  year
he  removed  with  part  of  his  church  to  Seconet,
where  they  founded  the  town  of  Rehoboth,  which
then  embraced  Seekonk  and  Pawtucket.  R.  I.  He
published  "  A  Concordance  for  the  Bible  "  (London,
1643;  Cambridge,  1683:  5th  ed.,  London,  1720).
It  was  known  as  the ''Cambridge  Concordance,"
and  was  at  one  time  supposed  to  be  the  first  work
of  the  kind  printed  in  the  English  language.

NEWMAN,  Samuel  Phillips,  educator,  b.  in
Andover,  Mass.,  in  1796;  d,  in  Barre,  Worcester
co.,  Mass.,  10  Feb.,  1842.  He  was  the  son  of  Mark
II.  Newman,  a  book-publisher.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1816,  was  professor  of  the  Latin  and
Greek  languages  and  literature  in  Bowdoin  from
1820  till  1824,  and  from  1824  till  1839  occupied
the  chair  of  rhetoric  and  oratory  in  the  same  in
stitution.  In  the  latter  year  he  resigned  to  become
principal  of  the  Massachusetts  state  normal  school,
which  had  been  just  founded  at  Lexington,  and  he
held  this  office  until  his  death.  Prof.  Newman
was  the  author  of  "  A  Practical  System  of  Rhetoric,
or  the  Principles  and  Practice  of  Style,  with  Ex
amples,"  of  which  50  or  60  editions  were  published
in  the  United  States  (Portland,  1829;  6th  ed.,  Lon
don.  Eng.,  1846);  "Elements  of  Political  Econo
my  ''  (Andover,  1835) ;  and  "  The  Southern  Eclectic
Reader.  Parts  I..  II.,  and  III."

NEWMAN,  William  Henry,  surgeon,  b.  in
Spencer  county,  Ky.,  23  Feb.,  18*20 ;  d.  in  Pueblo,
Col.,  17  March,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  Jeffer
son  medical  college  in  1855,  and  practised  in  Bards-
town,  Ky.,  till  1863.  when  he  removed  to  Louisville.
Entering  the  National  army  in  1862,  he  served  as
surgeon  of  the  3d  and  10th  divisions  of  the  Army
of  the  Cumberland,  and  was  in  charge  of  hospitals
in  his  native  town  until  the  end  of  1863.  He  also
held  the  rank  of  major  and  served  on  the  staff  of
Gen.  James  Jackson.  In  1864  he  was  elected  pro
fessor  of  obstetrics  in  the  University  of  Louisville,
but  immediately  resigned.  Iji  the  autumn  of  1865
he  delivered  a  series  of  nine  lectures  on  the  surgi
cal  diseases  of  women,  which,  it  is  believed,  were
the  first  that  were  ever  given  on  that  subject.  In
performing  ovariotomy  in  1870  it  is  claimed  that
he  first  demonstrated  the  efficacy  of  carbolic  acid
as  a  local  anaesthetic.  For  three  sessions,  1869-'70,
he  gave  clinical  lectures  on  the  diseases  of  women
at  Louisville  city  hospital.  In  1872  he  went  to
Denver,  Col.,  on  account  of  his  health.  He  prac
tised  there  and  in  Leadville  for  ten  years,  when  he
removed  to  Pueblo.  He  was  an  officer  of  several
professional  societies,  contributed  to  medical  peri
odical  literature,  and  invented  an  obstetrical  forceps.


NEWNAN.  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in  North  Caro
lina  about  1780;  d.  in  Walker  county,  Ga.,  16  Jan.,
1851.  He  was  commissioned  ensign  and  2d  lieu
tenant  in  the  4th  U.  S.  infantry,  3  March,  1799,
promoted  1st  lieutenant  the  following  November,
and  resigned,  1  Jan.,  1802.  He  commanded  the
Georgia  volunteers  as  colonel  of  militia  in  two
actions  with  the  East  Florida  Indians  in  Septem
ber  and  October,  1812,  was  conspicuous  in  an
attack  on  the  Autossee  towns  of  the  Creek  Indians
under  Gen.  John  Floyd,  29  Nov.,  1813,  was  pro
moted  lieutenant-colonel  the  following  month,  and
severely  wounded  in  an  engagement  with  the
Creeks  at  Camp  Defiance  under  the  same  com
manding  officer,  27  Jan.,  1814.  After  the  cessation
of  hostilities  he  resided  on  a  plantation  in  McDon-
ough,  Henry  co.,  Ga.,  and  became  adjutant  and
inspector-general  of  state  militia.  He  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  state-rights  Democrat,  and  served
from  5  Dec.,  1831.  till  2  March,  1833.

NEWPORT,  Christopher,  English  navigator,
b.  in  England  about  1565,  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  colony  at  Jamestown,  Va.,  setting
sail  in  command  of  three  vessels  from  Blackwall,
London,  19  Dec.,  1606.  He  had  previously  ac
quired  reputation  in  expeditions  against  the  Span
iards  in  the  West  Indies.  On  26  April.  1607,  he
sighted  Cape  Henry  and  Cape  Charles,  and  named
them  in  honor  of  the  sons  of  King  James.  On
landing,  on  30  April,  he  called  the  spot  Point
Comfort,  from  his  having  recently  passed  through
a  heavy  storm.  On  13  May  the  expedition  arrived
at  Jamestown.  The  following  month  he  returned
to  England,  and  in  1608  came  out  again  with
additional  settlers  and  supplies.  Of  the  120  emi
grants,  the  majority  were  goldsmiths  and  gentle
men,  •'  packed  hither  by  their  friends,"  says  Capt.
John  Smith,  "  to  escape  ill  destinies."  He  soon
afterward  visited  the  Indian  chiefs  Powhatan  at
Werowocomoco,  and  Opecancanough  at  Pamunkey.
As  the  object  of  the  new  arrivals  was  to  obtain
gold.  "  there  was  no  talk,  no  hope,  no  work,"  says
Smith,  "  but  dig  gold,  wash  gold,  refine  gold,  load
gold,"  and.  some  yellow  mica  having  been  discov
ered  near  the  present  site  of  Richmond,  Newport
filled  his  vessels  with  it  under  the  impression  that
it  was  gold,  and  carried  it  to  England.  Late  in
the  same  year  he  again  arrived  in  the  colony,  bring
ing  a  further  supply  of  provisions,  and  presents
for  Powhatan,  the  "  emperor  of  the  country."  He
made  his  last  voyage  to  Virginia  in  1610.  in  the
fleet  that  convoyed  Lord  Delaware,  who  brought
the  colony  a  new  charter.  The  expedition  was
wrecked  on  the  Bermudas,  but  finally  reached  its
destination.  Before  going  back  to  England,  Capt.
Newport  endeavored  to  depose  Smith  from  the
presidency,  but  failed,  and  afterward  acknowledged
himself  to  be  in  the  wrong.  The  man  whom  he
assailed  has  described  Newport  as  "empty,  idle,
timid,  and  ostentatious."  He  was  the  author  of
"Discoveries  in  America,"  first  published  in  ••  Ar-
eha?ologia  Americana."  edited  by  Rev.  Edward
Everett  Hale  (Boston,  1860).

NEWSAM,  Albert,  artist,  b.  in  Steubenville,

Ohio,  20  May.  1809: d.  in  Philadelphia, Pa.. 20

i  Nov.,  1864. 'He  was  born  deaf  and  dumb,  and  his

father,  a  boatman  on  the  Ohio  river,  was  drowned

'  soon  after  his  birth. The  boy  manifested  a  taste

for  drawing  in  his  early  childhood,  and  when  about

ten  years  old  was  taken  to  Philadelphia  by  a  travel-

j  ling  mute  who  became interested in him. He

>  reached  that  city  in  the  spring  of  1820.  and  while

making  a  street  sketch  in  chalk  attracted  the  atten-

I  tion  of  Bishop  White,  who  was  president  of  the

;  iiewly  founded  institution  for  the  deaf  and  dumb.


506


NEWSHAM


NEWTON


The  bishop  took  charge  of  the  boy,  and  on  15  May,
1820,  he  was  admitted  to  the  institution.  His  artis
tic  taste  was  developed  by  its  directors,  who  placed
him  with  George  Catlin,  the  portrait-painter,  and
Hugh  Bridport,  the  miniature-painter,  for  instruc
tion.  When  he  was  seventeen  years  old  he  was
placed  with  Cephas  G.  Childs.  the  engraver  and  part
ner  of  Henry  Inman  in  the  lithographic  business,
where  he  remained  for  four  years.  Here  he  learned
the  art  of  drawing  upon  stone  for  lithography,  in
which  he  became  justly  celebrated  as  the  most  skil
ful  and  faithful  lithographic  portrait  draughtsman
this  country  has  yet  produced.  One  of  his  earliest
attempts  was  a  portrait  of  his  benefactor,  Bishop
White,  for  the  institution  that  had  fostered  him.
His  most  important  works,  for  size,  subject,  and
execution,  are  his  portraits  of  Chief-Justice  Mar
shall  and  William  Rawle,  the  elder,  both  after
paintings  by  Henry  Inman.

NEWSHAM,  Joseph  Parkinson,  lawyer,  b.  in
Preston,  Lancashire,  England,  24  May,  1887.  He
came  early  to  this  country,  and  was  educated  in
the  public  schools  at  St.  Louis,  Mo.  Studying
law,  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Illinois  and
Missouri  in  18(50,  and  practised  in  St.  Louis.  En
tering  the  National  army,  he  served  on  the  staff  of
Gen.  John  C.  Fremont,  and  afterward  on  that  of
Gen.  Andrew  J.  Smith  during  the  entire  campaign
of  the  latter  from  Paducah  to  Shiloh.  He  was  then
adjutant  of  the  32d  Missouri  volunteers,  and  re
signed.  4  July,  1864.  The  same  year  he  removed
to  Louisiana  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  work  of
reconstruction.  lie  was  admitted  to  the  Louisiana
bar  in  1865,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Reconstruc
tion  convention  of  1867-'8.  He  subsequently  es
tablished  and  edited  "The  Feliciana  Republican,"
the  first  Republican  newspaper  in  that  part  of  the
state  from  1868  till  1872.  He  sat  in  the  40th  con
gress,  serving  from  18  July,  1868,  till  3  March.
1869,  and  was  a  candidate  for  re-election,  but  his
opponent,  Michael  Ryan,  Democrat,  obtained  the
seat.  On  Mr.  Newsham's  asserting  that  fraud  and
intimidation  had  been  used,  the  house,  after  in
vestigation,  declared  the  latter  legally  elected,  and
he  consequently  served  from  25  May,  1870,  till  5
Dec.  of  the  same  year.  Since  then  he  has  resided
on  his  plantation  at  Bayou  Sara,  La.,  and  served
as  parish  judge  and  parish  attorney.

NEWTON,  Gilbert  Stuart,  artist,  b.  in  Hali
fax.  N.  S.,  20  Sept.,  1797 ;  d.  in  Wimbledon,  Eng
land,  5  Aug.,  1835.  His  father,  Edward,  was  Brit
ish  collector  of  customs  at  Halifax  ;  his  mother
was  the  daughter  of  a  Scottish  loyalist  named
Stuart,  who  fled  from  Rhode  Island  to  Halifax,
and  thence  to  England,  at  the  beginning  of  the
Revolution.  After  the  father's  death  Mrs.  New
ton  removed  with  her  family  to  the  neighbor
hood  of  Boston,  Mass.,  about  1803.  Gilbert  left
Boston  when  yet  a  youth  and  went  to  Italy,  where
he  studied  a  year.  He  had  painted  some  pictures
and  portraits  before  leaving  home  which  excited
attention  and  were  thought  very  promising,  and
while  in  Italy  he  produced  a  portrait  of  an  official
which  was  much  admired,  but  he  decided  to  go  to
England.  In  Paris,  on  his  way,  he  met  Washing
ton  Allston,  Sir  David  Wilkie,  and  Charles  11.
Leslie,  and  returned  with  Leslie  to  England.  He
was  admitted  as  a  student  at  the  Royal  academy,
elected  an  associate  in  1828,  and  an  academicia'n
in  1831.  His  career  in  England  was  one  of  brill
iant  success.  Upon  his  first  arrival  in  that  country
he  and  Washington  Irving  had  lodgings  together
in  Langham  place.  Irving  writes  in  1824  to  Les
lie  :  "  When  you  see  Newton,  remember  me  affec
tionately  to  him.  I  often  look  back  with  fondness


and  regret  to  the  times  we  lived  together  in  Lon
don  in  a  delightful  community  of  thought  and
feeling,  struggling  our  way  onward  in  the  world,
but  cheering  and  encouraging  each  other.  I  find
nothing  to  supply  the  place  of  that  heartfelt  fel
lowship."  In  1831  Mr.  Newton  was  ill,  and,  as  his
physician  urged  his  taking  a  voyage,  he  sailed  for
the  United  States  in  October  of  that  year.  The
following  August  he  married  in  Boston,  and  he
returned  to  England  with  his  wife  in  October,
1832.  Nearly  three  years  later  he  died,  leaving  his
widow  and  one  daughter.  He  was  buried  in  the
cemetery  of  the  village  church  at  Wimbledon.  A
monument,  executed  by  Sir  Francis  Chantry,  was
raised  to  him  by  a  few  of  his  fellow-academicians,
bearing  the  inscription  :  "To  Gilbert  Stuart  New
ton  this  monument  is  raised  by  a  few  friends  who
admired  him  as  an  artist  and  loved  him  as  a  man."
What  is  to  be  said  of  Mr.  Newton  as  a  man  may
be  read  in  the  letters  of  Leslie  and  Washington  Ir
ving  that  are  quoted  in  the  "  History  of  the  Arts
of  Design,"  in  a  notice  of  Mr.  Newton  by  William
Dunlap.  Dunlap  shows  some  irritation  that  New
ton  should  have  considered  himself  an  Englishman,
but  he  was  certainly  such  by  birth  and  parentage,
and  his  whole  career  was  in  England.  He  took  to
portraiture  at  first,  mainly,  it  appears,  because  he
disliked  the  labor  of  study  required  for  effective
j  genre  painting,  in  which  direction  his  greatest  tal
ent  lay.  The  remonstrances  of  his  friends,  how
ever,  particularly  Washington  Irving,  had  their
effect,  and  he  soon  afterward  produced  his  first
subject  picture,  "  A  Poet  Reading  his  Verses  to  an
Impatient  Gallant."  He  had  an  extraordinary  eye
for  color,  and  possessed  considerable  humor,  excel
ling  particularly  in  the  illustration  of  scenes  from
Moliere,  "Gil  Bias,"  etc.  Besides  portraits,  he
painted  about  sixty  pictures,  including  "Falstaff
escaping  in  the  Buck-Basket,"  "Girl  at  her  Devo
tions,"  "The  Adieu,"  "The  Dull  Lecture,"  "The
Duenna,"  "The  Late  Player,"  in  the  New  York
historical  society's  rooms,  and  "  The  Trunk  Scene
in  '  Cymbeline.' "  Many  of  them  have  been  en
graved.  His  portraits  include  likenesses  of  Sir
Walter  Scott  at  Abbotsford,  Thomas  Moore,  Syd
ney  Smith,  Henry  Hallam,  and  Washington  Irving.
While  Mr.  Newton  was  in  this  country  in  1831-'2
he  painted  eight  small  portraits.  His  "Dull  Lec
ture"  is  in  the  Lenox  library,  New  York  city.
Washington  Irving  described  this  picture,  at  the
request  of  the  artist,  in  these  lines :
"  Frostie  age,  frostic  age,

Vain  all  your  learning  !
Drowsie  page,  drowsie  page,

Evermore  turning !
Young*  head  no  lore  will  heed,

Young  heart's  a  reckless  rover ;
Young  beautie,  while  you  read,

Sleeping,  dreams  of  absent  lover."
NEWTON,  Hubert  Anson,  mathematician,  b.
in  Sherburne,  N.  Y.,  19  March,  1830.  He  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  .1850,  after  which  he  studied
higher  mathematics.  In  1852  he  was  appointed
tutor,  and  entering  on  that  office  in  January,  1853,
he  was  given  charge  of  the  entire  mathematical  de
partment  at  once,  owing  to  the  illness  of  Prof.
Anthony  D.  Stanley.  He  was  elected  full  professor
in  1855,  and,  after  spending  a  year  abroad,  began
the  active  discharge  of  the  duties  of  his  chair,
which  he  has  since  continued  without  interruption.
His  scientific  work  in  pure  mathematics  includes
researches  "  On  the  Construction  of  Certain  Curves
by  Points,"  "  Certain  Transcendental  Curves,"  and
similar  papers,  but  his  most  valuable  investigations
have  been  in  connection  with  meteors  and  like


NEWTON


NEWTON


507


bodies.  By  collecting  and  discussing  old  and  re
cent  observations  of  November  showers,  he  demon
strated  that  the  period  of  revolution  of  these  shoot
ing-stars  must  have  one  of  five  accurately  deter
mined  values.  From
similar  sources  he  es
tablished  the  secular
motion  of  the  node  of
their  mean  orbit  and
explained  how  the  real
orbit  could  then  be  dis
tinguished  from  the
others  by  the  calcula
tion  of  the  secular  mo
tion  of  the  node  for
each  of  the  assigned
periods.  This  compu
tation  was  subsequent
ly  made  by  other  au
thorities,  and  so  it  be-
came  possible  to  con-
nect  the  stream  of  me
teors  with  the  comet  of
186(3  so  soon  as  the  orbit

of  that  comet  was  computed.  In  1804  he  published
a  memoir  upon  the  sporadic  meteors,  in  which  he  de
termined  their  numbers,  their  frequency  in  the  space
traversed  by  the  earth,  and  the  fact  that  most  of  them
moved  in  long  orbits  like  the  comets.  Much  of  his
work  has  been  in  the  direction  of  examining  results
that  have  been  obtained  by  others,  from  which  he
has  deduced  laws  or  general  principles  applicable
to  meteors.  He  is  regarded  both  in  this  country
and  abroad  as  one  of  the  highest  authorities  on  this
subject.  In  1864  he  undertook  and  carried  through
successfully  the  task  of  securing  the  introduction
in  the  arithmetics  of  the  United  States  of  an  ade
quate  presentation  of  the  metric  system  of  weights
and  measures.  In  1868  he  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  the  University  of  Michigan,  and  he
was  one  of  the  original  members,  appointed  by
congress,  to  constitute  the  National  academy  of
sciences.  He  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  Royal
astronomical  society  of  London  in  1872,  and  a  fel
low  of  the  Royal  philosophical  society  of  Edinburgh
in  1886.  Besides  being  a  member  of  other  scientific
societies,  he  has  been  president  of  the  Connecticut
academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  has  been  a  member
of  the  American  association  for  the  advancement
of  science  since  1850.  was  its  vice-president  in  1875,
when  his  retiring  address  took  the  form  of  a  strong
plea  for  more  study  of  mathematics  by  men  of  sci
ence,  and  was  its  president  in  1885.  He  has  been
greatly  interested  in  the  development  of  Yale,  and
in  its  council  has  had  much  influence.  Prof.  New
ton  is  secretary  and  executive  officer  of  the  board
of  managers  of  the  Yale  university  observatory,
and  is  an  associate  editor  of  the  "  American  Jour
nal  of  Science."  His  publications  have  been  re
stricted  almost  exclusively  to  scientific  papers  that
have  appeared  in  the  "Memoirs "of  the  National
academy  of  sciences,  and  in  the  "  American  Jour
nal  of  Science."

NEWTON.  Isaac,  naval  architect,  b.  in  Scho-
dack.  N.  Y.,  16  Jan.,  1794;  d.  in  New  York  city,
22  Nov.,  1858.  He  was  the  son  of  Abner  Newton,
who  served  as  an  officer  during  the  Revolutionary
war.  Early  in  life  he  turned  his  attention  to  the
building  of  steamboats  for  navigation  on  Hudson
river  and  the  great  lakes.  Nearly  ninety  vessels  for
this  purpose  were  constructed  by  him.  including
"  Balloon,"  "  Hendrick  Hudson."  "  Knickerbocker,"
'•  North  America,"  '•  Isaac  Newton."  and  "  The  New
World."  The  first  anthracite  coal  used  on  a  steam
vessel  was  employed  under  his  direction  on  the


"  North  America."  Mr.  Newton  was  the  founder  of
the  People's  line  of  steamboats  between  Albany  and
New  York,  and  he  was  also  interested  in  the  con
struction  of  many  ocean  steamers.  He  was  asso
ciated  in  the  development  of  the  great  transporta
tion  lines  between  New  York  and  Chicago,  includ
ing  the  New  York  Central  and  the  Lake  Shore  and
Michigan  Southern  railways. — His  son,  Isaac,  civil
engineer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  4  Aug.,  1837 ;  d.  there,
25  Sept.,  1884,  studied  letters  at  Hamilton  college,
civil  engineering  at  the  University  of  the  city  of
New  York,  and  medicine  at  the  medical  department
of  the  latter  institution,  but  received  no  degree.
His  practical  education  as  an  engineer  was  ac
quired  at  the  Novelty  iron-works,  and  at  the  Dela-
mater  works,  in  New  York  city,  after  which  he
served  as  assistant  engineer  on  the  People's  line,
and  as  chief  engineer  on  one  of  the  Collins  line  be
tween  New  York  and  Liverpool.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  was  appointed  1st  assistant  en
gineer  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  and  in  1861  assigned  to  the
"  Roanoke."  Subsequently  he  was  associated  with
John  Ericsson  (q.  v.)  in  the  building  of  the  "  Moni
tor."  He  accompanied  this  iron-clad  to  Hampton
Roads,  and  participated  in  the  fight  with  the
•'  Merrimac."  on  9  March.  1862,  having  special
charge  of  the  engines  and  turret  during  the  con
flict.  On  the  trip  from  New  York  to  Hampton
Roads  the  ventilation-apparatus  of  the  vessel  be
came  deranged,  and  the  gas  from  the  furnaces
escaped  into  the  boiler-room,  nearly  causing  the
death  of  the  stokers.  At  the  risk  of  his  life  he  en
tered  the  boiler-room,  dragged  the  men  out,  and
performed  their  work  till  the  immediate  danger  was
past,  when  he  was  taken  insensible  from  the  place.
In  his  report  of  the  battle,  John  L.  Worden  said  of
Newton :  "  In  the  emergency  which  arose  in  the
passage  to  Hampton  Roads  he  showed  great  readi
ness  in  resources  and  quickness  in  the  application
of  them  :  in  the  action  with  the  '  Merrimac '  he  did
his  duty  with  coolness,  skill,  and  energy,  thereby
contributing  largely  to  the  successful  result  of  the
combat."  Later  he  became  supervising  constructor
of  iron-clads  for  the  U.  S.  government  in  New  York,
and  in  this  capacity  superintended  the  building,
among  others,  of  the  "  Puritan  "  and  "  Dictator."
He  resigned  from  the  navy  on  8  Feb.,  1865,  and
thereafter  followed  his  profession  in  various  capaci
ties,  until  1869,  when  he  was  appointed  by  con
gress  to  investigate  the  condition  of  the  navy.  Sub
sequently  he  assisted  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan  in
the  work  of  reconstructing  the  Stevens  battery,
and  in  1872  became  his  assistant,  when  Gen.  Mc
Clellan  was  chief  engineer  of  the  department  of
public  works  in  New  York  city.  After  various
private  engagements  he  was  appointed  one  of  the
rapid  transit  commission  to  arrange  plans  for  the
transportation  of  passengers  and  freight  in  New
York  city,  out  of  whose  deliberations  grew  the
present  system  of  elevated  roads.  In  1881  he  was
appointed  chief  engineer  of  the  department  of  pub
lic  works  in  New  York  city,  and  he  was  identified
with  the  beginnings  of  the  new  Croton  aqueduct.
Mr.  Newton  was  a  m.ember  of  the  American  society
of  civil  engineers,  the  Society  of  mechanical  en
gineers,  and  other  scientific  bodies.  His  profes
sional  articles  contributed  to  current  literature
were  many,  and  he  was  an  accepted  authority  in
certain  directions. — Another  son,  Henry,  mining
engineer,  b.  in  New  York  city  on  12  Aug.,  1845  ;  d.
in  Deadwood.  Dakota,  5  Aug..  1877,  was  graduated
at  the  College  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1866,  and
at  Columbia  college  school  of  mines  in  1869.  re
ceiving  also  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  that  institu
tion  in  1876  for  advanced  scientific  studies.  After


508


NEWTON


NEWTON


grail  nation  he  continued  at  the  school  as  assistant
in  metallurgy.  In  186!)  lie  became  assistant  in
geology,  and  he  remained  as  such  until  1870,  like
wise  assisting  Prof.  John  S.  Newberry  in  his  work
on  the  Ohio  geological  survey  during  the  summers.
Jle  was  appointed  assistant  geologist  to  the  Black
Hills  expedition  that  was  sent  out  in  1870  under
Walter  P.  Jenney  by  the  department  of  the  inte
rior.  During  the  summers  of  1876-'7  he  was  active
in  the  field,  studying  the  mineralogy  and  geology
of  that  district,  aWne  spent  the  winter  in  collat
ing  the  information.  In  1877  he  was  called  to  the
chair  of  mining  and  metallurgy  in  Ohio  state  uni
versity,  and  expected  to  begin  his  duties  in  the  au
tumn  of  that  year,  but  when  he  was  visiting  the
Black  Hills  he  was  striken  with  a  fatal  fever.  Dr.
Newton  was  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and
had  made  himself  a  specialist  on  the  metallurgy  of
iron  and  steel,  on  which  subject  he  contributed  pa
pers  to  the  literature  of  his  profession.  His  most
valuable  work  was  his  "  Report  on  the  Geology
and  Resources  of  the  BlacK  Hills  of  Dakota "
(Washington,  1880),  which  is  prefaced  by  a  memoir
by  Prof.  John  S.  Newberry.

NEWTON,  Isaac,  commissioner  of  agriculture,
b.  in  Burlington  county,  N.  J.,  31  March,  1800 ;  d.
in  Washington,  D.  C.,  19  June,  1867.  He  received
a  common-school  education,  and  after  his  mar
riage  settled  on  a  farm  in  Delaware  county,  Pa.
Here  he  soon  became  known  for  the  neatness,  or
der,  and  productiveness  of  his  land,  and  he  event
ually  ranked  among  the  model  farmers  of  his  state.
He  early  became  a  member  of  its  agricultural  as
sociation,  was  frequently  sent  as  a  delegate  to  the
meetings  of  the  United  States  agricultural  so
ciety,  and  introduced  into  the  former  organization
a  resolution  urging  congress  to  establish  a  National
department  of  agriculture.  He  also  brought  the
plan  to  the  attention  successively  of  Presidents
Harrison,  Taylor,  Fillmore,  Buchanan,  and  Lin
coln,  whose  personal  acquaintance  he  enjoyed.  To
the  last  named  he  was  indebted  for  the  final  adop
tion  of  his  scheme.  When  the  agricultural  bureau
had  been  authorized  by  congress  in  1802,  Mr.  Lin
coln  naturally  offered  the  commissionership  to  Mr.
Newton,  to  whose  lot  the  organization  of  the  de
partment  fell,  and  to  whom  its  present  efficiency  is
largely  due.  This  office  he  held  until  his  death.

NEWTON,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  24
Aug.,  1823.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili
tary  academy  in  1842,  standing  second  in  the  class
that  included  Henry  L.  Eustis,  William  S.  Rose-

crans.  John  Pope,
Seth  Williams,  Dan
iel  H.  Hill.  Earl  Van
Dorn,  James  Long-
street,  and  others
that  held  high  com
mands  during  the
civil  war.  After  be
ing  promoted  into
the  engineer  corps

/- _ fv-^,  -^  !  ~*f  as  2(1  lieutenant,  he

" p*> -  '  served as assistant

professor  of  engi
neering  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy,
and  then  in  the  con
struction  of  various
fortifications  and
other  engineering

works  along  the  Atlantic  and  Gulf  sea-coasts  un
til  I860,  except  during  1858.  when  he  was  chief
engineer  of  the  Utah  expedition.  He  had  at
tained  the  rank  of  captain  on  1  July,  1856.  At


/

^

&


the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  chief  engi
neer  of  the  Department  of  Pennsylvania,  and  then
held  a  similar  appointment  in  the  Department  of
the  Shenandoah,  and  from  August,  1861,  till  March,
1862,  was  assistant  engineer  in  the  construction  of
the  defences  of  Washington,  D.  (J.  He  was  made
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  23  Sept.,  1861,  and
had  charge  of  a  brigade  in  the  defence  of  the  capi
tal.  During  the  peninsular  campaign  he  served
with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  was  engaged
in  the  actions  at  West  Point,  Gaines's  Mills,  and
Glendale.  He  continued  with  his  command  in  the
Maryland  campaign,  participating  in  the  forcing
of  Crampton  Gap  and  the  battle  of  Antietam.
Gen.  Newton  led  a  division  in  the  storming  of  the
Marye  Heights  in  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg,  was
made  major-general  of  volunteers  on  30  March,  1863,
and  then  took  part  in  the  Chancellorsville  cam
paign  and  in  the  battle  of  Salem  Heights.  In  the
subsequent  Pennsylvania  campaign  he  succeeded
to  the  command  of  the.  1st  corps  on  2  July,  1863,
after  the  death  of  John  F.  Reynolds,  and  com
manded  it  in  the  last  days  of  the  battle  of  Gettys
burg.  He  was  bre vetted  colonel  for  services  in
this  action,  and  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of  the  Con
federate  army  to  Warrenton,  Va.,  and  in  the  Rapi-
dan  campaign  during  October  and  December,  1863.
He  was  placed  in  command  of  the  2d  division  of
the  4th  corps  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland,
under  Gen.  Oliver  O.  Howard,  in  May,  1864,  and
participated  in  the  invasion  of  Georgia,  taking
active  part  in  the  engagements,  including  the  bat
tle  of  Peach  Tree  Creek,  Ga.,  that  culminated  in
the  capture  of  Atlanta  in  September,  1864.  Sub
sequently  lie  had  command  of  various  districts  in
Florida  until  he  was  mustered  out  of  volunteer
service  in  January,  1866,  after  receiving,  on  13
March,  1865,  the  brevets  of  major-general  in  the
volunteer  army,  and  those  of  brigadier-general  and
major-general  in  the  regular  army.  He  received
his  regular  promotion  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  en
gineers  on  28  Dec.,  1865,  and  in  April,  1866,  was
made  superintending  engineer  of  the  construction
of  the  defences  on  the  Long  Island  side  of  the
Narrows  entrance  to  New  York  harbor ;  also  of  the
improvements  of  the  Hudson  river  and  of  the  fort
at  Sandy  Hook,  N.  J.  He  was  also  a  member  of
the  board  of  engineers  to  carry  out  in  detail  the
modifications  of  the  defences  in  the  vicinity  of  New
York.  These  and  other  similar  engineering  duties,
principally  in  connection  with  the  harbor  of  New
York,  occupied  his  attention  until  his  retirement
on  27  Aug.,  1886.  His  well  known  achievement  of
this  kind  was  the  removal  of  obstructions  in
Hell  Gate  channel,  the  important  water-way  be
tween  Long  Island  sound  and  East  river.  These,
known  as  Ilallett's  reef  and  Flood  rock,  were  duly
mined  and  exploded  on  24  Sept..  1876,  and  10  Oct.,
1885.  All  of  the  problems  that  were  involved  in
the  preliminary  steps  of  this  great  work  were  com
pletely  and  conscientiously  studied,  and  the  accu
racy  of  his  solutions  was  shown  in  the  exact  cor
respondence  of  results  with  the  objects  that  he
sought.  The  proposed  enlargement  of  Harlem
river,  the  improvements  of  Hudson  river  from
Troy  to  New  York,  and  of  the  channel  between
New  Jersey  and  Staten  island,  and  of  harbors  on
Lake  Champlain  were  likewise  under  his  charge.
He  was  advanced  to  the  rank  of  colonel  on  30  June,
1879,  and  to  chief  of  engineers,  with  rank  of  briga
dier-general,  on  6  March,  1884.  The  office  of  com
missioner  of  public  works  in  New  York  city  had
been  for  some  time  awarded  by  political  prefer
ment,  and  it  became  necessary  to  secure  for  it  a
man  of  superior  skill  and  scientific  training.  In


NEWTON


509


accordance  with  these  requirements,  Mayor  Will
iam  R.  Grace,  on  '31  Aug.,  1887,  appointed  Gen.
Newton  to  that  office,  which  he  has  since  filled.
His  services  as  consulting  engineer  have  been  re
peatedly  sought,  and  he  has  invented  steam-drilling
apparatus  that  have  been  used  in  removing  rocks
in  New  York  harbor.  He  was  elected  to  member
ship  in  the  National  academy  of  sciences  in  1876,
and  to  honorary  membership  in  the  American  so
ciety  of  civil  engineers  in  1884.

NEWTON,  John  Thomas,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Alexandria,  Va.,  20  May,  1798;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C.,  28  July,  1857.  He  entered  the  navy  as  mid
shipman,  16  Jan.,  1809,  and  was  promoted  lieuten
ant,  24  July,  1813 ;  commander,  3  March,  1827 ;
and  captain,  9  Feb.,  1837.  He  was  acting  lieuten
ant  of  the  "  Hornet "  in  her  engagement  with  the
"  Peacock,"  24  Feb.,  1813,  and  was  1st  lieutenant
during  her  action  with  the  "  Penguin,"  on  23  March,
1815.  After  commanding  the  steamers  "  Fulton  "
and  "  Missouri,"  he  was  in  charge  of  Pensacola
navy-yard  from  1848  till  1852.  From  July  of  the
latter  year  till  March,  1855,  he  was  flag-officer  of
the  home  squadron,  which  gave  him  the  title  of
commodore.  The  last  two  years  of  his  life  he  was
in  command  of  the  navy-yard  at  Portsmouth,  N.  H.

NEWTON,  Richard, 'clergyman,  b.  in  Liver
pool,  England,  25  July,  1813 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  25  May,  1887.  He  came  with  his  parents  to
the  United  States  at  the  age  of  ten  years,  and
obtained  his  early  education  and  training  in  Phila
delphia  and  Wilmington,  Del.  lie  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1836,  and  at
the  General  theological  seminary,  New  York  city,
in  1839.  He  was  ordained  in  West  Chester,  Pa.,  in
the  latter  year,  by  Bishop  Henry  U.  Onderdonk,  in
the  Church  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  and  received  a  call
directly  to  the  rectorship  of  the  same  church.  A
year  later  he  became  rector  of  St.  Paul's  church,
Philadelphia,  which  post  he  held  for  twenty-two
years.  In  1862  he  was  called  to  the  Church  of  the
Epiphany,  Philadelphia,  where  he  labored  until
1881,  when  he  accepted  the  rectorship  of  the  Church
of  the  Covenant.  Philadelphia,  where  he  remained
during  the  rest  of  his  life.  He  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Kenyon  college,  Ohio,  in  1862,  and
was  for  many  years  a  trustee  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania.  Dr.  Newton  was  distinguished  for
his  contributions  to  juvenile  literature.  lie  was
very  successful  in  preparing  sermons  for  children.
These  have  been  translated  into  French,  German,
Arabic,  and  other  languages,  and  are  highly  es
teemed.  His  books  include  "Rills  from  the  Foun
tain  of  Life"  (Philadelphia,  1856);  "The  King's
Highway''  (New  York,  1858);  "Bible  Jewels"
(1867);  "Nature's  Wonders"  (1872);  "The  King
in  His  Beauty":  "Bible  Promises";  "Natural
History  of  the  Bible  " ;  and  "  Covenant  Names  and
Privileges."  Dr.  Newton  had  two  sons,  both  of
whom  entered  the  ministry. — His  son,  Richard
Heber,  clergyman,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  31  Oct.,  1840,
obtained  his  education  at  home  and  in  the  Univer
sity  of  Pennsylvania,  and  prepared  for  the  ministry
in  the  Episcopal  divinity-school,  Philadelphia.  He
was  made  deacon  in  St.  Paul's  church,  Philadel
phia,  in  June,  1860,  by  Bishop  Alonzo  Potter,  and
ordained  priest  in  the  same  church  in  1866  by  Bish
op  Odenheimer.  He  was  assistant  to  his  father  for
four  years,  became  minister  in  charge  of  Trinity
church,  Sharon  Springs,  N.  Y.,  in  1864,  was  rector
of  St.  Paul's  church,  Philadelphia,  in  1866,  and  of
All  Souls'  church,  New  York  city,  known  also  as
the  Anthon  memorial  church,  in  1869.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Union  college  in  1881.
He  has  attracted  notice  bv  the  radical  religious


views  that  he  has  expressed  from  his  pulpit.  Dr.
Newton's  publications  are  a  Sunday-school  hymn-
book  and  service-book  entitled  "  Children's  Church  "
(New  York,  1872) ;  "  The  Morals  of  Trade  "  (1876) ;
"  Womanhood  "  (1879) ;  "  Studies  of  Jesus  "  (1881) ;
"Right  and  Wrong  Uses  of  the  Bible"  (1883);
"  Book  of  the  Beginnings  "  (1884) ;  "  Philistinism  "
(1885) ;  and  "  Social  Studies  "  (1886).  Some  of  these
have  been  republished  in  England. — Another  son,
William  Wilberforce,  clergyman,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  4  Nov.,  1843,  was  graduated  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1865,  and  prepared  for
orders  in  the  Episcopal  divinity-school,  Philadel
phia.  He  was  made  deacon  in  the  Church  of  the
Epiphany,  Philadelphia,  18  June,  1868,  by  Bishop
Stevens,  and  ordained  priest  in  St.  Luke's  church,
Philadelphia,  19  June,  1869,  by  the  same  bishop.
He  was  assistant  to  his  father  for  two  years  during
the  latter's  absence  in  Europe.  He  has  been  rector
of  St.  Paul's  church,  Brookline,  Mass.,  in  1870-'5,
of  Trinity  church,  Newark,  N.  J.,  till  1877,  of  St.
Paul's  church,  Boston,  Mass.,  till  1881,  and  since
that  time  of  St.  Stephen's  church,  Pittsfield,  Mass.
He  organized  the  "  American  congress  of  churches,"
meetings  of  which  were  held  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  in
1885,  and  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  in  1886.  Mr.  New
ton's  publications,  besides  contributions  to  cantata
music,  are  "Little  and  Wise"  and  "New  Tracts
for  New  Times  "  (New  York,  1877) ;  "  Essays  of  To-
Day"  (Boston,  1879);  "The  Interpreter's"  House  "
(New  York,  1879) ;  "  The  Palace  Beautiful "  (1880) ;
"The  Voice  of  St.  John"  (1881);  "The  Legend  of
St.  Telemachus  "  (1882) ;  "  Priest  and  Man  "  (Bos
ton,  1883);  "Summer  Sermons"  (Pittsfield,  1885);
"Paradise"  (1885);  "The  Vine  out  of  Egypt"
(New  York,  1887) ;  "  Prayers  of  the  Ages  "  (1887) ;
and  ''A  Father's  Blessing  to  Children"  and  "  Rag-
nar.  the  Sea-King  "  (1888).

NEWTON,  Robert  Crittenden,  lawyer,  b.  in
Little  Rock,  Ark.,  2  June,  1840;  d.  there,  2  June,
1887.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Jared  Newton,
an  Englishman,  who  emigrated  to  Westmoreland
county,  Va.,  in  the  17th  century.  He  was  educated
partly  at  the  Western  military  institute,  Tenn.,  af
terward  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1860,  and  began  to  practise  in  his  native  city.  En
listing  in  the  Confederate  army  as  a  private,  he
was  successively  commissioned  lieutenant  and  as
sistant  adjutant-general  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Thomas
C.  Ilindman.  Subsequently  he  was  made  major  in
the  adjutant-general's  department,  and  colonel  of
the  5th  regiment  of  Arkansas  cavalry.  After  the
war  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  work  of  recon
struction.  In  1866  he  served  as  one  of  the  com
missioners  that  were  sent  by  the  Arkansas  legisla
ture  to  Washington,  D.  C.,  to  ascertain  from  the
Federal  authorities  on  what  terms  congressmen
from  that  state  would  be  admitted  to  seats.  In
1868  he  canvassed  the  state  against  the  constitution
of  that  year,  and  in  1874  he  was  state  treasurer  pro
tempore  from  23  May  till  12  November.  In  May,
1873,  when  Gov.  Elisha  Baxter  decided  to  reorgan
ize  the  militia  of  the  state,  he  appointed  Gen.  New
ton  one  of  two  major-generals  to  carry  out  the
wTork ;  but,  on  the  advice  of  President  Grant,  he  de
termined  to  disband  all  the  military  forces  of  the
state.  The  following  year,  on  the  outbreak  of  the
"Brooks-Baxter  war  ""(see  BAXTER.  ELISHA),  New
ton  was  reappointed  major-general  in  command
of  the  state  troops.  On  19  May,  1874,  the  Brooks
forces  having  evacuated  the  capitol  under  the
proclamation  of  President  Grant,  Gen.  Newton  oc
cupied  the  yard  and  grounds,  and  the  next  day  re
instated  Gov.  Baxter  in  possession  of  the  public
buildings,  property,  and  archives.


510


NEWTON


NIBOYER


NEWTON,  Robert  Safford,  surgeon,  b.  in  Gal-
lipolis,  Gallia  co.,  Ohio,  12  Dec.,  1818 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  9  Oct.,  1881.  He  was  educated  at  Gal
lia  college,  Ohio,  and  at  the  University  of  Ken
tucky,  where  he  received  the  degree  of  M.  D.  in
1841.  After  practising  at  Gallipolis  until  1845,  he
removed  to  Cincinnati,  where  he  soon  became
known  as  a  successful  physician  and  surgeon.  He
was  appointed  professor  of  surgery  in  the  Mem
phis,  Tenn.,  university  in  1849,  and  held  the  office
until  1851,  when  he  returned  to  Cincinnati  and
was  called  to  the  same  chair  in  the  Eclectic  medi
cal  institute.  He  resigned  in  1862.  and  in  April,
1863,  he  went  to  New  York  city.  During  his  resi
dence  there  he  was  instrumental  in  obtaining  a
charter  for  the  State  eclectic  medical  society,  and
in  organizing  it,  acting  as  presiding  officer  for
three  years.  He  had  previously  aided  in  the  or
ganization  of  the  National  society,  and  was  con
spicuous  in  the  work  of  its  various  branches.  He
subsequently  assisted  in  founding  the  Eclectic
medical  college  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1805,
serving  as  its  president  from  1875  till  1881,  and  as
professor  of  surgery  from  1865  till  his  death.  He
was  engaged  in  the  investigation  of  cell  pathology
from  1843  till  1880,  and  was  the  inventor  of  nu
merous  instruments  and  improvements  in  surgery,
especially  of  several  relating  to  the  pathology  and
treatment  of  cancerous  diseases.  He  was  the  origi
nator  of  the  circular  operation  for  the  removal  of
the  breast.  From  1851  till  1861  he  edited  and
published  the  "  Eclectic  Medical  Journal,"  and,
after  his  removal  to  New  York  city,  he  conducted
the  "Eclectic  Medical  Review"  until  1874,  when
it  was  merged  into  the  "  Medical  Eclectic."  In
1852  he  contributed  largely  to  the  "United  States
Eclectic  Dispensatory."  He  edited  "  Chapman  on
Ulcers "  (Cincinnati,  1853);  "Eclectic  Practice  of
Medicine,"  with  Prof.  William  B.  Powell  (1854;
New  York,  1875) ;  "  Diseases  of  Children  "  (1854  ;
New  York,  1880) ;  "  Syme's  Surgery  "  (Cincinnati,
1856;  new  ed.,  1867);  and  "Pathology  of  Inflam
mation  and  Fever"  (1861 ;  new  ed.,  1867).  He  is
the  author  of  "  A  Treatise  on  Antiseptic  Surgery  "
(Washington,  1876). — His  son,  Robert  Satt'ord,
physician,  b.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  2  Sept.,  1855,  re
ceived  the  degree  of  M.  D.  from  New  York  eclec
tic  medical  college  in  1876,  and  studied  in  London,
Paris,  Vienna,  and  Berlin,  from  that  year  till  1880.
He  was  clinical  assistant  at  the  Royal"  London  oph
thalmic  hospital  in  1876-'7,  assistant  medical  offi
cer  to  the  London  hospital  in  1877,  and  chief  of
the  Clinic  hospital  for  diseases  of  the  throat  and
lungs  in  the  same  city  in  1877-'8.  Returning  to
this  country,  he  was  professor  of  diseases  of  the
eye,  throat,  and  skin,  in  the  New  York  eclectic
medical  college  in  1881-'6,  and  also  dean  of  the
faculty.  Dr.  Newton  edited  the  New  York  "  Quar
terly  Cancer  Journal"  in  1880-'!,  and  the  New
York  "  Medical  Eclectic  ''  from  1877  till  1885.

NEWTON,  Roger,  jurist,  b.  in  1685 ;  d.  in  Mil-
ford,  Conn.,  15  Jan.,  1771.  He  served  in  the  Con
necticut  contingent  in  the  expeditions  against  the
French  in  Canada  in  1709-'10,  and  for  many  years
was  a  member  of  the  council.  Having  been  ad
mitted  to  the  bar,  he  was  appointed  judge  of  the
court  of  common  pleas,  which  office  he  held  for
thirty-three  years.  His  epitaph  calls  him

"  Newton  as  steel,  inflexible  from  right
In  faith,  in  law,  in  equity,  in  fight."

NEWTON,  Thomas,  lawyer,  b.  in  England,  10
Jan.,  1661 ;  d.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  28  May,  1721.
He  was  educated  in  England,  emigrated  "to  this
country,  and  was  attorney-general  for  Massachu
setts  bay  in  1720-'!.  Subsequently  he  became


deputy  judge  and  judge  of  the  admiralty.  Later
he  was  comptroller  of  the  customs  and  secretary
of  New  Hampshire  until  1690.  For  many  years
he  occupied  a  high  place  at  the  Boston  bar.

NEYRA,  Domingo  (ni-rah),  clergyman,  b.  in
Banda  Oriental,  Spanish  America,  about  1689 ;  tl.
in  Buenos  Ayres  after  1748.  He  studied  in  the
Dominican  convent  of  Cordova,  entered  the  order,
and  was  sent  to  Santiago.  Chili,  where  he  was  or
dained  priest  in  1713.  He  was  professor  in  the
Dominican  colleges  of  Cordova  and  Buenos  Ayres
from  that  year  till  1722.  The  Dominicans  of
Banda  Oriental  complained  of  unfair  treatment
on  the  part  of  the  provincials  of  Chili,  under  whose
jurisdiction  they  were,  and  had  several  times  de
manded  without  success  that  a  new  Dominican
province  should  be  formed  east  of  the  Cordilleras.
On  15  May,  1722,  Neyra  escaped  secretly  from
Buenos  Ayres,  and  went  to  Europe  to  plead  their
cause.  After  meeting  with  much  opposition,  he
obtained,  on  24  March,  1724,  a  papal  decree,  by
which  the  Dominicans  of  Banda  Oriental  were
formed  into  a  new  province.  He  returned  to  Bue
nos  Ayres  in  1729,  and  was  appointed  regent  of
studies  in  the  convent  of  San  Elmo.  It  was  ex
pected  that  he  would  be  made  provincial  on  his
return,  but  the  majority  favored  the  election  of
Father  Juan  Garay  (q.  r.),  who  became  his  bitter
enemy,  and,  notwithstanding  his  services,  ordered
him  to  quit  Buenos  Ayres.  After  a  visit  to  Rome,
he  returned  in  December,  1733,  and  learned  that  u
new  provincial,  friendly  to  him,  had  been  elected.
Neyra  was  chosen  prior  of  the  convent  of  Buenos
Ayres,  elected  provincial,  9  Nov.,  1737,  and  estab
lished  a  great  seminary  in  that  city.  He  went
abroad  in  1739  to  obtain  teachers,  but  the  ship  that
contained  his  valuable  library  was  captured  in  the
war  with  England,  and  he  was  obliged  to  remain
in  Spain  till  the  conclusion  of  peace  in  1748.  On
his  return  to  Buenos  Ayres  he  found  a  new  pro
vincial  had  been  elected  in  his  place,  lie  wrote
"  Ordenanzas  de  la  moderna  provincia  de  San
Agostin  de  Buenos  Ayres,  por  el  Padre  Domingo
Neyra,  de  la  orden  de  los  pi-edicadores,''  published
in  Buenos  Ayres  which  contains  a  description  of
his  first  journey  to  Rome.  His  remarks  on  Euro
pean  society  are  charming  for  their  mixture  of
shrewdness  and  simplicity.

NIBLO,  William,  donor,  b.  in  Ireland  in  1789:
d.  in  New  York  city,  21  Aug.,  1875.  He  emigrated
to  the  United  States  in  his  boyhood,  established  a
hotel  and  coffee-house,  and  became  the  proprietor
of  Niblo's  Garden  in  New  York  city  in  1829.  After
the  death  of  Dr.  Francis  L.  Hawks,  he  purchased
the  latter's  library  and  presented  it  to  the  New
York  historical  society.  The  printed  catalogue  of
this  gift,  which  is  known  as  the  "  Ilawks-Niblo
collection,"  occupies  118  pages  of  the  Hawks  me
morial.  Mr.  Niblo  was  a  well-known  figure  in  New
York  city,  and  a  liberal  donor  to  benevolent  insti
tutions.  Among  his  legacies  was  a  library  to  the
New  York  young  men's  Christian  association.

NIBOYER,  Bamloin  Simon  (ne-bo-yay),  Flem
ish  author,  b.  in  Bruges  in  1779  ;  d.  in  Yxelles,  near
Brussels,  in  1834.  He  was  a  soldier  during  the
French  revolution  and  afterward,  and  lost  an  arm
at  Marengo.  He  visited  southern  Europe,  Turkey,
Asia  Minor,  and  Jerusalem,  and  passing  to  Canada
early  in  1812  he  was  permitted  through  the  influ
ence  of  his  cousin,  an  officer  on  the  staff  of  the
commander-in-chief,  to  accompany  the  British
forces  to  the  United  States,  witnessing  the  burning
of  the  White  House.  After  the  peace  he  travelled
through  the  northern  and  eastern  states.  He  was
Dutch  vice-consul  in  Baltimore  from  1821  till  1826,


NICHOLA


NICHOLAS


511


and  married  theie  an  American  lady.  On  his  return
to  Holland  in  1827  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the
lower  chamber,  took  part  in  the  revolution  of  1830,
and  was  for  three  years  a  member  of  the  Belgian
assembly.  Early  in  1834  he  resigned  his  seat,  and
was  making  preparations  to  emigrate  to  the  United
States,  where  he  had  resolved  to  make  his  home,
when  he  died  suddenly  of  heart  disease.  His
works  include  "  Histoire  de  la  guerre  entre
1'Angleterre  et  les  Etats-Unis,  ses  causes,  ses  resul-
tats  "  (The  Hague,  1819);  and  "Voyage  pittoresque
a  travers  les  Etats-Unis  de  1'Amerique  du  Nord  "
(2  vols.,  Brussels,  1824).  His  "  Lettres  d'un  diplo-
mate "  (2  vols.,  1828),  which  were  written  during
the  author's  official  career  in  America,  and  contain
a  description  of  the  society  of  Baltimore,  attained
a  large  circulation  and  were  widely  discussed.  He
also  wrote  *'  Considerations  sur  le  systeme  republi-
cain  des  Etats-Unis  compare  avec  les  gouverne-
ments  represcntatifs  d'Europe"  (1831);  and  "De
1'aristocratie  en  Europe  et  en  Amerique  "  (1833).

NICHOLA,  or  NICOLA,  Lewis,  soldier,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland,  in  1717;  d.  in  Alexandria,  Va.,
9  Aug.,  1807.  He  was  of  Huguenot  descent,  and
both  his  father  and  grandfather  were  officers  in  the
British  army.  He  also  entered  the  army  as  ensign
in  1740.  was  subsequently  promoted  major,  and  in
17G6  given  the  command  of  Fort  Charles,  near
Kinsale,  Ireland.  In  this  year  he  resigned  his
commission  and  emigrated  to  this  country,  settling
in  Philadelphia,  where  he  engaged  in  civil  engineer
ing.  In  1769  he  established  the  "  American  Maga
zine,"  which  he  published  and  edited  during  that
year,  including  the  transactions  of  the  American
philosophical  society,  of  which  he  became  a  mem
ber.  Early  in  1776  he  was  chosen  barracks-master-
general  of  Philadelphia,  and  he  afterward  was
placed  in  command  of  the  city  guard.  In  Decem
ber  of  that  year  he  was  commissioned  town  major,
with  that  rank  in  the  state  service,  holding  this
place  till  1782.  Shortly  after  the  Declaration  of
Independence  he  published  in  Philadelphia  "  A
Treatise  of  Military  Exercise,  Calculated  for  the  Use
of  Americans,  in  which  every  Thing  that  is  sup
posed  can  be  of  Use  to  Them  is  retained,  and  such
Manoeuvres  as  are  only  for  Show  and  Parade
omitted.  To  which  is  added  some  Directions  on
the  Other  Points  of  Discipline."  He  planned  a
calevat  or  boat  for  river  defence,  devised  plans  for
magazines,  and  made  maps  of  the  injuries  that
were  done  by  the  British  while  they  were  in  posses
sion  of  the  city.  He  formed  and  offered  to  congress
the  plan  for  raising  a  regiment  of  invalids,  which
was  not  only  to  be  a  retreat  for  those  who  suffered
in  the  service,  but  also  a  recruiting  corps  and  mili
tary  school,  and  in  1777  was  commissioned  its
colonel.  He  was  made  brevet  brigadier-general  in
the  U.  S.  army  in  November,  1783.  His  military
knowledge  and  skill  made  his  services  of  grea't
value  to  the  colonies,  and  the  archives  of  Pennsyl
vania  teem  with  his  suggestions  for  the  good  of
the  public  service.  He  was  one  of  the  original
members  of  the  Pennsylvania  branch  of  the  Society
of  the  Cincinnati.  Col.  Xichola  was  usually  the
medium  of  communicating  to  Gen.  Washington
the  complaints  and  wishes  of  his  comrades  in  arms.
In  this  capacity,  in  May,  1783,  he  addressed  a  letter
to  Gen.  W  ashington,  in  which  he  suggested  that  a
mixed  government,  of  which  the  head  might  bear
the  title  of  king,  would  be  best  able,  to  extricate
the  United  States  from  their  embarrassments.  He
further  hinted  that  Washington  alone  would  be
worthy  of  this  place,  since  he  had  conducted  the  war
to  a  successful  issue.  The  letter  caused  Gen.  Wash
ington  pain,  and  he  rebuked  the  writer  severely.


NICHOLAS,  Robert  Carter,  statesman,  b.  in
Hanover,  Va.,  in  1715;  d.  there  in  1780.  His  fa
ther.  Dr.  George  Nicholas,  emigrated  to  Virginia
about  1700.  After  graduation  at  William  and
Mary  college,  the  son  studied  law,  and  practised
with  much  success.  He  represented  James  City  in
the  house  of  burgesses,  in  which  he  continued  until
the  house  of  delegates  was  organized  in  1777,  and
was  a  member  of  this  body  until  1779,  when  he  was
appointed  a  judge  of  the  high  court  of  chancery,
and  consequently  of  the  court  of  appeals.  From
1764  till  1776  he  was  a  conspicuous  member  of  the
party  of  which  Richard  Bland,  Peyton  Randolph,
and  Edmund  Pendleton  were  leaders,  and  in  1774
voted  against  the  stamp-act  resolutions  of  Patrick
Henry.  From  1766  till  1777  he  was  treasurer  of
the  colony,  and  in  1773  he  was  a  member  of  the
committee  of  correspondence.  He  was  also  a  mem
ber  of  all  of  the  important  conventions,  and  presi
dent  pro  tempore  of  the  one  that  met  in  July.  1775.
— His  son,  George,  statesman,  b.  in  Hanover,  Va.,
about  1755 ;  d.  in  Kentucky  in  1799,  was  graduated
at  William  and  Mary  in  1772,  was  major  of  the  2d
Virginia  regiment  in  1777,  and  afterward  became
colonel.  He  was  an  active  member  of  the  conven
tion  that  ratified  the  Federal  constitution,  and  was
a  member  of  the  house  of  delegates,  in  whose  de
liberations  he  had  great  influence.  In  1790  he
removed  to  Kentucky,  and  was  chosen  a  member
of  the  convention  that  framed  the  constitution  of
that  state,  meeting  at  Danville,  Ky.,  on  1  April,
1792.  The  constitution  was  largely  the  work  of
Mr.  Nicholas.  He  was  the  first  attorney-general  of
Kentucky. — Another  son,  Wilson  Cary,  governor
of  Virginia,  b.  in  Hanover,  Va.,  about  1757;  d.  in
Milton,  Va.,  10  Oct.,  1820,  was  graduated  at  Will
iam  and  Mary  col
lege.  He  was  an
officer  in  the  Revo
lutionary  army,  and
commanded  Wash
ington's  life-guard
until  it  was  dis
banded  in  1783.  He
was  a  member  of
the  convention  that
ratified  the  consti
tution  of  the  Unit
ed  States,  and  was'
elected  a  U.  S.  sena
tor,  in  place  of  Hen
ry  Tazewell,  as  a
Democrat,  serving
from  3  Jan.,  1800,
till  his  resignation,
17  Dec..  1804.  He
was  collector  of  the

ports  of  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth  in  1804-'7.
Henry  S.  Randall,  in  his  life  of  Jefferson,  says  of
him  and  his  brothers :  "  No  Virginia  family  con
tributed  more  to  Mr.  Jefferson's  personal  success
than  the  powerful  family  of  the  Nicholases — pow
erful  in  talents,  powerful  in  probity,  powerful  in
their  numbers  and  union.  On  every  page  of  Mr.
Jefferson's  political  history  the  names  of  George,
John,  Wilson  Cary.  and  Philip  Norborne  Nicholas
are  written." — Another  son,  John,  jurist,  b.  in
Williamsburg,  Va..  19  Jan.,  1761 ;  d.  in  Geneva,
N.  Y.,  31  Dec.,  1819,  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Democrat,  serving  from  2  Dec.,  1793,  till  3  March,
1801.  He  removed  to  Geneva.  N.  Y.,  in  1803.  and
devoted  himself  to  agricultural  pursuits.  From
1806  till  1809  he  was  a  state  senator,  and  he  was
first  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in  Ontario
count  v  from  1806  until  his  death.  He  was  elected


512


NICIIOLLS


NICHOLS


to  congress,  serving  from  26  Oct.,  1807,  till  27
Nov.,  1809,  and  from  1814  till  1817  he  was  governor
of  Virginia.  —  Another  son,  Philip  Norborne,
jurist,  b.  in  Willianisburg.  Va.,  in  1773;  d.  in
Richmond,  Va.,  18  Aug.,  1849,  was  named  for
Philip  Norborne  Berkeley.  Baron  de  Botetourt.
He  became  a  lawyer  at  an  early  age,  and  before
reaching  his  twenty-first  year  was  appointed  at
torney-general  of  Virginia.  For  many  years  he
was  president  of  the  Farmers'  bank  of  Virginia,  and
was  judge  of  the  general  court  of  Virginia  from
about  1823  till  his  death.  He  was  largely  inter
ested  in  the  politics  of  his  state,  and  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  "  Richmond  Junta,"  which,  with  the
"  Richmond  Enquirer,"  influenced  to  a  great  ex
tent  the  Democratic  party  in  the  state  of  Virginia
and  in  the  country  at  large.  He  strongly  opposed
the  doctrine  of  nullification  in  a  series  of  able  arti
cles  in  the  '•  Richmond  Enquirer,"  signed  "  Agri-
cola." — George's  son,  Robert  Carter,  senator,  b.  in
Hanover,  Va.,  about  1793  ;  d.  in  Terre bonne  parish,
La.,  24  Dec.,  1857,  was  graduated  at  William  and
Mary  in  1810.  He  served  in  the  war  of  1812,  and
was  appointed  captain  in  the  20th  infantry  on  12
March,  1812,  major  of  the  12th  infantry,  3  March,
1813,  and  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  44th  infantry,
20  Aug.,  1814.  He  was  transferred  to  the  30th  in
fantry  on  14  Nov.,  1814,  and  served  on  the  Cana
dian  frontier.  He  was  mustered  out  in  June,  1815,
and  removed  to  Louisiana,  where  he  engaged  in
sugar-planting.  He  was  charge  d'affaires  to  N  aples,
subsequently  became  secretary  of  state  of  Louisi
ana,  and  was  elected  a  U.  S.  senator,  as  a  Demo
crat,  serving  from  4  March,  1830,  till  3  March,
1841.  In  1851  he  became  superintendent  of  public
instruction  in  Louisiana. — Another  son  of  George,
Samuel  Smith,  jurist,  b.  in  Lexington,  Ky.,  1796;
d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  27  Nov.,  1869,  was  first  a  mer
chant  in  New  Orleans,  and  afterward  practised  law
with  success  in  Louisville,  Ky.  In  1831  lie  was
appointed  judge  of  the  court  of  appeals,  and  he
was  subsequently  a  member  of  the  state  legislature.
He  assisted  in  preparing  the  revised  code  of  Ken
tucky,  and  was  the  author  of  a  series  of  essays  on
"  Constitutional  Law  "  (Louisville,  about  1857).

NICHOLLS,  Francis  Tillon,  governor  of  Loui
siana,  b.  in  Donaldsonville,  Ascension  parish,  La.,
20  Aug.,  1834.  His  father,  Thomas  Clark  (1790-
1847),  was  a  member  of  the  general  assembly  of
Louisiana,  judge  of  a  district  court  for  many  years,
and  in  1843  was  appointed  senior  judge  of  the
Louisiana  court  of  error  and  appeals.  His  mother
was  a  sister  of  Joseph  Rodman  Drake.  The  son
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1855,  and  assigned  to  the  3d  artillery.  He  served
against  the  Seminole  Indians,  was  on  frontier  duty
in  1856,  and  resigned  his  commission  on  1  Oct.  o"f
that  year.  He  then  practised  law  in  Napoleonville,
La.,  until  1861,  when  he  joined  the  Confederate
army  as  captain  in  the  8th  Louisiana  regiment,  of
which  he  became  lieutenant-colonel.  In  1862  he
was  made  colonel  of  the  loth  regiment  and  briga
dier-general.  He  participated  in  Stonewall  Jack
son's  movements,  and  lost  an  arm  in  the  battle  of
Winchester,  Va.,  and  a  foot  at  Chancellorsville.
He  was  superintendent,  of  the  conscript  bureau  of
the  Trans-Mississippi  department  in  1864—'5.  and
practised  law  in  Ascension  parish  from  1865  till
1876.  He  was  elected  governor  of  Louisiana  as  a
Democrat,  serving  from  1877  till  1880.  and  in
January,  1888,  was  again  nominated  for  this  office.
He  now  (1888)  practises  law  in  New  Orleans.

NICHOLS,  Charles  Henry,  physician,  b.  in
Vassalborough,  Kennebec  co.,  Me.,  19  Oct.,  1820.
He  was  educated  in  the  public  schools  and  in  the


Friends'  school,  Providence,  R.  L.  taught  from
his  seventeenth  to  his  twentieth  year,  studied  medi
cine  at  the  University  of  New  York,  and  was  gradu
ated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1843.  He  practised  at  Lynn,
Mass.,  from  fhat  date  until  1847.  when  he  became
associate,  physician  to  the  New  York  state  lunatic
asylum  in  Utica.  He  has  since  made  a  specialty
of  the  treatment  of  mental  diseases,  and  the  archi
tecture  and  hygiene  of  institutions  for  the  insane.
He  was  physician  and  superior  officer  in  Bloom-
ingdale  asylum,  New  York  city,  in  1849-'52.  In
October  of  the  latter  year  he  chose  the  site,  subse
quently  built,  organized,  and  equipped  the  U.  S.
government  hospitals  for  the  insane  in  Washing
ton.  D.  C.,  and  he  afterward  enlarged  the  build
ings  three  times,  treated  4,000  patients,  and  pro
cured  the  extension  of  the  grounds  from  195  to
420  acres.  He  was  acting  assistant  surgeon  dur
ing  the  civil  war,  and,  in  connection  with  the
general  government  hospital  for  the  insane,  con
ducted  a  general  hospital  for  U.  S.  volunteers.
During  his  service  in  Washington  he  was  president
of  the  first  board  of  school  commissioners,  of  the
levy,  and  of  the  board  of  police  commissioners
for  the  District  of  Columbia,  vice-president  of  the
board  of  directors  of  the  Columbia  hospital  for
women,  and  a  member  of  many  professional  and
benevolent  societies.  He  was  for  several  years
president  of  the  Association  of  medical  superin
tendents  of  American  institutions  for  the  insane.
At  the  meeting  of  the  Intel-national  medical  con
gress  in  Philadelphia  in  1876  he  read  a  paper  be
fore  the  section  on  mental  diseases  on  the  '•  Best
Mode  of  providing  for  the  Subjects  of  Chronic  In
sanity."  He  resigned  the  superintendence  of  the
government  asylums  in  Washington  in  1877,  and
since  that  date  has  been  superintendent  of  Bloom-
ingdale  asylum  for  the  insane,  New  York  city.

NICHOLS,  Clarinda  Howard,  reformer,  b.  in
Townsend,  Windliam  co..  Vt.,  25  Jan.,  1810:  d.  in
Porno,  Cal.,  11  Jan.,  1885.  She  assisted  her  hus
band  for  ten  years  in  editing  and  publishing  the
"  Windliam  County  Democrat,"  and  in  1847  began
to  speak  in  public  on  the  laws  of  Vermont  in  re
gard  to  the  property  liabilities  of  married  women.
The  next  year  she  was  instrumental  in  securing
the  passage  of  the  first  bill  in  the  Vermont  legis
lature  that  recognized  the  civil  existence  of  wives.
She  afterward  emigrated  to  Kansas,  served  one
term  as  recording  clerk  of  the  state  legislature,  and
removed  to  Porno.  Cal.,  in  1871.

NICHOLS,  Edward  Tatnall,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Augusta,  Ga.,  1  March,  1823  :  d.  in  Pomfret,
Conn.,  12  Oct.,  1886.  He  was  appointed  to  the
U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1836,  became  passed  mid
shipman  in  1842,  lieutenant  in  1850,  and  com
mander  in  1802.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  steamer
•'  Winona"  in  the  Western  Gulf  blockading  squad
ron,  participated  in  the  bombardment  of  Fort
Jackson  and  Fort  St.  Philip,  and  received  the
surrender  of  the  latter  on  28  April,  1862.  He  also
took  part  in  the  passage  of  the  batteries  at  Vicks-
burg,  and  was  commended  for  "  ability,  steadiness,
and  sound  judgment."  In  June,  1864,  while  in
command  of  the  steamer  "  Mendote."  he  engaged
the  Confederate  battery  at  Four  Mile  Creek,  James
river,  Va.  He  became  captain  in  1866,  commodore
in  1872,  rear-admiral  in  1878,  and  was  placed  on
the  retired  list  in  March,  1885.

NICHOLS,  Francis,  soldier,  b.  in  Crieve  Hill,
Enniskillen,  Ireland,  in  1737  ;  d.  in  Pottstown,  Pa.,
13  Feb.,  1812.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1769,
enlisted  in  the  patriot  army  in  Cumberland  county,


NICHOLS


NICHOLS


513


Pa.,  in  June,  1775,  became  2d  lieutenant,  and  was
captured  at  Quebec,  31  Dec.,  1775.  He  refused  to
give  his  sword  to  several  private  soldiers,  but  finally
delivered  it  to  an  officer,  with  the  exaction  of  a
promise  that  it  should  be  returned  on  his  release.
This  was  done  in  August,  1776,  in  the  presence  of
all  the  American  officers,  with  the  assurance  that
it  was  by  the  permission  and  command  of  Gen.
Sir  Guy  Carleton.  This  sword  is  still  in  the  pos
session  of  Gen.  Nichols's  great-grandson,  Francis
Nichols  Whitney.  Nichols  subsequently  rose  to
the  rank  of  brigadier-general.  He  was  the  first
U.  S.  marshal  of  the  eastern  district  of  Pennsyl
vania. — His  brother.  William,  b.  in  Knniskillen,
Ireland,  28  Nov.,  1754 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  19  Oct.,
1804,  also  served  in  the  Revolution,  attaining  the
rank  of  captain  and  quartermaster  in  1770. — His
grandson,  William  Augustus,  soldier,  b.  in  Phil
adelphia,  Pa.,  12  May,  1818;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
8  April,  1869.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1838,  became  1st  lieutenant
in  1844,  served  throughout  the  Mexican  war  as
aide  to  Gen.  John  A.  Quitman,  and  assistant  ad
jutant-general  under  Gen.  John  Garland,  and  re
ceived  the  brevet  of  major  for  bravery  at  Molino
del  Rev.  He  became  assistant  adjutant-general,
with  the  rank  of  captain,  in  1852,  and  lieutenant-
colonel  in  1861.  During  the  civil  war  he  was
adjutant-general  of  the  Department  of  the  East  in
June  and  November,  1861,  and  of  the  Department
of  New  York  in  December,  assistant  in  the  office
of  the  adjutant-general  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  in
1862-'4,  became  colonel  and  brevet  brigadier-gen
eral  in  18G4,  and  brevet  major-general  in  1865  for
meritorious  service  during  the  war.  At  the  time
of  his  death  he  was  chief  of  staff  and  adjutant-
general  of  the  military  department  of  Missouri.

NICHOLS.  George  Ward,  author,  b.  in  Mt.
Desert,  Me.,  21  June,  1837;  d.  in  Cincinnati.  Ohio,
15  Sept.,  1885.  He  was  a  journalist  in  early  life,
but  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  in  1862  he
became  a  member  of  Gen.  John  C.  Fremont's  staff,
and  remained  with  him  until  the  battle  of  Cross
Keys.  He  was  then  attached  to  Gen.  W'illiam  T.
Sherman's  staff,  and  went  with  him  on  his  march
to  the  sea.  He  had  some  skill  as  a  painter,  and
excelled  as  a  writer  on  art  and  musical  subjects.
He  spent  the  last  sixteen  years  of  his  life  in  Cin
cinnati,  where  he  projected  and  accomplished  the
establishment  and  endowment  of  the  Cincinnati
college  of  music,  of  which  he  was  president  at  the
time  of  his  death.  He  published  "  The  Story  of  the
Great  March,"  of  which  70,000  copies  were  sold  in
one  year  (New  York,  1865) ;  "  Art  Education  ap
plied  to  Industry  "  (1877) ;  and  "  Pottery,  how  it
is  Made."  with  a  bibliography  (1878).  See  a  me
morial  address  delivered  by  Gen.  Jacob  D.  Cox
(Cincinnati,  1887).

NICHOLS,  Ichabod,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ports
mouth,  N.  H.,  5  July,  1784;  d.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  2  Jan.,  1859.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1802,  was  tutor  of  mathematics  there  in  1803-'9,
and  at  the  latter  date  was  ordained  associate  pas
tor  of  the  1st  Congregational  church  in  Portland,
Me.,  becoming  its  sole  pastor  in  1814,  and  serving
till  1855.  He  then  removed  to  Cambridge,  Mass.,
where  he  engaged  in  scholarly  pursuits  until  his
death.  He  was  a  trustee  of  Bowdoin  for  many  years,
and  vice-president  of  the  American  academy  of  arts
and  sciences.  Bowdoin  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1821,  and  Harvard  the  same  in  1831.  Dr.
Nichols  was  a  Unitarian  of  the  conservative  school
in  theology,  a  metaphysician,  and  an  independent
thinker.  His  publications  include  a  work  on
'•  Natural  Theology  "  (Boston,  1830)  and  two  post-

TOL.  IV. 33


'  humous  volumes  entitled  "  Hours  with  the  Evan-
i  gelists  "  (1859)  and  "  Remembered  WTords,  from  the
Sermons  of  Rev.  Ichabod  Nichols"  (1860). — His
nephew,  George,  editor,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  30
'.  Jan.,  1809 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  5  July,  1882,
:  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1828,  and  studied  at
i  the  divinity-school,  but  never  was  settled  as  a  min-
|  ister.  After  being  employed  as  a  private  tutor,  he
became  in  1833  one  of  the  owners  of  the  University
bookstore  in  Cambridge,  and  in  1842  one  of  the  pro
prietors  of  the  University  press.  Mr.  Nichols  was
noted  for  his  accuracy  and  skill  as  an  editor,  and  es
pecially  as  a  proof-reader.  For  several  years  he  was
paid  a  high  salary  for  reading  the  proof  of  the
"  Atlantic  Monthly."  In  his  edition  of  Burke's
works  he  cleared  the  text  of  innumerable  errors.
He  edited  his  uncle's  "  Hours  with  the  Evange
lists"  (Boston,  1859);  the  "Works  of  Edmund
Burke"  (12  vols.,  1865-'7);  and  the  "Works  of
Charles  Sumner  "  (14  vols.,  1871-'83).
I  NICHOLS,  James  Robinson,  author,  b.  in
West  Amesbury  (now  Merrimac),  Mass.,  19  July,
1819 ;  d.  in  Haverhill,  Mass.,  2  Jan.,  1888.  He  was
self-educated,  and  attended  medical  lectures  at
Dartmouth  in  1842,  but  was  not  graduated,  became
a  druggist  in  1843,  and  in  1867  founded  a  firm  of
manufacturing  chemists  in  Boston,  retiring  from
business  in  1872.  In  1878  he  became  a  member  of
the  State  board  of  agriculture.  In  1866  he  estab
lished  the  "Boston  Journal  of  Chemistry"  (now
"  Popular  Science  News  " '),  which  he  edited  till  his
death.  He  was  active  in  railroad  matters,  and
founded  and  endowed  a  public  library  in  Merrimac,
Mass.  Dartmouth  gave  him  the  honorary  degree
of  M.  D.  in  1867.  Dr.  Nichols  invented  scientific
apparatus  and  methods  of  chemical  manipulation,
and  published  "  Chemistry  of  the  Farm  and  the
Sea"  with  other  essays  (Boston,  1867);  "Fireside
Science  "  (1869) ;  and  "  Whence,  What,  Where  ?  a
View  of  the  Origin,  Nature,  and  Destiny  of  Man  ''
(1882).  He  has  also  issued  Dr.  James  Hinton's
"Mystery  of  Pain,"  with  an  introduction  (1886).

NICHOLS,  Mary  Sargeant  Gove,  physician,
b.  in  Goffstown,  N.  H.,  10  Aug.,  1810.  After  her
marriage  with  her  first  husband,  whose  name  was
Gove,  she  taught  for  several  years  in  Lynn,  Mass.,
where  she  began  a  course  of  lectures  on  anatomy
i  and  hygiene,  subsequently  delivering  a  similar
course  in  the  New  England  and  middle  states.
She  began  to  contribute  papers  on  hygiene  to  the
!  "  Democratic  Review  "  and  "  Godey's  Lady's  Book  "
|  in  1841,  and  in  1845  established  a  water-cure  in
New  York,  which  she  conducted  successfully  for
many  years.  In  1848  she  married  Dr.  Thomas  L.
Nichols,  with  whom  she  was  associated  in  the
water-cure  establishment.  She  published  "  Lectures
to  Ladies  on  Anatomy  and  Physiology  "  (New  York.
1840);  " Experience " in  Water-Cure"  (1859);  and
novelettes  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Mary  Orne."

NICHOLS,  Moses,  physician,  b.  in  Amherst,
N.  H.,  in  1759  ;  d.  there  in  May.  1790.  He  was  a
general  of  militia  during  the  Revolution,  and  com
manded  the  troops  that  attacked  the  rear  of  the
enemy's  left  at  Bennington,  17  Aug.,  1777.  After
the  peace  he  practised  medicine,  attained  to  emi
nence  in  his  profession,  and  held  several  local
offices  in  Amherst.

NICHOLS, Rebecca  S.  Reed,  author,  b. in

Greenwich,  N.  J.,  in  August,  1820. She  removed

with  her  father,  who  was  a  physician,  to  Kentucky

i  in  1836,  and  the  next  year  married  Willard  Nichols,

i  with  whom she edited the "  Pennant,"  a  daily

newspaper. They  removed  about  1839  to  Cincin-

i  nati,  Ohio,  where"  she  edited  "  The  Guest,"  a  liter-

i  ary  journal. Her  earliest  original  productions


614


NICHOLS


NICHOLSON


appeared  in  the  Louisville  papers  under  the  signa
ture  of  "  Ellen,"  but  her  best  work  was  a  series  of
letters  to  the  "Cincinnati  Herald,"  under  the  pen-
name  of  "  Kate  Cleaveland."  She  is  also  the  author
of  "  Bernice,  and  other  Poems  "  (Louisville,  1844)
and  "  Songs  of  the  Heart  "  (Cincinnati,  1852).

NICHOLS,  William  Kipley,  chemist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  30  April,  1847;  d.  in  Hamburg,
Germany,  14  July,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at
Massachusetts  institute  of  technology  in  1869,
where  lie  taught  during  his  senior  year,  and  was
afterward  instructor  and  assistant  professor  until
1872,  when  he  was  elected  professor  of  general
chemistry,  which  chair  he  retained  until  his  death.
Prof.  Nichols  was  a  member  of  the  German  chemi
cal  society,  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and
sciences,  and  the  American  association  for  the  ad
vancement  of  science,  of  which  he  was  vice-presi
dent  in  1885,  delivering  before  the  section  on
chemistry  a  retiring  address  on  "Chemistry  in  the
Service  of  Public  Health."  He  was  recognized  as
an  authority  on  most  of  the  branches  of  chemistry
that  relate  to  sanitation,  and  among  his  researches,
at  the  request  of  the  Massachusetts  board  of  health,
was  a  valuable  series  on  the  ventilation  of  railway-
trains,  particularly  the  effects  of  the  atmosphere
of  smoking-cars.  Prof.  Nichols's  specialty  was
potable  water,  and  he  published  numerous  papers
on  the  water-supplies  of  cities.  He  was  devoted  to
the  interests  of  the  Institute  of  technology,  and
compiled  a  record  of  the  "Publications  of  its
Officers,  Students,  and  Alumni."  in  which  may  be
found  a  complete  list  of  his  own  papers  down  to
1882.  Besides  his  scientific  papers  he  published
in  book-form  "  An  Elementary  Manual  of  Chem
istry,*"  abridged  from  Eliot  and  Storer's  manual,
with  the  co-operation  of  the  authors  (New  York,
1872);  a  "Compendious  Manual  of  Qualitative
Analysis,"  by  Charles  \V.  Kliot  and  Frank  II.
Storer  (1872),  this  and  subsequent  editions  being
revised  by  him  ;  "  Water  Supply,  mainly  from  a
Chemical  and  Sanitary  Standpoint"  (1883):  and,
with  Lewis  M.  Norton,  "  Experiments  in  General
Chemistry  "  (printed  privately,  Boston,  1884).

NICHOLSON,  Alfred  Osbora  Pope,  senator,
b.  in  Williamson  county,  Tenn.,  31  Aug.,  1808 ;  d.
in  Columbia,  Tenn.,  23  March,  1876.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  North  Carolina  in
1827,  and  studied  medicine,  but,  abandoning  it  for
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1831.  and  began
practice  at  Columbia,  Tenn.  He  edited  "  The
Western  Mercury  "  at  Columbia  in  1832-'5,  "  The
Nashville  Union  "  in  1844-'G,  and  "  The  Washing
ton  Union  "  in  1853-'G.  Mr.  Nicholson  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  state  house  of  representatives  from  1833
till  1839,  and  was  appointed  a  U.  S.  senator  from
Tennessee,  in  place  of  Felix  Grundy,  as  a  Democrat,
serving  from  11  Jan.,  1841,  till  3  March,  1843.  He
was  chancellor  of  the  middle  division  of  Tennessee
in  1845-'51,  president  of  the  Bank  of  Tennessee  in
184G-'7,  and  printer  of  the  house  of  representatives
during  the  33d  congress,  and  of  the  senate  during
the  34th.  He  was  a  member  of  the  convention
that  met  at  Nashville  in  1850,  and  delivered  there
an  eloquent  address  in  favor  of  the  compromise
propositions  that  were  then  before  congress.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Democratic  national  conven
tion  of  1852,  and  was  offered  by  President  Pierce  a
cabinet  appointment,  which  he  declined.  In  1857
Mr.  Nicholson  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  and
served  until  3  March,  1861,  when  he  retired,  and
was  formally  expelled  on  3  July  of  that  year  for
his  connection  with  the  secession  movement.  Dur
ing  the  war  he  was  twice  arrested  at  Columbia  and
imprisoned.  In  1870  he  was  elected  a  member  of


the  convention  to  revise  the  constitution  of  the
state,  i;nd  the  same  year  he  was  appointed  chief
justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  Tennessee.  He  was
the.  author  of  a  letter  to  aspirants  for  the  presi
dency  in  1848.  which  became  famous  under  the
name  of  the  "  Nicholson  letter."

NICHOLSON,  Sir  Francis,  colonial  governor,
d.  in  London,  England,  5  March,  1728.  He  had
served  in  the  British  army,  was  lieutenant-governor
of  New  York  under  Edmund  Andros,  and  at  the
head  of  the  administration  in  1687-'!).  He  was
governor  of  Virginia  in  1690-'2  and  in  165)9-1705,
and  of  Maryland  from  1694  till  1699,  and  during
his  second  term  of  office  in  Virginia  he  established
the  capital  at  Williamsburg  instead  of  at  James
town  as  before.  He  was  commander  of  the  forces
that  captured  Port  Royal,  Nova  Scotia,  2  Oct.,
1710,  and  afterward  returned  to  England  to  urge
another  attempt  at  the  conquest  of  Canada,  taking
with  him  five  Iroquois  chiefs,  whom  he  presented
to  Queen  Anne.  After  his  return  to  the  colonies
he  commanded  an  unsuccessful  expedition  for  the
conquest  of  Canada,  was  appointed  governor  of
Nova  Scotia,  and  served  from  12  Oct.,  1712,  till
August,  1717.  He  was  knighted  in  1720,  served  as
governor  of  South  Carolina,  1721-5,  returned  to
Kngland  in  June,  1725,  and  was  made  a  lieutenant-
general,  lie  was  a  bold  and  ambitious  man,  and
had  conceived  a  project  for  uniting  all  the  Anglo-
American  colonies,  the  ostensible  object  of  which
was  the  mutual  defence  of  the  British  colonists
against  the  encroachment  of  the  French  on  the
north,  and  the  hostile  Indians  along  the  frontier.
Nicholson  submitted  his  plan  to  the  king,  who
heartily  approved  of  it,  and  recommended  the
measure  to  the  favorable  consideration  of  the  colo
nial  assemblies.  Virginia  would  have  nothing  to
do  with  the  scheme,  which  so  exasperated  Nichol
son  that  he  recommended  that  all  the  American
colonies  be  placed  under  a  viceroy,  and  that  a
standing  army  be  maintained  among  them  at  their
own  expense.  His  project  was  not  received  with
favor  by  Queen  Anne  and  her  ministers.  Sir
Francis  was  the  author  of  "  Journal  of  an  Expedi
tion  for  the  Reduction  of  Port  Royal  "  (London,
1711).  This  rare  quarto,  of  which  there  is  but  one
copy  in  the  New  World,  was  reprinted  by  the  Nova
Scotia  historical  society  in  1879,  and  "  An  Apology
or  Vindication  of  Francis  Nicholson,  Governor  of
South  Carolina  "  (1724).

NICHOLSON,  James,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Ches-
tertown,  Md.,  in  1737;  d.  in  New  York  city,  2
Sept.,  1804.  His  father,  a  Scotchman,  came  from
Berwick-on-Tweed,  and  was  given  a  grant  known
as  Nicholson's  Manor,  near  the  passage  of  the  Blue
Ridge,  Va.,  that  is  still  known  as  Nicholson's  Gap.
He  held  offices  of  trust  under  the  government.
The  son  was  trained  to  the  sea,  was  at  the  capture
of  Havana  in  1762,  and,  after  residing  in  New  York
in  1763-'71,  entered  the  Revolutionary  navy  in
the  "Defence,"  a  Maryland  vessel,  in  1775.  In
this  ship,  in  March,  1776.  he  recaptured  several
vessels  that  had  been  taken  by  the  British,  and  in
June,  1776,  he  was  appointed  to  the  command  of
the  "  Virginia."  of  twenty-eight  guns.  In  January,
1777,  he  succeeded  Com.  Esek  Hopkins  as  com-
mander-in-chief  of  the  navy,  and  held  that  post
till  its  dissolution.  A  strict  blockade  of  the  Chesa
peake  prevented  the  "  Virginia  "  from  leaving  the
bay,  and  Capt.  Nicholson  and  his  crew  joined  the
army  and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Trenton.  In
a  subsequent  attempt  to  get  to  sea  the  "  Virginia"
struck  upon  a  bar,  and  was  captured,  but  the  captain
and  most  of  his  crew  escaped.  Congress  instituted
an  inquiry  into  the  circumstance,  which  resulted


NICHOLSON


NICHOLSON


515


in  Capt.  Nicholson  being  acquitted  of  all  blame.
He  afterward  commanded  the  frigate  "Trumbull,"
of  thirty-eight  guns,  and  on  2  June,  1780,  had  a
severe  action  of  three  hours'  duration  with  the
"  Wyatt,"  losing  thirty  men  before  the  ships  part
ed.  In  August,  1781,  the  '"Virginia"  was  cap
tured  off  the  capes  of  Delaware  by  the  "  Iris  "  and
the  ''  General  Monk,"  after  a  gallant  resistance,
being  completely  dismantled.  Capt.  Nicholson
and  his  crew  were  captured,  and  the  former  was
not  exchanged  until  near  the  close  of  the  war,  and
saw  no  more  service.  After  the  war  he  resided  in
New  York,  where  in  1801-'4  he  was  U.  S.  commis
sioner  of  loans.  He  had  one  son  and  five  daughters,
one  of  whom  married  Albert  Gallatin. — James's
brother,  Samuel,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Maryland  in
1743 ;  d.  in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  29  Dec.,  1813,  was  a
lieutenant  with  Paul  Jones  in  the  battle  between
the  "Bon  Hornine  Richard"  and  the  "  Serapis,"
and  was  appointed  a  captain  on  17  Sept.,  1779.
Early  in  1782  he  commanded  the  frigate  "  Deane,"
of  thirty-two  guns,  in  which  he  cruised  successful
ly,  taking,  among  other  prizes,  three  sloops  of  war,
with  an  aggregate  of  forty-four  guns.  He  retained
his  rank  of  captain  on  the  reorganization  of  the
navy,  10  June,  1794,  and  was  the  first  commander
of  the  frigate  "  Constitution,"  the  building  of  which
he  superintended.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he
was  at  the  head  of  the  navy. — Another  brother,
John,  was  commissioned  a  lieutenant  in  the  Revo
lutionary  navy  on  17  Aug.,  1776,  and  captain,  17
Sept.,  1779. — John's  son,  William  Carmichael,
naval  officer,  b.  in  Maryland  in  1800 ;  d.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  25  July,  1872.  He  was  commissioned
a  midshipman  from  his  native  state,  18  July,  1812,
and  was  on  board  the  "  President,"  under  Decatur,
in  the  desperate  action  off  Long  Island  in  January,
1815,  when  that  vessel  surrendered  to  the  British
fleet.  He  was  carried  to  England  and  not  released
till  the  end  of  the  war.  He  was  commissioned  a
lieutenant  in  March,  1821,  and  served  on  the  frigate
"  United  States  "  in  the  Pacific  squadron  in  1827.
He  was  on  duty  at  the  naval  station  in  1834,  be
came  commander,  8  Sept.,  1841,  went  out  in  the
sloop  "Preble  "  in  the  Mediterranean  squadron  in
1843,  served  at  the  naval  rendezvous  at  Boston  in
1845-'G,  was  attached  to  the  receiving-ship  at  New
York  in  1847-'8,  and  commandant  at  the  navy-yard
ill  Memphis,  Tenn.,  in  1852-'3.  He  was  commis
sioned  as  captain,  22  Aug.,  1855,  and  in  the  same
year  acted  as  fleet-captain  of  the  Pacific  squadron.
From  1858  till  1861  he  had  in  charge  the  steam
frigate  "  Mississippi "  in  the  East  India  squadron.
In  1861  he  was  in  command  of  the  steam  frigate
"  Roanoke,"  and  from  1861  to  1866  was  on  special
duty.  His  commission  as  commodore  was  signed
16  July,  1862.  His  courage  was  manifested  upon
several  occasions,  and  he  was  engaged  in  numerous
duels.  When  the  civil  war  began  he  was  the  com
mander  of  the  United  States  marine  asylum  in
Philadelphia. — Samuel's  grandson,  James  Will
iam  Augustus,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Dedham,  Mass.,
10  March,  1821 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  28  Oct.,  1887,
was  the  son  of  Nathaniel  Dowse  Nicholson  (1792-
1822),  an  officer  in  the  navy,  who  served  during
the  war  of  1812  with  Great  Britain.  The  son
entered  the  navy,  10  Feb.,  1838,  as  a  midship
man,  was  promoted  lieutenant  in  1852,  and  in
1847-'8  was  acting  master  in  the  Mexican  war.  In
1853-'5  he  was  lieutenant  of  the  sloop  "  Vandalia,"
of  the  Japanese  expedition,  under  Com.  Matthew
C.  Perry.  His  first  command  in  the  civil  war  was
the  •'  Isaac  Smith,"  in  the  Port  Royal  expedition,
and  he  was  commended  by  Admiral  Dupont  for
coolness  and  courage.  In  the  winter  of  1861-'2  he


served  in  Florida,  and  in  the  spring  of  1862  he
was  assigned  the  command  of  St.  Augustine.  In
February,  1862,  he  had  an  engagement  with  a  Con
federate  flotilla  in  Savannah  river.  He  was  pro
moted  command
er  in  July,  and  in
1862- '3  was  ord
nance  officer  on
the  New  York  sta
tion.  In  1863-'4
he  commanded
the  "  Shamrock  "
in  the  South  At
lantic  blockading
squadron  before
Charleston,  and  he
had  in  charge  the
monitor  "Manhat
tan,"  under  Far-
ragut,  at  the  bat
tle  of  Mobile  Bay.
He  greatly  aided
in  the  capture  of
the  Confederate
ram  "  Tennessee,"
the  only  shots

which  penetrated  her  armor  being  fired  from  the  15-
inch  guns  of  the  "  Manhattan."  Nicholson  after
ward  attacked  Fort  Powell  at  intervals  for  twelve
days,  firing  100  shells  into  it,  and  bombarded  Fort
Morgan  from  9  till  21  Aug.,  when  it  surrendered.
He  returned  to  New  York  in  January,  1865.  com
manded  the  steamer  "  Mohigan,"  of  the  Pacific
squadron,  in  1865-'6,  and  in  July  of  the  latter  year
was  made  captain.  In  1871-'2  he  commanded  the
flag-ship  "  Lancaster,"  of  the  Brazil  squadron,  and
in  1873  he  became  commodore.  He  had  charge  of
the  New  York  navy-yard  in  1876-'80,  and  on  1
Sept.,  1881,  he  was  appointed  to  the  command  of
the  European  station,  being  commissioned  rear-ad
miral  on  1  Oct.  of  that  year.  He  was  present  dur
ing  the  bombardment  of  Alexandria,  Egypt,  by
the  British  fleet,  on  11  July,  1882,  and  on  the  14th,
after  the  firing  had  ceased,  he  landed  100  marines
to  protect  the  U.  S.  consulate  and  to  assist  in  re
storing  order.  Throughout  the  bombardment  and
subsequently  Admiral  Nicholson's  conduct  was
prompt,  energetic,  and  efficient,  and  received  gen
eral  commendation  in  Europe,  as  well  as  in  this
country.  On  10  March,  1883,  he  was  retired,  re
signing  the  European  squadron  to  his  successor,
Admiral  Baldwin.  He  received  medals,  decora
tions,  and  thanks  from  various  European  sover
eigns.  When  Admiral  Nicholson  went  on  the  re
tired  list  he  was  the  last  representative  of  a  family
that  had  been  eminent  in  the  naval  history  of  the
United  States.  Since  1755  eighteen  of  the  name
and  family  have  been  in  the  service.  Three  have
worn  broad  pennants,  and  a  fourth  died  just  as  he
received  an  appointment  to  one.

NICHOLSON,  James  Bartram,  bookbinder,
b.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  28  Jan.,  1820.  His  ancestor,
John,  a  gunsmith,  made  the  first  firelocks  for  the
Pennsylvania  committee  of  safety,  and  afterward
made  others  for  the  Continental  congress.  James
was  educated  in  Philadelphia,  became  a  bookbinder,
and  has  attained  note  for  his  beautiful  work.  lie
has  been  twice  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  con
gress.  Mr.  Nicholson  has  delivered  numerous  lec
tures  and  addresses,  and  published  an  exhaustive
••  Manual  of  Bookbinding  "  (Philadelphia,  1856).

NICHOLSON,  John  B.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Richmond,  Va.,  in  1783  ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,
9  Nov.,  1846.  He  became  a  midshipman,  4  July,
1800,  lieutenant,  20  May,  1812,  commander,  5


516


NICHOLSON


NICOLL


March,  1817,  and  captain,  24  April,  1828,  and  sub
sequently  took  rank  as  a  commodore.  He  served
as  4th  lieutenant  of  "  The  United  States  "  at  the
capture  of  "  The  Macedonian  "  frigate,  and  was  the
1st  lieutenant  of  "  The  Peacock,"  and  after  her
fight  with"  The  Epervier  "  brought  the  prize  safely
into  port.  He  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Washing
ton  Irving,  who  frequently  alludes  to  him  in  his
letters  as  "Jovial  Jack  Nicholson."

NICHOLSON,  Joseph  Hopper,  jurist,  b.  in
Maryland  in  1770;  d.  there,  4  March,  1817.  He
received  a  good  education,  studied  law,  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  his  profession.  He
was  elected  to  congress  from  Maryland,  and  served
by  successive  re-elections  from  2  Dec.,  1799,  till  1
March,  180G,  when  he  resigned.  He  was  appointed
chief  judge  of  the  6th  judicial  circuit,  and  was
also  a  judge  of  the  court  of  appeals.

NICHOLSON,  William  Riifus,  Reformed
Episcopal  bishop,  b.  in  Green  county,  Miss.,  8  Jan.,
1822.  He  was  graduated  at  La-grange  college,  Ala.,
in  1840,  studied  for  the  ministry,  was  admitted  to
holy  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,
and  was  successively  rector  of  Grace  church,  New
Orleans,  St.  John's,  Cincinnati,  St.  Paul's,  Boston,
and  Trinity,  Newark,  N.  J.  In  1874  he  became  a
member  of  the  Reformed  Episcopal  church,  and
took  charge  of  a  congregation  in  Philadelphia.  In
1870  he  was  elected  and  consecrated  bishop,  and
subsequently  he  was  chosen  dean  of  the  theological
seminary  of  his  denomination  in  Philadelphia.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Kenyon.
He  has  published  "The  Blessedness  of  Heaven"
(New  York,  1874) ;  "  Reasons  why  I  became  a  Re
formed  Episcopalian"  (Philadelphia,  1875);  "The
Real  Presence  in  the  Bread  and  Wine  of  the  Lord's
Supper"  and  "  The  Call  to  the  Ministry  "  (1877).
Dr.  Nicholson  is  also  the  author  of  "  The  Bearing
of  Prophecy  on  Inspiration,"  in  the  proceedings  of
the  "  Bible  Conference  on  Inspiration,"  held  in
Philadelphia  in  November,  1887  (New  York,  1888).

NICKEKSON,  Frank  Stillman,  soldier,  b.  in
Swanville,  Me.,  27  Aug.,  1826.  He  was  educated  at
East  Corinth  academy,  Me.,  and  was  a  collector  of
customs  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  when  he
resigned  and  became  successively  captain,  major,
and  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  4th  Maine  regiment.
He  was  commended  in  general  orders  by  Gen.
Oliver  0.  Howard  for  bravery  at  Bull  Run,  and  on
31  Dec.,  1861,  was  made  colonel  of  the  14th  Maine
and  sent  to  New  Orleans  under  Gen.  Benjamin  P.
Butler.  He  was  specially  mentioned  for  his  ser
vices  at  Baton  Rouge,  and  on  29  Nov.,  1862,  was
promoted  to  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  He
then  served  in  the  Department  of  the  Gulf  till  his
resignation  on  13  May,  1865.  Since  the  war  Gen.
Nickerson  has  resided  in  Boston,  Mass.

NIC  KLIN,  Philip  Holbrook,  author,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1786 ;  d.  there,  2  March,  1842.
He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1804,  and,  after
studying  law,  became  a  bookseller  in  Baltimore  in
1809,  and  in  1814  in  Philadelphia.  In  1839  he  re
tired  from  business,  and  engaged  in  literature.
While  a  trustee  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
he  visited  England,  and  on  his  return  in  1834  made
a  report  to  the  board  on  the  condition  of  the  uni
versities  of  Cambridge  and  Oxford.  He  contrib
uted  articles  on  conchology  to  "  Silliman's  Journal  "
and  to  other  periodicals,  wrote  "  Letters  Descrip
tive  of  the  Virginia  Springs,"  "  Pleasant  Peregrina
tions  through  Pennsylvania,"  and  "  Remarks  on
Literary  Property,"  and  was  also  the  author  of
various  papers  on  free-trade  and  the  tariff  system
in  relation  to  books,  published  in  the  report  of  the
Philadelphia  free-trade  convention  in  1831,


NICOLAY,  John  George,  author,  b.  in  Essin-
gen,  Bavaria,  26  Feb.,  1832.  He  came  to  the  United
States  with  his  father  in  1838,  lived  for  some  time
in  Cincinnati,  where  he  attended  the  public  schools,
and  then  moved  to  Illinois.  At  the  age  of  sixteen
he  entered  the  office  of  the  "  Pike  County  Free
Press  "  in  Pittsfield,  and  before  he  came  of  age  he
was  proprietor  and  editor  of  the  paper.  He  went
to  Springfield  in  1857  as  an  assistant  to  the  secre
tary  of  state,  and  remained  there  until  Abraham
Lincoln  was  nominated  for  the  presidency,  when
he  became  his  secretary.  After  the  election  he
was  appointed  private  secretary  to  the  president,
and  served  in  that  capacity  until  Mr.  Lincoln's
death.  From  1865  till  1869  he  was  U.  S.  consul
at  Paris,  and  on  his  return  he  edited  for  a  time
the  Chicago  "  Republican."  He  was  marshal  of  the
U.  S.  supreme  court  from  1872  till  1887.  He  is  the
author,  in  collaboration  with  John  Hay,  of  (he
"  Life  of  Abraham  Lincoln,"  now  (1888)  in  course
of  publication  in  the  "  Century  Magazine."  He  has
also  published  "  The  Outbreak  of  Rebellion,"  in
"  Campaigns  of  the  Civil  War"  (New  York,  1881).

NICOLE,  Francois  L6on  Etienne  (ne-cole),
Haytian  poet.  b.  near  Grande  Riviere  in  1731 ;  d.  in
Cape  Fran9ais  in  1773.  He  was  a  mulatto,  but,
showing  in  early  life  a  love  for  poetry,  was  admitted
to  the  Jesuit  college  of  his  native*  place,  where  he
received  his  education,  and  came  to  Paris  in  1750.
Voltaire,  being  pleased  with  the  young  man's  talent,
introduced  him  to  the  encyclopedists,  and  Louis
XV.,  after  hearing  him  recite  some  of  his  verses,
granted  him  a  pension.  But  Nicole  returned
in  1769  to  Cape  Frangais,  where  he  obtained  em
ployment  in  the  governor's  house.  He  published
"  La  romance  do  1'esclave '' (Paris,  1766);  "  Fleurs
des  tropiques"  (Cape  Frangais,  1770);  and  "  Poesies
nouvelles"  (1772).

NICOLET,  Jean,  French  explorer,  lived  in  the
17th  century.  He  was  a  trader,  living  in  Quebec,
dealt  with  the  Indians,  and  in  the  course  of  his
travels  made  his  way  as  far  west  as  the  Green  bay
of  Michigan.  According  to  Father  Vimont,  who
wrote  in  1640,  the  date  of  his  visit  was  about  1634.
Nicolct  was  therefore  the  first  white  man  to  set
foot  in  what  is  now  the  state  of  Wisconsin.  He  is
also  believed  by  Bancroft  to  be  the  first  European
who  saw  the  prairies  of  Illinois  and  the  site  of  the
city  of  Chicago.  His  stories,  on  his  return  to  Que
bec,  to  the  effect  that  he  had  been  on  a  river  that
would  have  taken  him  to  the  sea  had  he  kept  on
three  days  longer,  led  the  Jesuits  to  believe  them
selves  on  the  eve  of  discovery  of  the  long-sought
outlet  to  India.  A  county  of  Quebec,  and  a  town,
the  seat  of  Nicolet  institution,  bear  his  name.

NICOLL,  James  Craig,  artist,  b.  in  New  York
city,  22  Nov.,  1846.  He  studied  under  Maurice  F.
II.  do  Haas,  and  has  made  many  sketches  in  his
trips  along  the  Atlantic  coast.  He  exhibited  first
in  1868  at  the  National  academy  of  design,  was
elected  an  associate  in  1880,  and  academician  in
1885.  lie  gained  a  gold  medal  at  the  New  Or
leans  exposition  in  1885.  Mr.  Nicoll  has  given
much  attention  to  etching  of  late  years,  and  was
secretary  of  the  Etching  club  for  about  five  years.
He  was  elected  president  of  the  Artists'  fund  so
ciety  in  1887,  and  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
American  water-color  society,  and  its  secretary
for  several  years.  Among  his  water-colors,  by
which  he  is  perhaps  best  known,  are  "  On  the
Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,"  "  Foggy  Morning,  Grand
Menan"  (1876);  "Moonlight,  Cape  Ann "(1877);
"  Coast  View  in  Spring  "  ;  "  Off  Portland  Har
bor,"  "  Outlet  of  Lake  Oscawana  "  (1878) :  "  Moon
light  at  Nahant "  (1881) ;  "  A  Creek  "  (1884) ;  and


NICOLLET


NICOLLS


517


"  Stormy  Day  at  Block  Island  "  (1886).  His  prin
cipal  paintings  in  oil  are  "Bass  Rocks  near  Glou
cester,  Mass."  (1879) ;  '•  On  Marblehead  Neck,"
"  Shower  at  Block  Island  "  (1880) ;  "  On  the  Rocks
near  Portland"  (1881);  "Harbor  View"  (1882);
"  Marblehead  Rock  "  (1883) ;  "  Sunlight  on  the  Sea  "
(1884);  '-Summer  Morning"  (1885);  "Fog  and
Sunshine,"  and  "  An  August  Evening"  (188(5).

'NICOLLET,  Jean  Nicholas,  explorer,  b.  in
Cluses,  Savoy,  24  July,  1786;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C.,  11  Sept.,  1843.  He  was  educated  at  the  col
lege  in  his  native  place,  and  in  1805  became  as
sistant  in  mathematics  in  Chambery.  Later  he
went  to  Paris,  where  in  1817  he  became  secretary
and  librarian  of  the  observatory,  also  studying  as
tronomy  with  Laplace,  who  refers  to  Nicollet's  as
sistance  in  his  works.  In  1823  he  was  given  an
appointment  in  the  government  bureau  of  longi
tudes,  at  the  same  time  holding  the  professorship
of  mathematics  in  the  College  of  Louis  le  Grand,
and  the  post  of  examiner  of  candidates  for  the
naval  school.  In  1832  he  came  to  the  United
States  for  the  purpose  of  acquiring  an  extended
knowledge  of  the  physical  geography  of  North
America.  After  exploring  the  southern  states  he
studied  the  great  basin  that  is  embraced  by  the
sources  of  the  Red,  Arkansas,  and  Missouri  rivers,
and  in  1836  extended  his  investigations  to  the
sources  of  the  Mississippi.  He  determined,  by  as
tronomical  and  barometrical  observations,  the  geo
graphical  position  and  elevation  of  many  impor
tant  points,  also  collecting  many  interesting  de
tails  respecting  the  history  and  dialects  of  the  In
dian  nations,  and  the  productions  and  natural  his
tory  of  the  country.  On  his  return  to  Washington
he  was  engaged  by  the  war  department  to  visit  the
far  west  and  prepare  a  general  report  and  map  for
the  government.  Lieut.  John  C.  Fremont  was  de
tailed  to  accompany  him  as  assistant.  In  1841  he
presented  a  paper  on  "  The  Geology  of  the  Upper
Mississippi  Region  and  of  the  Cretaceous  Forma
tion  of  the  Upper  Missouri "  before  the  Association
of  American  geologists  and  naturalists,  and  in
1843,  at  the  Albany  meeting  of  this  association,  he
gave  further  particulars  respecting  the  cretaceous
formation,  and  exhibited  the  beautiful  map  of  the
country  that  he  had  completed  for  the  govern
ment,  lie  published  "  Cours  de  mathematiques  a
Tusage  de  la  marine "  with  M.  Reynaud  (Paris,
1830),  and  "  Report  intended  to  illustrate  a  Map
of  the  llydrographical  Basin  of  the  Upper  Missis
sippi  River"  (Washington,  1843).

NICOLLS,  Mathias,  jurist,  b.  in  England  about
1630  ;  d.  on  Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  22  Dec.,  1687.  He
was  the  eldest  son  of  the  Rev.  Mathias  Nicolls,  of
Plymouth,  England.  The  name  was  spelled  "  Nick-
holls"  in  the  14th  century,  was  written  "  Nicolls  "
in  the  17th,  and  in  the  early  part  of  the  18th  was
changed  in  this  country  to  its  present  form  of
"  Nicoll."  Mathias  was  a  barrister  of  Lincoln's
Inn,  when  he  was  appointed  by  Charles  II.,  in
1664,  secretary  of  the  commission,  and  a  captain
in  the  forces  under  Col.  Richard  Nicolls,  who  was
sent  out  by  that  king  to  settle  disputes  in  the  New
England  colonies  and  to  capture  New  Netherlands
from  the  Dutch,  the  king  having  previously  granted
it  to  his  brother  James,  Duke  of  York.  The  sur
render  occurred  on  8  Sept.,  1664,  and  Richard
Nicolls  became  the  first  English  governor,  his  title
in  his  commission  being  "Deputy  Governor"  to
the  Duke  of  York.  Mathias  Nicolls  was  appointed
the  first  secretary  of  the  province,  both  commis
sions  having  been  issued  and  delivered  in  England
in  the  spring  of  1664,  about  two  months  before  the
expedition  sailed.  On  the  formation  of  the  gover


nor's  council,  which  was  immediate,  Mathias  Nicolis
was  appointed  a  member.  In  October,  1664,  he
attended  at  Hernpstead  the  promulgation  by  the

fovernor  of  "  The  Duke's  Laws,"  the  first  code  of
Inglish  laws  in  New  York,  and  authenticated  them
by  his  official  signature  as  secretary.  This  code,
mainly  the  work  of  Mathias  Nicolls,  was  compiled
from  the  law  of  England,  the  Roman-Dutch  law  of
New  Netherlands,  and  the  local  laws  and  regula
tions  of  the  New  England  colonies,  and  is  a  liberal,
just,  and  sensible  body  of  laws.  After  being  sub
mitted  to  the  duke  and  his  council  in  England,  it
was  there  printed  arid  copies  sent  out  by  the  duke,
with  orders  to  promulgate  and  establish  it  as  the
law  of  New  York,  which  was  done  by  the  governor
in  a  meeting  of  delegates  that  was  called  for  that
purpose  at  Hempstead,  in  Queens  county.  In  the
court  of  assizes  that  was  established  by  these  laws,
Mathias  Nicolls  sat  as  presiding  judge,  and  also
with  the  justices  in  the  minor  courts  of  session.
In  1672  he  was  chosen  the  third  mayor  of  New-
York,  and  he  was  also  the  first  judge  of  the  court
of  common  pleas  in  that  city.  On  the  remodelling
of  the  courts  under  the  act  of  the  legislature  of
1683,  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  judges  of  the
supreme  court  of  the  colony.  After  this  appoint
ment  he  also  continually  performed  all  the  duties
of  secretary  of  the  province,  and  occasionally  acted
in  his  military  capacity  as  captain  of  the  militia,
for  which  he  is  sometimes  spoken  of  in  the  records
of  that  time  as  Capt.  Nicolls.  He  purchased  large
tracts  on  Little  Neck  and  Great  Neck,  in  Queens
county,  on  the  former  of  which  he  dwelt,  his  estate,
called  Plandome,  consisting  of  upward  of  2.000
acres.  There  he  died  and  was  buried.  He  mar
ried  before  he  came  to  this  country,  and  left  one
son  and  one  daughter.  The  latter,  MARGARET,  b.
in  1662,  became  the  wife  of  the  second  Col.  Richard
Floyd,  of  Suffolk  county. — Mathias's  son,  William,
jurist,  b.  in  England  in  1657 ;  d.  on  Long  Island
in  May,  1723,  was  made  clerk  of  Queens  county  in
1683,  but  in  1688  removed  to  New  York.  He  was
a  lawyer  by  profession,  and  opposed  the  usurpa
tion  of  Jacob  Leisler  in  1688,  for  which  the  latter
imprisoned  him.  After  his  release  by  Gov.  Hough-
ton,  on  the  fall  of  Leisler  in  March,  1691,  he  was  at
once  appointed  a  councillor  of  the  province.  In
1695  he  was  sent  by  the  assembly  as  agent  of  the
province  to  England  to  solicit  the  crown  to  com
pel  the  other  American  colonies  to  make  their
respective  contributions  to  the  defence  of  the  con
tinent  against  the  French,  the  expense  of  which
bore  heavily  and  unjustly  on  New  York.  In  1698
Gov.  Bellomont,  who  took  sides  with  the  Leisle-
rian  party,  suspended  him  from  the  council.  In
1701  he  was  elected  to  the  assembly  from  Suffolk
county,  but,  being  a  non-resident,  could  not  take
his  seat.  Pie  then  built  a  house  on  his  estate  of
Islip  Grange,  in  that  county,  on  Great  South  bay,
which  he  purchased  from  the  natives  in  1683,  and
which,  with  adjacent  purchases,  was  granted  to
him  by  a  royal  patent  in  1697.  In  1702  he  was
again  elected  member  of  assembly  for  Suffolk
county,  and  chosen  speaker  of  the  house,  and  from
that  time  he  was  continuously  re-elected  till  his
death,  and  also  chosen  speaker  till  1718,  when,
on  account  of  his  health,  he  declined  a  re-elec
tion,  though  retaining  his  seat  upon  the  floor.
Thus  he  was  a  member  of  the  house  twenty-one
years  in  succession,  and  sixteen  years  in  succession
its  speaker.  As  a  lawyer  he  was  engaged  in  the
prosecution  of  Leisler  in  1691,  the  defence  of
Nicholas  Bayard  in  1702,  and  that  of  Francis
Makemie  in  1707,  and  he  was  a  man  of  principle,
ability,  and  influence.  He  married  Anne,  daughter


518


NICOLLS


NICUESA


of  Jcremias  Van  Rensselaer,  and  widow  of  Kilian
Van  Rensselaer,  her  cousin,  by  whom  he  left  three
sons  and  three  daughters.  BENJAMIN,  eldest  son,
d.  in  1724,  aged  thirty,  leaving  a  widow,  Charity,
daughter  of  Col.  Richard  Floyd,  who  married  in
1725  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson,  first' president  of  King's
college.— William's  son,  William,  b.  in  1702;  d.  in
1768,  like  his  father,  was  a  lawyer,  legislator,  and
public  man,  and  like  him  was  elected  to  the  assem
bly  for  Suffolk  in  1739.  He  served  twenty-nine
years  in  succession,  being  regularly  re-elected  till
his  death,  during  the  last  nine  years  of  which  time
he  was  the  speaker  of  the  house.  He  died  a  bache
lor. — His  nephew,  William,  eldest  son  of  his
brother  Benjamin,  b.  in  1715 ;  d.  29  March,  1780,
also  became  a  lawyer,  and  in  1750  was  made  clerk
of  Suffolk  county,  which  office  he  held  all  his  life.
He  was  elected  to  the  assembly  to  succeed  his  uncle
in  17C8.  and  on  the  dissolution  of  that  body  was  re-
elected  in  1769,  and  sat  till  the  beginning  of  the
Revolution.  He  had  two  sons,  William  (1756-'95)
and  Samuel  Benjamin  (1762-1828),  to  the  former  of
whom  he  devised  his  great  Islip  Grange  estate,
and  to  the  latter  his  Shelter  island  estate,  about
three  fourths  of  that  island  originally  devised  to
the  first  William  Nicoll  by  Gyles  Sylvester  in  1708.
To  the  grandchildren  of  these  two  sons  these  es
tates  mainly  belong  at  this  day.

NICOLLS,  Sir  Richard,  first  English  governor
of  New  York,  b.  in  Ampthill,  Bedfordshire,  Eng
land,  in  1624 ;  d.  at  sea,  28  May,  1672.  lie  was  the
fourth  son  and  youngest  child  of  Francis  Nicolls,  of
the  Middle  Temple,  and  of  Ampthill.  The  civil
war  put  an  end  to  his  studies  at  one  of  the  Eng
lish  universities,  and  he  joined  the  king's  army,
though  only  eighteen  years  old.  and  was  made  cap
tain  of  a  troop  of  horse.  On  the  fall  of  the  royal
cause  he  fled  to  Holland,  entered  the  service  of  the
Duke  of  York,  served  with  him  in  the  continental
wars,  and  at  the  restoration  of  Charles  II.  was
appointed  gentleman  of  the  bed-chamber  to  the
Duke  of  York.  Being  of  fine  presence,  clear  head,
and  pleasant  manners,  and  a  good  linguist,  speak
ing  French  and  Dutch  as  well  as  he  did  English,
he  was  appointed  the  chief  of  the  commission  that
was  charged  by  Charles  II.,  in  1664,  to  settle  dis
putes  between  and  with  the  New  England  colo
nies,  and  "  to  reduce  "  New  Netherland  from  the
Dutch.  Nicolls  sailed  with  his  fleet  from  Ports
mouth,  15  May,  1664.  Stopping  at  Boston,  and  di
recting  Winthrop  to  meet  him  at  the  west  end  of
Long  Island,  he  reached  Gravesend  bay,  25  Aug.,
1664,  but  three  of  his  ships  did  not  arrive  till  the
28th.  He  demanded  the  instant  surrender  of  New
Netherland.  A  successful  resistance  being  out  of
the  question,  Stuyvesant  reluctantly  negotiated.
After  long  discussion  between  the  representatives
of  Stuyvesant  and  those  of  Nicolls,  articles  of  sur
render  were  agreed  to  on  Saturday,  6  Sept.,  at  Stuy-
vesant's  Bowery  house,  which  Nicolls  signed  the
same  day.  On  Sunday  the  Dutch  council  consid
ered  them,  and  early  Monday  morning,  8  Sept.,  1664,
they  were  signed  by  Stuyvesant,  and  the  ratifica
tions  were  exchanged.  Nicolls  took  possession  of
New  Netherland  the  same  day,  the  Dutch  troops
marching  out  of  the  fort  at  New  Amsterdam  and
the  English  marching  in.  Nicolls  at  once  gave  to
the  conquered  territories  the  names  of  the  titles  of
his  patron,  calling  the  province  and  city  "  New
York,"  Long  Island  and  Westchester  county  "  York
shire,"  and  the  northern  portion  of  the  province
"Albania"  and  its  chief  town  "Albany."  By  his
prudent  and  mild  conduct  and  pleasing  manners,  j
Nicolls  so  overcame  the  prejudices  of  the  Dutch
that,  on  25  and  26  Oct.,  1664,  Stuyvesant,  Van  Cort-


landt,  and  all  the  other  officials  and  chief  men  of
New  Amsterdam  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  to
Charles  II.  as  sovereign,  and  the  Duke  of  York  as
lord  proprietor  of  New  York,  and  acknowledged
Nicolls  to  be  the  duke's  deputy  governor,  under  the
hitter's  commission,  dated  2  April,  1664.  On  8
March,  1665.  he  published,  in  a  convention  of  dele
gates  at  Hcmpstead,  "  the  duke's  laws,"  the  first
code  of  English  law  in  New  York.  It  was  drawn  up
by  Matthias  Nicolls  (q.  v.\  secretary  of  the  province,
from  the  laws  in  the  other  British  colonies,  the
common  law  of  England,  and  the  former  Roman-
Dutch  law  of  New  Netherland.  On  12  June,  1665,
he  established  the  English  municipal  government
of  the  city  of  New  York  by  a  mayor,  alderman,  and
sheriff,  in  place  of  the  Dutch  burgomaster  and
schepens,  and  appointed  Nicholas  Bayard,  Stuyve-
sant's  nephew,  the  first  clerk  of  the  common  coun
cil.  In  1666  he  was  engaged  in  settling  difficulties
with  the  Indians  and  the  French,  and  reconciling
minor  disputes  among  the  Dutch  and  English  peo
ple  of  the  province.  In  1667  he  applied  to  the  Duke
of  York  for  permission  to  resign,  which,  after  some
delay,  was  granted,  but,  at  the  duke's  request,  he  re
mained  till  the  arrival  of  his  successor,  Col.  Francis
Lovelace,  with  whom  he  made  a  journey  through  the
province  to  introduce  him  to  the  magistrates  and
people.  On  25  Aug.,  1668,  after  a  notable  dinner
that  was  given  in  his  honor  by  the  city  authorities,
he  was  escorted  to  the  vessel  by  the  largest  proces
sion  of  military  and  citizens  that  had  then  been  seen
in  New  York,  and  sailed  for  P^ngland,  amid  the  re
grets  of  the  people  among  whom  he  had  come  as  a
conqueror.  Nicolls's  rule  was  honest  and  wise :
his  decisions  as  chief  of  the  court  of  assizes  under
"  the  duke's  laws"  were  just,  and  his  government
was  marked  with  moderation  and  integrity.  On
his  return  to  England  he  took  his  former  place  in
the  Duke  of  York's  household,  and  at  the  begin
ning  of  the  war  with  Holland  in  1672  served  with
him  in  the  fleet  under  his  command,  and  lost  his
life  in  the  battle  with  De  Ruyter  on  28  May,  1672.
He  lies  buried  in  the  chancel  of  Ampthill  parish
church,  where  a  white  marble  monument  is  erected
to  his  memory,  its  upper  part  inclosing  the  cannon-
ball  that  killed  him.  with  the  words  "  Instrumen-
tum  Mortis  et  Immortalitatis."  Below  it  is  a
Latin  inscription  testifying  to  his  merits  as  a  sol
dier,  governor,  and  scholar,  and,  as  he  requested
in  his  will,  mentioning  his  family.  Sir  Richard
was  never  married.

NICOLSON,  Samuel,  inventor,  b.  in  Plymouth,
Mass.,  22  Dec.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  6  Jan.,
1868.  He  engaged  in  commerce  early  in  life,  and
became  a  partner  in  a  large  commission-house  in
Charleston,  S.  C.  Being  compelled  to  return  to
New  England  on  account  of  his  wife's  health,  he
was  chosen  superintendent  of  the  Boston  mill-dam
company,  and  secretary  of  the  Water-power  com
pany,  which  offices  he  filled  for  many  years.  He
was  the  author  of  several  valuable  inventions,  the
most  noteworthy  of  which  were  an  improved  steer
ing-apparatus  for  vessels,  and  the  wooden-block
pavement  that  bears  his  name.  This  was  adopted
in  several  cities,  and  is  well  adapted  for  light
travel.  Subsequently  a  judicial  decision  rendered
it  of  great,  pecuniary  value.

NICUESA,  Diejro  de  (ne-kway'-sah),  Spanish
adventurer,  b.  in  Seville  in  1464;  d.  at  sea  in  1511.
He  was  a  companion  of  Americo  Vespucci  and  of
Alonso  de  Ojeda  in  his  voyage  in  1501,  and  returned
afterward  to  Spain  to  solicit  a  grant  of  new  coun
tries  that  he  intended  to  discover.  Ojeda  went  to
court  with  a  similar  request,  and  was  given  the
countries  from  Cape  Vela  to  the  middle  of  the  Gulf


NICUM


NIEMCEWICZ


519


of  Darien,while  Nicuesa  obtained  the  covintries  from
Darien  to  Cape  Gracias  a  Dios  with  the  name  of  Cas-
tillade  Oro.  Both  expeditions  left  San  Lucar  in  1509
to  recruit  more  adventurers  in  Ilispaniola,  where
they  had  serious  difficulty  regarding  the  possession
of  Jamaica,  and  Ojeda  left  first  for  the  continent.
Nicuesa,  who  possessed  more  ample  means,  left  a
few  days  later,  with  a  powerful  expedition,  and
touching  the  coast  near  the  present  site  of  Cartha-
gena,  found  Ojeda  besieged  by  a  numerous  army  of
Indians.  After  assisting  his  rival  to  defeat  these
he  sailed  again  in  the  direction  of  Veragua.  A
storm  separated  the  convoy,  and  Nicuesa  with  his
vessel  was  wrecked  on  an  unknown  coast,  where  he
suffered  great  hardships.  Messengers  that  he  sent
along  the  coast  met  his  lieutenant.  Lope  Olano,
who  had  landed  with  three  vessels  farther  south,
but,  seeing  a  good  opportunity  to  usurp  the  com
mand,  the  latter  pretended  to  disbelieve  what  they
said  and  continued  his  explorations.  Nicuesa  was
now  forced  to  march  along  the  coast,  continually
harassed  by  the  natives,  till  finally  he  met  Olano  near
Porto  Bello.  The  latter's  vessels  had  been  wrecked,
and  he  had  lost  several  hundred  men  in  warfare
with  the  Indians.  Nicuesa  pardoned  his  lieutenant
and  they  continued  their  march,  but  soon  provisions
began  to  fail,  and  finally,  worn  out  with  fatigue,
they  arrived  at  a  port  that  had  been  called  by  Co
lumbus  Bastimentos,  where  Nicuesa,  disheartened,
said,  •'  Let  us  stop,  in  the  name  of  God."  There
they  founded  a  small  settlement  which,  accord
ingly,  they  called  Nombre  de  Dios.  Meanwhile,  in
the  middle  of  1510,  a  second  expedition,  fitted  out
on  Nicuesa's  account  in  Spain  under  Rodrigo  de
Colmenares,  arrived  in  Ojeda's  new  settlement,
Santa  Maria  de  la  Antigua,  and,  finding  that  after
the  latter's  departure  for  Spain  there  had  been
differences  between  his  partner  Enciso  and  Balboa
(q.  ?'.),  Colmenares  was  persuaded  by  some  of  the
colonists  to  go  in  search  of  Nicuesa  and  bring  him
to  the  new  colony.  In  this  manner  the  latter  was
finally  relieved,  and  arrived  on  15  Nov.,  1510,  in
Antigua;  but  Balboa,  who  had  arrested  Enciso,
suspecting  the  intentions  of  Nicuesa,  imprisoned
him  on  a  charge  of  having  sacrificed  many  lives,
-and  finally  obliged  him  to  set  sail  for  Spain  in
a  small  vessel  with  a  crew  of  only  seventeen  men.
He  sailed  on  1  March,  1511,  and  was  never  heard
of  again.

NICUM,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Winnenden,
Wiirtemberg,  Germany,  6  Jan.,  1851.  He  received
his  preparatory  training  in  the  Latin-school  of  his
native  place,  and  after  coming  to  this  country  was
graduated  at  Muhlenberg  college,  Allentovvn,  Pa.,
in  1873,  and  at  the  Lutheran  theological  seminary,
Philadelphia,  in  1876.  He  has  been  pastor  in
Frockville,  Pa.,  in  1876-'8;  Frankford,  Philadel
phia,  in  1878-'80  ;  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  in  1880-'7;  and
in  the  latter  year  he  accepted  a  call  to  St.  John's
Lutheran  church,  Rochester,  N.  Y.  Since  1884  he
has  been  president  of  the  fourth  conference  of  the
New  York  ministerium.  Since  1886  he  has  been
German  secretary  of  the  general  council  of  the
Evangelical  Lutheran  church  in  North  America,
and  in  1887  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  gen
eral  council's  board  of  German  home  missions.  He
is  a  frequent  contributor  to  Lutheran  and  other
periodicals,  and  has  published  "  Weihnachts-An-
dacht"  (Reading,  Pa.,  1880);  "  Gleichniss-Reden
Jesu "  (1884) ;  "  Laws  of  the  State  of  New  York
relating  to  Churches "  (Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  1884) ;
"  Reformations  -  Album  "  (Reading,  1885) ;  and
"The  Doctrinal  Development  of  the  New  York
Ministerium  "  (Philadelphia,  1887).  He  has  in  press
a  "  History  of  the  New  York  Ministerium."


NIEBUHR,  Sisrismund  (ne-boor),  German  navi
gator,  b.  in  Neu-Breisach  in  1631 ;  d.  in  Amster
dam  in  1699.  He  entered  the  service  of  the  states-
general  of  Holland,  and  in  1675  was  sent  to  South
America  on  a  voyage  of  exploration.  After  stop
ping  at  Rio  Janeiro,  he  sailed  along  the  coast  to
the  Strait  of  Lemaire,  made  soundings  to  ascertain
the  depth  of  the  ocean,  and  prepared  a  chart  that
afterward  proved  valuable.  He  was  shipwrecked
in  a  storm  off  Los  Reyes  island,  but  built  there  a
new  ship  and  determined  the  exact  location  of
Los  Bajos  de  Esteban,  which  had  hitherto  been
disastrous  to  navigators.  He  located  also  on  his
chart  several  dangerous  rocks,  and.  landing  in
Tierra  del  Fuego,  had  friendly  intercourse  with  the
natives,  persuading  two  of  them  to  accompany  him
to  Holland.  During  the  voyage  he  was  obliged  to
put  into  Guiana  for  repairs,  and  he  entered  the  Zuy-
der  Zee  in  October,  1677.  His  narrative  was  pub
lished  under  the  title  "  Reisebeschryving  in  de
Straat  van  Lemaire,  tot  Kaap  Hoorn,  en  langs  de
kust  van  Brazilie,  on  der  nomen  door  de  Loods
Niebuhr  in  dienst  van  de  Edele  Heren  der  Gen
eral  Staten  "  (Amsterdam,  1678).

NIEL,  Fr£d6ric  Gnillnume  Amedfie  Ferdi
nand  (neel),  West  Indian  geographer,  b.  near  Saint
Pierre,  Martinique,  in  1729  ;  d.  in  Versailles  in  1791.
He  entered  the  colonial  administration  and  held
several  offices.  In  1761  he  undertook  a  survey  of
Martinique,  and  he  was  afterward  sent  on  several
missions  to  Santo  Domingo,  Guadeloupe,  and
South  America.  He  was  appointed  in  1782  as
sistant  librarian  of  the  city  of  Versailles,  but  re
signed  in  1790,  and,  returning  to  Martinique,  was
chosen  delegate  to  the  constituent  assembly.  He
was  one  of  the  founders  in  Paris  of  the  club  "  Les
amis  des  noirs,"  and,  although  opposed  to  a  gen
eral  emancipation  of  the  slaves,  advocated  a  policy
of  gradual  enfranchisement,  and  published  several
pamphlets  in  support  of  his  ideas.  Among  his
works  are  "  Description  de  la  cote  orientale  de
1'ile  de  la  Martinique"  (Paris,  1763);  "Atlas  pour
servir  aux  marins  qui  prennent  le  debouquement
de  Saint  Domingue "  (1770);  "  Le  flux  et  le  re
flux  de  la  mer  sur  les  cotes  de  File  Sainte  Cathe
rine  "  (1772) ;  "  Atlas  de  la  cote  du  Maranhao  "
(1775);  "De  1'esclavage  aux  Antilles"  (1790);  "La
question  des  esclaves "  (1791);  "Des  droits  du
negres"  (1791);  and  "  L'esclave  peut-il  devenir
un  bon  citoyen?"  (1791).

NIEMCEWICZ,  Julian  Ursin,  Count  (ne-em-
tsay'-vitch),  Polish  statesman,  b.  in  Skoki,  Lithu
ania,  Poland,  in  1757  ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  21  May,
1841.  He  was  of  noble  birth,  entered  the  Lithu
anian  army  as  the  adjutant  of  Prince  Czartoryski,
and  in  1788  was  promoted  major.  Being  appointed
a  deputy  to  the  Polish  constitutional  diet,  he  had
the  principal  share  in  drawing  up  the  constitution
of  3  May,  1791,  and  about  the  same  time  became
an  editor  of  a  popular  journal  called  "  Gazeta  Nar-
odowa."  After  the  battle  of  Maciejowice  he  was
made  prisoner  with  Kosciusko,  and  confined  in  the
fortress  of  St.  Petersburg,  from  which  they  were  re
leased  on  the  accession  of  Paul  in  1796.  The  fol
lowing  year  he  accompanied  Kosciusko  to  this
country.  His  handsome  person,  his  culture,  and
his  captivating  manners  at  once  made  him  a  favorite
in  society  in  New  York  city,  where  he  was  the  fre
quent  guest  of  John  Jay,  Alexander  Hamilton,  and
other  eminent  men.  In  1800  he  married  Mrs.  Liv-
|  ingston  Kean,  the  widow  of  John  Kean  (q.  v.),  a
S  delegate  from  South  Carolina  to  the  Continen-
I  tal  congress,  who  died  in  1795.  Mrs.  Kean  had
purchased  Liberty  Hall,  the  country-seat  of  her
uncle,  Gov.  William  Livingston,  and  after  her


520


NIEMEYER


NIEUWIIOF


marriage  with  Count  Niemcewicz  it  again  became
the  centre  of  attraction  for  scholars  and  statesmen.
After  the  invasion  of  Poland  by  Napoleon  in  1807.
he  returned  to  Warsaw  and  was  made  secretary  of
the  senate.  On  the  annexation  of  his  native  coun
try  to  Russia  he  became  president  of  the  commit
tee  on  the  new  constitution.  He  took  an  active
part  in  the  revolution  of  1831,  and  in  his  capacity
of  secretary  drew  up  the  resolution  that  expelled
the  Romanoff  family  from  the  throne  of  Poland.
After  the  fall  of  Warsaw  he  visited  England,  and
thence  went  to  Paris,  where  he  remained  until  his
death.  Besides  being  a  patriot  and  statesman,
Niemcewicz  was  a  poet  and  historian.  A  complete
edition  of  his  works  was  issued  in  twelve  volumes
in  Leipsic  in  1840.  His  "  Historical  Songs  of  the
Poles"  (Warsaw,  1816:  German  translation,  Leip
sic,  1833),  set  to  music,  with  historical  sketches,
attained  great  popularity.  He  also  published  "  His
tory  of  the  Reign  of  Sigismund  III.  of  Poland"
(3  "vols. ;  new  ed.,  Breslau,  183(5) :  "  Collection  of
Memoirs  relating  to  Old  Polish  History  "  (5  vols.  ;
new  ed.,  Leipsic,  1840) ;  and  "  John  of  Tenczyn,"  a
romance.  In  addition  to  the  foregoing  he  wrote  a
series  of  fables  and  tales  in  the  style  of  La  Fon
taine,  several  dramas  that  were  produced  success
fully  on  the  stage,  and  translated  from  the  English
poets.  In  "  Leb  and  Sarah,  or  Letters  of  Polish
Jews,"  he  described  the  moral  and  intellectual  con
dition  of  the  Hebrew  race  in  Poland.  His  eulogy
on  Kosciusko  is  considered  his  masterpiece.

NIEMEYER,  Conrade  Jacob  tie  (no -mire),
Brazilian  engineer,  b.  in  Lisbon,  Portugal,  28  Oct.,
1788 ;  d.  in  Rio  Janeiro  in  1862.  He  entered  the
regiment  of  artillery  at  Lisbon  as  a  cadet  in  Feb
ruary,  1803,  but  in  1833  obtained  his  retirement
with  the  rank  of  colonel  and  gave  himself  entirely
to  geographical  studies.  In  1840  Xiemeyer  pub
lished  and  dedicated  to  the  Historical  and  geo
graphical  society  of  Rio  Janeiro,  of  which  he  had
been  a  member  since  1839,  his  "  General  Chart  of
the  Empire,"  which  gained  him  the  diploma  of
honorary  fellow  of  that  society  and  of  the  Geo
graphical  society  of  Berlin.  In  1856  he  was  charged
with  preparing  a  chorographic  chart  of  the  em
pire,  and,  notwithstanding  his  advanced  age,  he
finished  his  difficult  task  to  the  full  satisfaction  of
the  provincial  governments.  The  chart  was  pub
lished  in  Rio  Janeiro  in  1860.

NIEMEYER,  John  Henry  (ne-mire),  artist,  b.  in
Bremen,  Germany,  25  June,  1839.  lie  came  to  the
United  States  in  1846,  residing  in  Cincinnati,  and
studied  in  Paris  in  1866-'70  under  Jean  LeonGerome
and  Adolphe  Yvon  at  the  Ecole  des  beaux  arts,  in
the  studio  of  Louis  Jacquesson  de  la  Chevreuse,  and
also,  for  some  time,  in  that  of  Sebastian  Cornu.
He  received  three  medals  in  the  government  schools
of  Paris.  After  his  studies  in  Europe  he  was  ap
pointed  in  1871  professor  of  drawing  in  the  Yale
school  of  fine  arts.  He  has  painted  various  genre
pictures  and  portraits,  among  the  best  of  which
are  "  Gutenberg  inventing  Movable  Type  "  (1862) ;
a  portrait  of  Theodore  D.  Woolsey  (1876);  "The
Braid,"  "Where?"  "Why?"  (1880);  and  "  Sancta
Sirnplicitas"  (1882).  He  has  also  executed  some
bas-reliefs,  among  them  a  large  medallion  por
trait  of  William  M.  Hunt  (1883)  and  "  Lilith
tempting  Eve"  (1883).

NIETO,  Jos6  Apolinario  (nyay'-to),  Mexican
naturalist,  b.  in  San  Miguel.  Hiloxochitlan,  in
1810 ;  d.  in  Cordova,  21  Dec.,  1873.  At  the  age  of
nine  years  he  lost  his  father,  and,  being  left  in
great  poverty,  he  learned  the  trade  of  a  tailor.  He
obtained  the  protection  of  a  gentleman  of  Orizaba,
Jose  Maria  Aguilar,  who  employed  him  in  his


house  and  gave  him  opportunity  to  continue  his
studies.  At  that  time  the  French  naturalist,  Alex-
andre  Leseur,  arrived  in  Orizaba,  commissioned  to
form  a  Mexican  entomological  collection.  Nieto
aided  Leseur  in  his  work,  and  very  soon  acquired
a  knowledge  of  the  French  language.  After  sev
eral  years  lie  obtained  the  whole  confidence  of  his
protector,  who  at  his  death  confided  to  Nieto  the
administration  of  his  property.  In  1838  Nieto
moved  his  residence  to  Cordova,  where  he  bought
a  country-seat,  tried  to  acclimatize  the  silk-worm,
and  fostered  the  cultivation  of  mulberry-trees.  In
1845  he  returned  to  Orizaba  and  there  propagated
the  cinchona-tree,  which  has  since  become  common
in  the  republic.  He  contributed  to  the  establish
ment  of  the  railroad  and  the  telegraph  lines  that
unite  the  state  of  Vera  Cruz  with  the  capital.  Not
withstanding  that  he  was  deprived  by  an  accident
in  1850  of  part  of  his  physical  faculties,  he  con
tinued  his  scientific  work,  and  contributed  to  "  La
Naturaleza,"  the  paper  of  the  Mexican  society  of
natural  history.  He  was  an  honorary  member  of
many  scientific  societies  in  Europe  and  America.

NIETO.  Vicente.  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Aran-
juez  in  1753 :  d.  in  Potosi,  Bolivia,  15  Dec.,  1810.
He  entered  the  army  as  a  lieutenant  and  served  in
New  Spain,  becoming  in  1795  brevet  brigadier-
general  and  honorary  colonel  of  the  Pueblo  regi
ment.  He  returned  to  Spain  in  1806,  was  in  sev
eral  encounters  with  the  French,  commanded  a
division  at  the  battle  of  Rio  Seco  in  1808,  and,  be
ing  promoted  major-general  at  the  end  of  the  same
year,  was  sent  to  serve  in  Buenos  Ayres.  In  Au
gust,  1809,  he  was  appointed  by  the  viceroy,  Hi
dalgo  de  Cisneros,  commander  of  a  division  to  op
erate  against  Chuquisaca,  and  in  November  fol
lowing,  by  the  junta  central,  president  of  the  au-
diencia  de  Charcas.  When,  in  May,  1810,  the
independence  of  Buenos  Ayres  was  declared  and  a
patriot  army  marched  against  upper  Peru,  Nieto
joined  Gen.  Jose  de  Cordova  and  Francisco  de
Paula  Sanz,  intendant  of  Potosi.  The  campaign
was  short,  but  decisive.  The  independents  were  at
first  defeated  at  Cotagaita  on  27  Oct.  and  at  Tupiza
on  29  Oct.,  but  collected  their  forces,  and  at  Sui-
pacha  on  7  Nov.  they  gained  a  complete  victory,
the  three  royalist  generals  being  made  prisoners.
Soon  all  the  provinces  of  upper  Peru  pronounced
for  independence,  and  in  the  next  month,  by  order
of  Juan  Jose  Castelli,  member  of  the  junta  guber-
nativa,  the  Spanish  chiefs  were  shot  in  Potosi.

NIEUWHOF,  Joliann  Jacob  (nyoy-hoff),  Ger
man  navigator,  b.  in  Usen,  Westphalia,  in  1010;  d.
on  the  coast  of  Malabar,  29  Sept..  1672.  He  en
tered  the  service  of  the  Dutch  West  India  com
pany  as  supercargo  and  made  several  voyages  to
South  America.  The  Dutch  under  Prince  Maurice
of  Nassau-Siegen  (q.  v.)  having  conquered  northern
Brazil,  Nicuwhof  went  to  that  country  about  1640,
and,  being  employed  to  explore  the  regions  be
tween  Maranham  and  San  Francisco  rivers,  made
a  particular  study  of  the  neighborhood  of  Per-
nambuco.  He  left  Brazil  in  1049  when  the  Portu
guese  captured  Rio  Grande,  and  passed  to  the
service  of  the  East  Indian  company.  He  resided
several  years  in  Batavia,  was  appointed  in  1654
steward  of  the  mission  to  China  under  Peter  van
Goyer  and  Jacob  van  Keyser,  remained  in  the  lat
ter  country  till  1657,  when  he  became  governor  of
Ceylon.  Returning  in  1672  to  the  Indies  from
Holland,  he  landed  to  trade  on  the  Malabar  coast,
and  was  not  seen  again.  He  was  probably  mur
dered  by  the  natives.  He  left  several  manuscripts,
which  were  published  after  his  death,  including
"  Zonderlinge  reis  naar  Brazilie  over  zee  en  over


NILES


NILES


521


land"  (Amsterdam,  1682),  and  several  works  on
Chinese  history  and  institutions.

NILES,  Hezekiah,  editor,  b.  in  Chester  county,
Pa.,  10  Oct.,  1777 ;  d.  in  Wilmington,  Del.,  2  April,
1839.  He  learned  printing,  and  about  1800  be
came  a  member  of  an  unsuccessful  publishing  firm
in  Wilmington.  He  then  removed  to  Baltimore,
Md.,  where  for  six  years  he  edited  a  daily  paper.
He  is  chiefly  known  as  the  founder,  printer,  and
publisher  of  "  Niles's  Register,"  a  weekly  journal
published  in  Baltimore,  which  he  edited  from  1811
until  1836,  and  which  is  considered  so  valuable  as
a  source  of  information  concerning  American  his
tory  that  the  first  32  volumes,  extending  from  1812
till  1827,  were  reprinted.  The  "  Register "  was
continued  by  his  son,  William  Ogden  Xiles,  and
others,  until  27  June,  1849,  making  altogether  76
volumes.  He  advocated  the  protection  of  national
industry,  and  was  with  Mathew  Cary  a  champion
of  the  "  American  system."  In  addition  to  a  series
of  humorous  essays  entitled  "  Quill  Driving,"  pub
lished  in  a  periodical,  he  compiled  a  work  entitled
"  Principles  and  Acts  of  the  Revolution  "  (Balti
more,  1822).  The  towns  of  Niles,  Mich.,  and
Niles,  Ohio,  were  named  in  his  honor.

NILES,  John  Milton,  postmaster-general,  b.
in  Windsor.  Conn..  20  Aug.,  1787;  d.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  31  May,  1856.  After  receiving  a  common-
school  education,  he  studied  law.  was  admitted  to

the  bar  in  1817.
and  began  to  prac
tise  in  Hartford.
In  that  year  he  es
tablished  the  Hart
ford  "  Times."
which  he  edited,
and  to  which  he
contributed  for
thirty  years.  He
was  an  active
Democratic  poli
tician  and  a  sup
porter  of  state-
rights  doctrines.
In  1820  he  was  ap
pointed  a  judge  of
the  Hartford  coun
ty  court,  which
office  he  held  for  several  years,  and  in  1829  he  was
postmaster  of  the  city.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  sen
ator  in  place  of  Xathan  Smith,  as  a  Whig,  and  sub
sequently  elected  to  this  post,  serving  from  21  Dec.,
1835.  till  3  March,  1839,  and  again  from  4  Dec..
1843.  till  3  March,  1849.  From  19  May,  1840.  till  6
March,  1841,  he  was  postmaster-general  under
President  Van  Buren.  In  1851-'2  he  travelled  in
Europe,  and  he  spent  his  latter  years  in  horticul
tural  pursuits.  He  bequeathed  his  library  to  the
Historical  society  of  Connecticut,  and  left  $70.000
in  trust  to  the  city  of  Hartford  as  a  charity  fund,
the  income  of  which  he  directed  to  be  annually
distributed  to  the  poor.  He  edited  for  publication
an  English  work  entitled  "The  Independent
Whig"  (1816):  a  "Gazetteer  of  Connecticut  and
Rhode  Island,"  with  Dr.  John  C.  Pease  (Hartford,
1819) ;  "  Lives  of  Perry,  Lawrence,  Pike,  and  Har
rison"  (1820);  a  "History  of  the  Revolution  in
Mexico  and  South  America,  with  a  View  of  Texas"
(1839);  "The  Civil  Officer"  (New  York,  1840):
and  a  new  edition  of  Archibald  Robbins's  "Jour
nal  of  the  Loss  of  the  Brig  'Commerce'  upon
the  West  Coast  of  Africa"  (Hartford,  1842).

NILES,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  on  Block  island,
R.  I.,  1  May,  1674:  d.  in  'Braintree,  Mass..  1  May,
1762.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1699  and


preached  in  a  district  of  Rhode  Island  called
the  "  ministerial  lands,"  and  in  Kingston,  R.  I.,
from  1702  till  1710.  From  1711  until  his  death  he
was  pastor  of  the  2d  church  in  Braintree,  Mass.
I  In  1759  he  received  the  degree  of  M.  A.  from  Har
vard.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Tristitiae  Ecclesi-
arum,  or  a  Brief  and  Sorrowful  Account  of  the
!  Present  Churches  in  New  England  "  (1745) ;  "  God's
Wonder- working  Providence  for  New  England  in
the  Reduction  of  Louisburg,"  a  tract  in  verse
(1747) ;  "  Vindication  of  Divers  Important  Doc
trines  "  (1752) :  "The  True  Scripture  Doctrine  of
Original  Sin,"  in  answer  to  Dr.  John  Taylor's  work
on  the  same  subject  (1757) :  and  an  unfinished  "  His-
|  tory  of  the  Indian  and  French  Wars."  published
in  the  Massachusetts  historical  collections.  His
;  diary,  kept  for  sixty  years,  containing  a  complete
j  history  of  the  town  of  Braintree,  is  still  extant. —
His  son,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Braintree,  Mass.,  14
May,  1711 ;  d.  in  Lebanon.  Conn..  30  April,  1804,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1731,  was  judge  of
the  court  of  common  pleas  for  Suffolk  county,  a
councillor,  and  the  friend,  neighbor,  and  legal  ad
viser  of  John  Adams. — The  second  Samuel's  son,
Nathaniel,  lawyer,  b.  in  South  Kingston,  R.  I.,
!  3  April,  1741  ;  'd.  in  West  Fairlee,  Vt.,  31  Oct.,
j  1828,  studied  at  Harvard,  and  was  graduated  in
,  1766  at  Princeton,  where  he  was  known  as  "  Both
eration  primus."  Subsequently  he  studied  medi
cine  and  law,  taught  for  a  time  in  New  York  city,
and  then  studied  theology  under  Dr.  Joseph  Bel
lamy.  He  preached  in  various  New  England  towns,
and  finally  settled  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  where  he  in
vented  a  process  of  making  wire  from  bar-iron  by
water-power.  He  afterward  erected  a  wool-card
manufactory  in  that  town.  After  the  Revolution
he  bought  a  tract  of  land  in  Orange  county,  Vt.,
in  what  is  now  West  Fairlee,  being  the  first  in
habitant  of  that  place,  and  preaching  in  his  own
house  there  for  nearly  forty  years.  He  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  Vermont  legislature,  serving  as  its
speaker  in  1784,  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  six
times  a  presidential  elector,  and  a  representative  to
congress,  serving  from  24  Oct..  1791,  till  3  March,
1795.  He  was  also  a  "censor"  for  revising  the
state  constitution.  He  received  the  degree  of  A.
M.  in  1772  from  Harvard,  and  in  1791  from  Dart
mouth,  of  which  institution  he  was  a  trustee  from
1793  till  1820.  He  published  "Four  Discourses
on  Secret  Prayer"  (1773):  "Two  Discourses  on
Confession  of  Sin  and  Forgiveness"  (1773);  two
upon  "  Liberty  "  ;  two  sermons  entitled  "  The  Per
fection  of  God,"  the  "  Fountain  of  Good  "  (1777) ;
a  sermon  on  "  Vain  Amusements  " ;  and  a  "  Let
ter  to  a  Friend  concerning  the  Doctrine  that  Im
penitent  Sinners  have  the  Natural  Power  to  make
to  Themselves  New  Hearts."  He  contributed  papers
to  the  "  Theological  Magazine,"  and  was  the  au
thor  of  "  The  American  Hero,"  a  popular  war-
song  during  the  Revolution,  written  upon  hearing
of  the  news  of  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill. — Another
son,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Braintree.  Mass.,  14
Dec.,  1744;  d.  in  Abington,  Mass.,  16  Jan..  1814,
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1769,  and  was  known
there  as  "  Botheration  secundus."  After  studying
theology  under  Dr.  Joseph  Bellamy  and  his  father-
in-law.  Rev.  Ezekiel  Dodge,  he  was  ordained  pastor
of  a  Congregational  church  in  Abington  on  25
Sept.,  1771,  and  preached  there  for  forty  years.
He  published  a  sermon  on  the  death  of  Gen.  Wash
ington  (1800),  a  sermon  before  the  Massachusetts
missionary  society  (1801),  and  a  pamphlet  entitled
"  Remarks  on  a  Sermon  by  John  Reed"  (1813). —
Nathaniel's  grandson,  Nathaniel,  lawyer,  b.  in
South  Kingston,  R.  I.,  15  Sept.,  1835,  was  educated


522


NILES


NINDEMANN


at  Phillips  Andovcr  academy,  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  New  York  bar  in  1857.  He  be
came  speaker  of  the  New  Jersey  assembly  in  1872,
government  director  of  the  Union  Pacific  railroad
in  1879,  and  since  1884  has  been  president  of  the
Tradesmen's  national  bank  of  New  York  city.  He
is  the  author  of  several  important  laws  that  have
been  passed  in  the  New  Jersey  legislature,  among
which  is  one  that  established  1,000  free-school  libra
ries  in  that  state,  and  another  that  created  a  free-
school  fund  which  now  exceeds  $3,000,000.

NILES,  William  Woodruff,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Hatley,  Lower  Canada,  24  May,  1832.  He  was
graduated  at  Trinity  in  1857  and  at  Berkeley  di
vinity-school,  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1861.  He  was
tutor  in  Trinity  college  in  1857-'8,  was  ordained
deacon  in  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  Middle-
town,  on  22  May,  1801,  by  Bishop  Williams,  and
priest  in  St.  Philip's  church,  Wiscassett,  Me.,  14
May,  1802,  by  Bishop  Burgess.  On  his  ordination
to  the  priesthood  he  became  rector  of  St.  Philip's
church,  Wiscassett,  of  which  he  had  been  in  charge
during  his  diaconate.  In  1804  he  became  professor
of  Latin  in  Trinity  college,  and  in  conjunction  with
his  professorship  he  was  rector  of  St.  John's  church,
Warehouse  Point,  Conn.,  in  18G8-'70.  He  was
elected  second  bishop  of  New  Hampshire,  and  was
consecrated  in  St.  Paul's  church,  Concord,  N.  II.,
21  Sept.,  1870.  At  the  time  of  his  consecration  he
was  a  British  subject,  and  he  was  not  naturalized
until  December,  1873.  He  edited  ''The  Church
man"  in  Hartford  in  180G-'7.  Bishop  Niles  re
ceived  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Trinity  college
in  1870  and  from  Dartmouth  in  1879.  He  has  pub
lished  addresses,  essays,  and  occasional  contribu
tions  to  church  magazines.

NILSSON,  Christine,  singer,  b.  near  Wexio,
Sweden,  3  Aug.,  1843.  Her  father,  a  small  farmer,
who  possessed  taste  in  music,  was  the  chief  choris
ter  in  the  church  of  that  district.  From  her  earli
est  years  Christine  gave  evidence  of  vocal  talent.
She  taught  herself  to  play  on  the  violin  and  flute,
and  sang  in  the  peasants'  fairs  in  Sweden  with  her
brother.  At  one  of  these  festivals  in  Ljungby  in
June,  1857,  she  attracted  the  attention  of  a  Swed
ish  magistrate  named  Tornerhjelm,  who  sent  her
to  llalmstad  and  Stockholm,  where  she  remained
for  two  years  as  a  pupil  of  Franz  Berwald.  After
studying  in  Paris  for  three  years  she  made  her
debut  there  as  Violetta  in  "La  Traviata"  on  24
Oct.,  1804.  In  1807  she  appeared  in  London  in
both  opera  and  oratorio,  and  in  1808  she  sang  at
the  Grand  opera-house  in  Paris,  where  she  made  a
sensation  as  Ophelia  in  Ambroise  Thomas's  "  Ham
let."  In  that  year  she  sang  in  the  Crystal  palace,
London,  at  the  Handel  festival.  She  first  ap
peared  in  the  United  States  in  1870  in  concerts,
and  in  1871  sang  in  opera  with  great  success.  She
re-appeared  in  London  in  1872  and  married  there
Auguste  Kouzaud,  a  broker  of  Paris,  who  died  in
1882.  In  1873  she  sang  with  great  success  in  St.
Petersburg,  and  from  1872  till  1877  she  appeared
every  season  in  Italian  opera  in  London.  She  vis
ited  this  country  again  in  1873-'4  and  in  1882,  and
made  a  tour  in  Scandinavia  in  1870.  Her  last  ap
pearance  in  New  York  was  on  10  April,  1883.  In
1880  she  married  Count  Casa  di  Miranda.  Her
voice  is  of  moderate  power,  but  possesses  remarka
ble  purity  of  intonation,  sweetness,  brilliancy,  and
evenness  in  its  entire  register.  Its  compass  is
nearly  three  octaves.  Her  most  successful  charac
ters  are  Elsa,  Marguerite,  and  Mignon.

NINA,  Joao  Estevam  Miguel  da  Silva  (ne-
nah),  Brazilian  author,  b.  in  Pernambuco  about
1770  ;  d.  there  in  1813.  He  received  his  early  edu


cation  in  Brazil,  but  finished  his  studies  in  the  Uni
versity  of  Coimbra,  was  graduated  in  law,  and
practised  his  profession  successfully  in  Pernam
buco.  His  leisure  time  was  devoted  to  historical
researches,  and  he  was  elected  an  associate  member
of  the  Historical  institute  of  Rio  Janeiro.  He
published  "  Memorias  de  algumas  part  icularedades
acerca  dos  estabelecimentos  portuguezes  eus  Bra
zil  "  (2  vols.,  Pernambuco,  1800) ;  "  Descripciio  cir-
cumstanciada  do  provincia  de  Sao  Paulo  "  (2  vols.,
1810) ;  and  "  Collegao  das  Vidas  dos  Portuguezes
Celebres,"  a  cyclopaxlia  of  the  Portuguese  adven
turers  that  participated  either  in  the  conquest  or
in  the  colonization  of  Brazil  (0  vols.,  1809-'12).

NINDE,  William  Xavier,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Cortland,  N.  Y..  21  June,  1832.  His  father,  Rev.
William  Ward  Ninde,  was  a  well-known  Methodist
preacher  in  New  York  state.  The  son  was  gradu
ated  at  Wes-
leyan  universi
ty,  Middletown,
Conn.,  in  1855,
and  after  teach
ing  in  Rome
academy,  N.  Y.,
entered  the
Methodist  min
istry  in  185(5.
He  served  as  pas
tor  of  churches
in  Ohio,  visited
Europe  and  the
East  in  1808-'9,
and  in  1870  was
transferred  to
the  Detroit  con
ference.  In  1873
he  was  appoint
ed  professor  of
practical  theology  in  the  Biblical  institute  in  Ev-
anston.  111.,  of  which  he  became  president  in  1879.
He  also  served  from  1870  till  1879  as  pastor  of  the
Central  church  in  Detroit,  Mich.  He  was  a  dele
gate  to  the  Methodist  ecumenical  conference  in
London  in  1881,  and  on  15  May,  1884,  was  elected
bishop.  In  1874  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Wesleyan  university.

NINUEMANN,  William  Friedrich  Carl,
arctic  explorer,  b.  in  Gingst,  island  of  Riigcn,  Ger
many,  22  April,  1850.  He  was  graduated  at  the
public  school  in  Gingst  in  1805,  and  in  1807  came
to  New  York  and  served  as  quartermaster  on  a
yacht.  He  went  on  the  arctic  expedition  in  the
steamer  "  Polaris,"  which  sailed  from  New  London
on  3  July,  1871.  On  15  Oct.,  1872,  the  "  Polaris  "
being  fast  in  the  ice  and  leaking  badly,  the  crew
was  ordered  to  land  provisions,  and  while  thus  en
gaged  the  floe  broke,  and  Nindemann  with  eighteen
others  drifted  southward  for  190  days  without  see
ing  the  ship  again.  This  part  of  the  crew  were
rescued  by  the  steamship  "  Tigress  "  on  29  April,
1873.  After  returning  to  Washington,  he  volun
teered  on  the  "  Tigress  "  in  her  search  for  the  "  Po
laris,"  and  remained  with  this  vessel  until  October,
1873,  when  he  joined  the  crew  of  the  steamer
"  Jeannette."  On  9  Oct.,  1881,  Capt.  DeLong  sent
Louis  P.  Noros  and  Nindemann  to  find  aid.  Tak
ing  a  southern  course,  they  wandered  until  21  Oct.,
when  they  were  met  by  a  native,  who  took  them  to
Kumak  Surka,  where  they  sent  a  message  through
a  Russia-n  exile  to  George  Melville,  who  afterward
joined  them  at  Bulun.  Subsequently  Melville,
James  H.  Bartlett,  and  Nindemann  explored  the
delta  for  traces  of  DeLong's  party  and  on  15  March,
1882,  they  found  the  bodies  of  DeLong  and  his  com-


XIXEGRET


NINO


523


panions:  a  thorough  but  unsuccessful  search  was  !
made  for  Lieut.  Charles  W.  Chipp  and  his  party.
Xindemann  has  invented  a  tong  for  the  gaff  of  fore-
and-aft  rigged  vessels,  which  was  patented  in  1883,
and  is  the  author  of  a  pamphlet  entitled  "  Eines
deutschen  Matrosen  Nordpolfahrten,"  edited  by
Karl  Knortz  (Zurich,  1885).

NINEGRET,  Indian  sachem,  lived  in  the  17th
century.  He  was  the  uncle  of  Miantonomo,  and
his  name  was  written  in  several  wavs.  He  was  first
known  to  the  English  settlers  as  Janemo.  and  was
sachem  of  the  Niantics,  a  tribe  of  the  Xarragan-
setts.  He  did  not  participate  in  the  Pequot  war  of
1032,  but  aided  the  English  in  that  of  1637.  About
a  year  after  the  death  of  Miantonomo  (q.  r.)  he
formed  a  plan  for  expelling  the  English,  and  sent
a  messenger  to  Waiandance,  the  Long  Island
sachem,  to  engage  him  in  it.  Instead  of  listening
to  the  messenger,  this  chieftain  bound  and  sent  him
to  Saybrook  fort,  whence  he  was  despatched  to
Hartford  under  guard.  On  their  way  the  party
was  forced  to  put  in  at  Shelter  island,  and  here
Xinegret's  deputy  escaped.  Having  passed  the
winter  of  1652-'3  among  the  Dutch  in  Manhattan
and  the  western  Indians,  he  was  suspected  of  plot
ting  with  them  against  the  English,  and  after  a
special  meeting  of  the  commissioners  in  Boston,  in
April,  1053,  they  declared  war  with  him.  but,  owing
to  the  opposition  of  Ma.ssachusetts.it  was  not  prose
cuted.  Meanwhile  Ninegret  waged  war  against
the  Long  Island  Indians,  who  had  placed  them
selves  under  the  protection  of  the  English.  In
September,  1654,  the  commissioners  sent  a  mes
sage  to  the  chief  demanding  his  appearance  in
Hartford,  where  they  were  convened,  and  also  the
payment  of  tribute  that  had  long  been  due.  He
refused  to  appear,  and  sent  them  a  haughty  an
swer.  War  was  again  declared  against  him,  and
270  infantry  and  40  horsemen  were  raised,  and

E  laced  under  the  command  of  Maj.  Samuel  Wil-
ird,  whose  instructions  were  to  go  to  Xinegret's
quarters,  demand  the  tribute,  and  insist  upon  a
cessation  of  the  war  with  the  Long  Island  Indians.
On  the  approach  of  the  troops  Xinegret  fled  to  a  dis
tant  swamp,  and  was  not  pursued.  On  13  Oct.,
1000,  with  other  chiefs,  he  mortgaged  his  territory
to  the  colonists,  and  he  gave  them  possession  at
Pettequamscot  in  1662.  He  took  no  part  in  King
Philip's  war  in  1075-'6,  and  so  escaped  the  ruin
that  overtook  the  other  tribes.  The  date  of  his
death  is  not  known,  but  it  is  said  that  he  was
buried  at  a  place  near  Charleston,  R.  I.,  called
"  Burying  Hill."  His  daughter  succeeded  to  the
sachemdom,  and  was  inaugurated  with  all  the
pomp  and  ceremony  of  the  Indians.  At  her  death
she  was  succeeded  by  her  half-brother  Xinegret,
who  in  1709  granted  a  large  portion  of  his  people's
lands  to  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  which  grant
gave  great  trouble  to  the  Indians  in  after  years.
This  chief  died  about  1722.  leaving  two  sons,
Charles  Augustus  and  George.  The  former,  dying
shortly  afterward,  left  an  infant  son,  who  was  ac
knowledged  by  some  of  the  tribe  as  their  sachem,
while  another  portion  adhered  to  his  uncle,  who
assumed  the  entire  government  in  1735.  George's
son,  Thomas  Xinegret,  who  became  chief  in  1746,
made  further  sales  of  the  Xiantic  lands  to  Rhode
Island,  which  caused  discontent  among  his  people,
some  of  whom  tried  to  depose  him.  One  appeal  to
Sir  William  Johnson,  superintendent  of  the  In
dians,  takes  the  ground  that  the  lands  sold  were
necessary  for  the  support  of  the  families  of  many
whose  lives  had  been  lost  in  the  king's  service  dur
ing  the  French  war  of  1754-'61.  In  one  of  their
letters  to  Sir  William  Johnson,  in  answer  to  an


objection,  that  the  Indians  had  no  power  to  depose
a  sachem,  they  replied :  "  As  it  was  in  the  power
of  the  nation  to  put  him  in,  we  think  it  in  the
power  of  the  nation  to  turn  him  out.''  The  con
troversy  continued  for  several  years,  and  Rhode
Island  ultimately  obtained  the  lands.  In  a  letter
to  Sir  William  Johnson,  Xinegret  speaks  of  having
paid  £500  sterling  to  a  subordinate  chief,  when  go
ing  to  the  war,  for  the  quit-claim  of  his  land,  the
money  being  intended  for  the  support  of  his  mother
in  the  event  of  his  fall.  Little  impression  was
made  upon  the  Xarragansetts  or  Xiantics  by  the
Puritans.  Roger  Williams  spoke  with  discourage
ment  about  this,  and,  when  Mayhew  requested
Xinegret  to  allow  him  to  preach  to  his  tribe,  he
replied :  "  Go  and  make  the  English  good  first."
A  small  remnant  of  the  Xmntics  were  living  in
Rhode  Island  in  1812.

NINO,  Andres  (neen'-yo),  Spanish  navigator,  b.
in  Moguer  in  1475;  d.  about  1530.  From  early
youth  he  navigated  vessels  for  the  Portuguese  gov
ernment  to  the  coast  of  Africa  and  the  East  In
dies,  and  he  went  in  1515  to  Panama,  where  he  ac
quired  the  reputation  of  a  skilled  pilot.  When  in
1521  Gil  Gonzalez-Davila  received  a  commission
from  the  crown  of  Spain  to  explore  and  conquer
the  Pacific  coast  north  of  Panama,  he  constructed
four  vessels  with  timber  that  was  transported  with
immense  labor  across  the  isthmus  from  the  Atlan
tic,  and,  appointing  Xifio  chief  pilot,  sailed  on  21
Jan.,  1522,  from  Tararegui,  in  the  Bay  of  San  Mi
guel.  Gonzalez  landed  on  the  coast  in  the  Bay  of
San  Vicente  with  part  of  his  forces  to  explore  the
country,  and  sent  Xifio  further  north  to  discover  a
passage  to  the  Atlantic  of  which  the  Indians  had
told  him.  The  latter  followed  the  coast  to  lati
tude  17°  50'  north,  and.  finding  no  passage,  re
turned  to  the  south,  where  he  found  the  Adelan-
tado  besieged  by  an  army  of  4.000  Indians,  whom
he  helped  to  disperse.  They  then  continued  to
explore  the  coast  of  Cape  Blanco,  the  Bay  of  Papa-
gayos,  Posesion  river,  and  a  gulf  which  they  called
Fonseca,  in  honor  of  the  president  of  the  council
of  the  Indies.  They  landed  in  the  possessions  of  a
cacique  called  Xicarao,  and,  after  many  encounters
with  the  warlike  tribes,  penetrated  to  the  interior
and  discovered  there  a  large  fresh  -  water  lake,
which  they  called  Mar  Dulce.  or  sweet  lake  (now
Lake  Xicaragua).  and  the  volcano  of  Masaya.  Af
ter  exploring  the  country  thoroughly  they  sailed
again  for  Panama,  where  they  arrived.  29  Dec.,
1532,  laden  with  treasure.  They  gave  a  glowing
description  of  the  country,  which  for  its  wealth
they  called  the  paradise  of  Mohammed.  Gonzalez
sailed  in  the  following  year  to  Spain  to  solicit  the
commission  of  governor  of  the  country  and  fit  out
a  new  expedition,  and  Xifio  returned  with  him  to
enjoy  his  riches,  but,  his  health  being  shattered  by
the  fatigues  of  his  frequent  voyages,  he  did  not
survive  many  years.

NIXO,  Pedro  Alonso,  called  THE  XEGRO,  b.  in
Moguer,  Spain,  in  1468 ;  d.  about  1505.  He  trav
elled  on  the  coasts  of  Africa,  and  was  a  compan
ion  of  Christopher  Columbus  in  his  third  voyage,
in  which  they  discovered  the  island  of  Trinidad,
1  Oct.,  1498,  the  mouths  of  the  Orinoco,  and  the
coast  that  Columbus  called  Tierra  Firme.  Return
ing  to  Spain  he  resolved  to  go  to  the  Indies  on  his
own  account  in  search  of  the  gold  and  pearls  that
the  Indians  had  in  great  abundance.  The  council
of  Castille  gave  him  permission  to  discover  new
countries,  on  condition  that  he  should  not  touch  at
those  that  had  been  already  discovered  by  Colum
bus,  and  that  he  should  keep  the  fifth  part  of  his
profits  for  the  king.  Louis  and  Cristopher  de  la


524


NIPHER


N1TSCHMANN


Guerra,  one  a  rich  merchant  and  the  other  a  pilot,
associated  themselves  with  Nino  for  the  enterprise,
and  left  the  port  of  San  Lucas  toward  the  end  of
May,  1499.  After  a  rapid  passage  of  twenty-three
days  they  arrived  on  the  coast  of  Tierra  Firme  in
Maracapana,  They  visited  t  he  gulf  that  Ojeda  called
the  Gulf  of  Pearls,  and  also  the  islands  of  Marga
rita,  Coche,  and  Cubagua,  where  they  obtained  a
large  quantity  of  pearls  in  exchange  for  objects  of
little  value.  Nino  now  sailed  up  the  coast  to  Punta
Araya,  where  he  discovered  the  famous  salt-mines
that  are  still  called  by  the  same  name.  He  then
returned  to  Spain  and  arrived  in  Galicia  loaded
with  wealth  after  a  voyage  of  two  months.  He
was  accused  of  keeping  the  fifth  part  that  belonged
to  the  king,  and  the  authorities  arrested  him  and
confiscated  his  property.  He  died  before  the  ter
mination  of  the  lawsuit  that  followed.

NIPHER,  Francis  Eugene,  physicist,  b.  in
Port  Byron,  N.  Y.,  10  Dec.,  1847.  He  was  gradu
ated  in  1870  at  the  State  university  of  Iowa,  where
he  became  assistant  in  physical  science.  In  1874
he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  physics  in  Washington
university.  St.  Louis.  The  second  state  weather
service,  that  of  Missouri,  was  organized  by  him  in
1877,  and  for  ten  years  was  maintained  independent
of  official  support.  From  1878  till  188-3  he  con
ducted  a  magnetic  survey  of  Missouri,  doing  the
work  under  private  auspices,  and  publishing  the
annual  reports  in  the  "  Transactions  of  the  St.
Louis  Academy  of  Sciences."  Prof.  Nipher  is  a
member  of  scientific  societies,  and  since  1884  has
been  president  of  the  St.  Louis  academy  of  sciences.
His  publications,  including  twenty-five  papers  on
physics,  have  been  contributed  to  the  "  American
Journal  of  Science "  and  to  transactions  of  socie
ties.  He  is  also  the  aut hor  of  '•  Theory  of  Magnetic-
Measurements,  with  an  Appendix  on  the  Method
of  Least  Squares  "  (New  York,  1886).

NISBET,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hadding-
ton,  Scotland,  21  Jan.,  1736;  d.  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  18
Jan.,  1804.  He  was  educated  at  the  University  of
Edinburgh,  and  after  a  full  course  of  study  at  the
theological  hall  was  licensed  to  preach,  24  Sept.,
1760.  He  became  popular  as  a  preacher,  and  was
soon  settled  over  one  of  the  churches  in  the  town
of  Montrose.  When  the  war  began  between  Great
Britain  and  the  American  colonies  Nisbet,  who
was  a  man  of  advanced  views  and  a  liberal  in  poli
tics,  gave  his  sympathies  to  the  latter.  By  this
means  he  incurred  not  a  little  obloquy,  and  he  soon
began  to  find  his  position  uncomfortable.  He  was
an  accomplished  scholar,  and  when  Dickinson  col
lege,  Pa.,  was  founded,  its  presidency  was  offered
him,  and  Nisbet,  having  accepted  the  call,  arrived
in  this  country  in  June,  1785.  Having  experienced
some  unexpected  difficulty  with  the  faculty  in  the
management,  and  especially  in  the  arrangement  of
the  studies,  he  resigned  in  1786,  but,  a  reconcilia
tion  having  been  effected,  he  was  re-elected  presi
dent  in  May  of  the  same  year,  and  resumed  his
place.  In  addition  to  the  duties  of  the  presidency,
he  lectured  on  logic,  belles-lettres,  philosophy,  and
systematic  theology.  His  library,  containing  many
rare  and  curious  books,  was  given  to  Princeton
theological  seminary  by  two  of  his  grandsons.
Nisbet's  works  appeared  after  his  death  (1806).
See  a  memoir  by  Dr.  Samuel  Miller  (1840).

NISBET,  Eiigenius  Aristides,  jurist,  b.  near
Union  Point,  Greene  co.,  Ga.,  7  Dec.,  1808 :  d.  in
Macon,  Ga.,  18  March,  1871.  He  was  of  Scotch
descent,  and  his  father,  Dr.  James  Nisbet,  was  a
pioneer  of  Georgia,  a  member  of  the  convention  of
1798  that  framed  its  constitution,  and  a  representa
tive  in  the  state  legislature.  The  son  was  educated


at  Columbia  college,  S.  C.,  and  at  Franklin  college,
Athens,  Ga.,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1821.  He
studied  law  in  Litchfield  law-school.  Conn.,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  by  special  act  of  the  legislature
before  reaching  the  age  of  twenty-one,  practised  in
Georgia,  and  represented  his  county  in  the  legisla
ture  for  many  years.  He  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  Whig,  and  served  from  2  Dec.,  1839,  till  3
March,  1843,  when  he  resumed  his  law-practice.
In  1845  he  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  newly  or
ganized  state  supreme  court.  In  politics  he  was  a
strict  constructionist,  but  supported  William  If.
Harrison  in  1840  and  Henry  Clay  in  1844.  He
was  a  leader  of  the  American  party  in  1855,  and  in
1860  supported  the  Bell-Everett  ticket.  He  was
a  member  of  the  state  secession  convention  in  1801,
and  of  the  Confederate  provisional  congress.

NITSCHMANN,  David,  Moravian  bishop,  b.  in
Zauchtenthal,  Moravia,  27  Dec.,  1696 ;  d.  in  Bethle
hem,  Pa.,  8  Oct.,  1772.  In  1724  he  emigrated  to
Herrnhut,  Saxony,  where  he  devoted  himself  to  the
work  of  an  evangelist.  In  1732  lie  went  to  the
West  Indies  as  one  of  the  first  two  foreign  mis
sionaries  of  the  Moravian  church,  who  declared
their  readiness  to  sell  themselves  as  slaves  if  there
should  be  no  other  way  of  reaching  the  negroes.
Three  years  later,  on  13  March,  1735.  he  was  con
secrated  to  the  episcopacy  at  Berlin  by  Bishop
Daniel  Ernst  Jablousky,  with  the  concurrence  of
Bishop  Sitkovius,  of  Poland,  the  two  surviving
representatives  of  the  ancient  episcopate  of  the
Unitas  Fratrum,  which  had  been  maintained  amid
many  persecutions  for  more  than  two  and  a  half
centuries.  After  this  he  was  almost  constantly  on
official  journeys  both  in  Europe  and  America.
Toward  the  end  of  the  year  in  which  he  was  con
secrated  he  visited  the  colony  that  the  Moravians
had  established  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  sailing  across
the  Atlantic  in  the  same  vessel  with  John  and
Charles  Wesley,  who  were  deeply  impressed  by  the
fearlessness  that  he  and  his  companions  displayed
in  the  midst  of  a  terrific  storm.  At  Savannah,  28
Feb.,  1736,  he  ordained  Anthony  Seifferth,  and  this
was  probably  the  first  ordination  by  a  Protestant
bishop  within  the  bounds  of  the  United  States.
John  Wesley  was  present,  and  was  so  impressed
with  the  simplicity  and  solemnity  of  the  occasion
that  he  imagined  himself  in  one  of  the  assemblies
that  were  presided  over  by  the  apostles.  In  1740
Nitschmann  paid  a  second  visit  to  this  country,
and  founded  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  the  chief  seat  of  the
Moravians  in  the  United  States.  Four  years  later,
while  on  his  way  back  to  Europe,  the  ship  in  which
he  was  sailing  was  captured  by  a  Spanish  frigate,
and  he  was  taken  to  St.  Sebastian  and  detained  as
a  prisoner  until  1745.  In  1748  he  visited  the  Amer
ican  Moravian  churches  a  third  time,  and  in  1755
he  came  to  stay  in  this  country,  working  with  un
abated  zeal  until  the  infirmities  of  old  age  called
for  rest.  His  life  was  one  of  extraordinary  activity
and  great  success.  He  labored  in  different  parts
of  Germany,  in  Livonia,  Denmark,  Sweden,  and
Norway,  in  England  and  Wales,  in  the  West
Indies,  in  Georgia,  Pennsylvania,  New  York,  and
North  Carolina,  and  in  various  regions  of  the  In
dian  country.  In  the  course  of  these  labors  he
undertook  not  less  than  fifty  sea-voyages.

NITSCHMANN,  John,  Moravian  bishop,  b.  in
Schoenau,  Moravia,  in  1703;  d.  in  Zeist,  Holland,
(i  May,  1772.  He  was  one  of  the  descendants  of
the  Ancient  Brethren's  church  who  forsook  their
native  country,  relinquished  all  their  possessions,
and  settled  at  Herrnhut,  in  Saxony,  in  order  that
they  might  enjoy  religious  liberty.  In  1741  he
was  consecrated  to  the  episcopacy,  and  eight  years


NIVELLES


NIXON


525


later  he  came  to  this  country  in  order  to  supply  j
the  place  of  Augustus  Spangenberg  as  presiding  !
bishop. He  returned  to  Europe  in  1751. Nitsi-h-
mann  was  endowed  with  rare  executive  abilities,
and  noted  by  his  simplicity,  his great  kindness,
and  his  grace  of  bearing. As  a  public  speaker  he
was  very  popular.

NIVELLES,  Charles  Etienne  de,  French  sol
dier,  b.  in  Dauphine  about  1665 :  d.  near  what
$  now  Mobile,  Ala.,  in  1711.  He  served  for  some
years  as  captain  in  Canada,  afterward  accompanied
Iberville  (q.  r.)  to  Louisiana,  participated  in  the
foundation  of  the  colony  of  Biloxi  in  1699.  the  first
settlement  of  the  French  in  Louisiana,  and  became
commander  of  the  fortress  that  was  built  in  1702
on  Dauphine  island,  at  the  entrance  of  Mobile  bay.
As  lieutenant  of  Iberville  he  undertook  several  ex
peditions  against  the  Indians,  and  when  in  1705
the  colony  was  visited  by  the  first  known  epidemic
of  yellow  fever  in  Louisiana,  he  restrained  the  set
tlers,  who  prepared  to  abandon  the  country,  and
also  took  an  active  part  in  quelling  the  "  petticoat
insurrection,"  or  rebellion  of  the  women,  who  were
dissatisfied  with  the  settlers'  diet  of  Indian  corn.
During  the  following  years,  as  famine  and  hostile
Indians  desolated  the  colony,  Nivelles's  courage
and  power  of  endurance  proved  equal  to  the  ordeal,
and  his  expedients  contributed  much  toward  re
lieving  the  inhabitants.  He  perished  in  the  great
flood  in  1711  that  destroyed  the  settlements  around
Fort  Saint  Louis  de  la  Mobile,  and  caused  their  re
moval  to  the  place  where  Mobile  now  stands.

NIVERT,  Desii'6  Amanle  Christian,  French
missionary,  b.  in  Calais  about  1605 ;  d.  in  Canada
in  1661.  He  was  a  Recollet  monk,  and  for  years
the  associate  of  Father  Charles  Lallemand,  superior
of  the  Canada  missions,  residing  in  the  Huron  ter
ritory.  He  is  known  by  two  works,  "  Recits  d'un
long  sejour  fait  au  paysdesPIurons,  situees  confins
de  la  Nouvelle  France  de  1'Amerique  du  Nord  "
(Paris,  1655)  and  "  Vocabulaire  de  la  langue  Hu-
ronne,  en  usage  encore  chez  les  sauvages  de  la
province  des  Puants,  de  celle  du  Feu,  chez  les
Petuneux,  chez  ceux  de  la  Nation  Neutre  et  chez
les  Yroquois"  (1657).  The  latter  is  extremely  rare
and  interesting,  and  is  one  of  the  best  dictionaries
of  the  Huron  dialect.

NIXON,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Framingham,
Mass.,  4  March,  1725;  d.  in  Middlebury,  Vt.,  24
March,  1815.  When  the  expedition  against  Cape
Breton  was  undertaken  by  Gov.  William  Shirley  in
1745  he  joined  the  troops  under  Sir  William  Pep-
perell.  and  was  at  the  capture  of  Louisburg.  After
serving  in  the  army  and  navy  for  seven  years  he
returned  to  his  native  place,  but  soon  entered  the
army  again  as  a  captain  and  fought  at  Ticonderoga
and  in  the  battle  of  Lake  George  in  1755.  After
ward  falling  into  an  ambuscade,  he  cut  his  way
through  the  enemy  and  escaped,  although  he  lost
nearly  all  of  his  party.  In  the  Revolution  he  led
a  company  of  minute-men  at  Lexington,  and  com
manded  a  regiment  at  Bunker  Hill,  where  he  re
ceived  a  wound  from  which  he  never  entirely
recovered.  He  was  appointed  brigadier-general.
9  Aug.,  1776,  and  intrusted  with  the  command  of
Governor's  island,  New  York  harbor.  He  served
under  Gen.  Horatio  Gates  in  1777,  and  at  the  bat
tle  of  Stillwater,  where  he  commanded  the  1st
Massachusetts  regiment,  a  cannon-ball  passed  so
near  his  head  as  to  impair  permanently  the  sight
of  one  eye  and  the  hearing  of  one  ear.  Owing  to
failing  health,  he  resigned  his  commission  on  12
Sept.,  1780,  and  in  1803  removed  to  Middlebury,
Vt. — His  brother,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Framing-
ham,  Mass.,  7  May,  1736 ;  d.  at  sea,  12  Aug.,  1800,


was  ensign  in  the  French  war  in  1756.  He  com
manded  a  company  of  minute-men  in  1775,  and
was  afterward  colonel  of  the  6th  Massachusetts  regi
ment,  serving  throughout  the  Revolution.  About
1784  he  removed  to  Southborough.  He  died  on
the  voyage  from  Boston  to  Portland.  Me.

NIXON,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
in  1733 ;  d.  there,  31  Dec.,  1808.  His  grandparents
emigrated  to  America  at  the  close  of  the  17th
century  from  Wexford,  County  Wexford,  Ireland.
His  father,  Rich
ard,  was  a  shipping-
merchant,  in  1738
built  Nixon's  wharf
on  Delaware  river,
and  was  a  member
of  the  city  council
from  1724  till  his
death.  On  the  or
ganization  of  the
"  Associators,"  for
home  defence  dur
ing  the  French  and
Spanish  war,  he  was
chosen  captain  of
the  Dock-yard  com
pany.  Trie  son  suc
ceeded  to  the  busi
ness  of  his  father.
and  in  1756,  during
the  excitement  of
the  French  war,  was  elected  lieutenant  of  the  com
pany  of  which  his  father  had  been  captain  on
its  organization.  In  1765  he  signed  the  non-im
portation  agreement  against  the  stamp-act,  and
from  that  time  onward  was  foremost  in  opposition
to  the  usurpations  of  the  crown.  He  was  one  of
the  wardens  of  the  port  of  Philadelphia  in  1766,  a
member  of  the  committee  that  was  appointed  at
town-meeting,  20  May,  1774.  to  reply  to  the  letter
from  the  citizens  of  Boston,  carried  by  Paul
Revere,  and  a  month  later  was  made  a  member  of
the  first  committee  of  correspondence.  He  was
a  deputy  to  the  conventions  of  the  province  in
1774-'5.  In  April,  1775,  the  Associators  were  again
called  into  being,  and  he  was  made  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  3d  battalion,  known  as  "  the  silk
stockings."  He  was  a  member  of  the  committee
of  safety  from  its  organization  until  its  dissolu
tion,  and  presided  at  its  meetings  in  the  absence
of  its  chairman.  In  May,  1776,  he  had  charge  of
the  defences  of  the  Delaware,  at  Fort  island,  and
in  July  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  guard  of
the  city.  On  4  July  congress  adopted  the  Decla
ration  of  Independence,  on  the  5th  it  was  ordered
that  it  should  be  proclaimed  in  each  of  the  United
States  and  at  the  head  of  the  army,  on  the  6th  the
committee  of  safety  of  Philadelphia  ordered  that
it  should  be  read  and  proclaimed  at  the  state-house
on  Monday,  8  July,  at  noon.  At  that  time  and
place,  by  popular  appointment,  John  Nixon  read
and  proclaimed  to  the  people  publicly  for  the  first
time  the  Declaration  of  Independence.  In  July
he  took  his  battalion  of  Associators  to  Amboy,
where  they  had  six  weeks'  service,  and  in  Decem
ber,  having  been  made  colonel  to  succeed  John
Cadwalader,  who  had  been  commissioned  brigadier-
general,  he  marched  with  his  battalion  to  Trenton,
and  remained  with  Washington's  army  until  late
in  January,  taking  part  in  the  battle  of  Princeton.
He  was  a  member  of  the  navy  board  in  1776,  and
in  the  winter  of  1778  was  at  Valley  Forge  with  the
troops.  In  1780,  on  the  formation  of  the  bank  to
supply  the  army  with  provisions,  he  was  made  first
director,  and  he  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the


526


NIXON


NOAH


Bank  of  North  America  in  1783,  and  its  second
president  from  1793  until  his  death.  His  son,
Henry,  married  Maria,  daughter  of  Robert  Morris,
and  subsequently  became  fourth  president  of  the
Bank  of  North  America.

NIXON,  John  Thompson,  jurist,  b.  in  Fairton,
N.  J.,  31  Aug.,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at  Prince
ton  in  1841,  studied  law.  was  admitted  to  the  bar
of  Virginia  in  1844,  and  to  that  of  New  Jersey  in
1845,  and  began  to  practise  in  Bridgeton,  N.  J.  In
1848-'9  he  was  a  member  of  the  New  Jersey  legis
lature,  acting  as  speaker  in  the  latter  year.  He
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  serving
from  5  Dec.,  1859,  till  3  March,  1863,  and  was  an
active  member  of  the  committee  on  commerce.  In
1870  he  was  appointed  by  President  Grant  U.  S.
judge  for  the  district  of  New  Jersey.  In  1803  lie
delivered  the  annual  address  before  the  two  literary
societies  of  Princeton  on  "  Endurance,  Individual
and  National,"  and  in  1864  he  was  made  a  trustee
of  this  college.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the
old-school  assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in
1869,  in  promoting  the  reunion  of  its  two  branches,
and  was  a  member  of  the  general  assembly's  com
mittee  to  revise  the  form  of  government  and  book
of  discipline.  Mr.  Nixon  is  one  of  the  four  resid
uary  legatees  designated  by  the  late  John  C.  Green,
charged  with  the  distribution  to  benevolent  objects
of  an  estate  exceeding  $7,000.000.  He  prepared  the
second,  third,  and  fourth  editions  of  Judge  Lucius
Q.  C.  Elmer's  '•  Digest  of  the  Laws  of  New  Jersey,"
known  as  "  Nixon's  Digest "  (4th  ed.,  Newark,
1868);  .and  also  "Forms  of  Proceedings  under  the
Laws  of  New  Jersey"  (2d  ed.,  Trenton,  1850).

NIZA,  Marcos  de  (ne-sah),  Italian  missionary,
b.  in  Nice  in  the  latter  part  of  the  loth  century ;
d.  in  Mexico  in  1542.  He  became  a  Franciscan
friar,  and  was  sent  in  1531  as  a  missionary  to  New
Spain,  but  heard  in  Hispaniolu  of  the  first  expedi
tion  of  Francisco  Pizarro  (q.  v.),  and  resolved  to  go
to  the  newly  discovered  countries.  He  went  first
to  Panama,  and  from  there  to  Nicaragua,  preach
ing  on  his  way,  and  joining  Velalcazar  accompa
nied  him  to  Peru  in  1532.  He  was  present  at  the
capture  of  Cajamarca,  witnessed  the  death  of  Ata-
hulapa,  and  was  afterward  appointed  commissary
of  his  order  in  Peru,  but,  not  agreeing  with  the
conquerors  about  their  treatment  of  the  Indians,
left  Peru  in  1535  and  came  to  Mexico.  There,  on
account  of  his  learning,  he  was  soon  appointed  pro
vincial  of  the  Santo  Evangelico  province,  and.  de
siring  to  convert  the  northern  Indians,  he  resolved
to  visit  their  countries.  Accompanied  by  another
friar,  and  guided  by  the  negro  Stephen,  one  of  the
companions  of  Cabeza  de  Vaca,  he  set  out  from
Culiacan  on  7  March,  1539.  On  reaching  Cibola
he  sent  forward  Stephen  with  a  party  of  friendly
Indians  to  ask  admission ;  but  the  Zufiis  attacked
them  on  their  way,  and  the  guide  was  killed.  Mar
cos  then  determined  not  to  advance  farther  than  a
hill  that  commanded  Cibola,  and,  planting  a  cross
there,  took  possession  of  the  country  for  the  king
of  Spain.  It  is  generally  admitted  that  he  pene
trated  as  far  as  one  of  the  present  towns  of  the
Pueblo  Indians  of  New  Mexico.  Returning  to
Mexico  he  gave  such  a  marvellous  account  of  the
riches  of  the  countries  that  he  had  visited  that  the
Spanish  cupidity  became  excited.  The  viceroy,  An
tonio  de  Mendoza.  prepared  an  expedition,  of  which
Francisco  Vasquez  de  Coronado  (q.  v.)  was  appoint
ed  commander,  and  Marcos  accompanied  the  ad
venturers  as  guide.  Cibola  was  taken  by  storm,
but  it  far  from  realized  the  expectations  of  the
Spaniards,  and  they  reproached  the  missionary
with  his  false  account.  Coronado  at  last  calmed


their  indignation,  and  Niza  was  allowed  to  proceed
unmolested  to  Mexico,  where  he  arrived  in  Novem
ber,  1540,  worn  out  by  fatigue  and  nearly  crippled.
He  spent  some  months  in  the  convent  of  Jalapa  for
his  health,  but,  feeling  no  improvement,  he  returned
to  the  convent  of  Mexico  early  in  1542,  and  died  in
the  same  year.  His  report  to  the  viceroy,  "  Rela-
cion  del  descubrimiento  de  los  siete  Ciudades  y
Reino  de  Cibola  al  Norte  de  Mexico  y  400  leguas
distante  de  la  Capital."  in  manuscript,  is  in  the  ar
chives  of  Simancas.  It  was  translated  into  Italian
by  Giambattista  Ramusio  in  his  "Raccoltas  di  Na-
vigazioni "  (3  vols.,  1550-'9),  into  English  by  Rich
ard  Hakluyt  in  his  "  Voyages "  (1600),  and  into
French  by  Henri  Ternaux-Compans  in  his  "Col
lections"  (1836-'40).  It  is  full  of  improbabilities,
and  in  part  even  contradicted  by  Coronado's  re
port  r  but  many  facts  that  he  related,  which  were  at
that  time  considered  as  absurd,  have  been  verified.

NI/A,  Tadeo  de,  Mexican  missionary,  b.  about
1500;  d.  in  1561.  lie  was  the  son  of  an  Indian
cacique,  but  was  converted  to  Christianity,  and  be
came  the  godson  of  Father  Marcos  de  Niza,  whose
surname  he  adopted.  He  entered  the  Franciscan
order  and  was  of  great  help  to  its  members  as  an
interpreter.  He  wrote  by  order  of  the  viceroy,  An
tonio  de  Mendoza,  "  Ilistoria  del  Reyno  de  Tenoch-
t  it  Ian,  y  de  su  conquista,  firmada  de  treinta  Senores
de  Tlaxcala  en  Mexico,  1548,"  which  is  said  to  be  a
very  valuable  history  of  the  Aztec  sovereigns,  owing
to  the  author's  perfect  knowledge  of  the  Indian
dialects  and  traditions.  The  manuscript  is  now  in
the  archives  of  Simancas.

NOAH,  Mordeeai  Manuel,  journalist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa,.  14  July,  1785  ;  d.  in  New  York
city.  22  May,  1851.  He  engaged  in  trade,  but  soon
studied  law,  and,  removing  to  Charleston,  S.  C.,
turned  his  attention
to  politics.  In  1811
he  was  appointed  by
President  Madison
U.  S.  consul  at  Riga,
Russia,  but  declined,
and  in  1813  secured
the  post  of  consul-
general  at  Tunis,  with
a  special  mission  to
Algiers.  His  consul
ship  was  made  mem
orable  by  his  rescue
of  several  Americans
that  were  held  as
slaves  in  the  Barbary
states,  and  he  protest
ed  against  the  pay
ment  of  an  annual
tribute  to  the  pirate  government  of  Morocco  as  se
curity  for  the  American  merchant  marine.  On  his
return  to  New  York  he  entered  journalism,  and
founded  and  edited  in  rapid  succession  the  "  Na
tional  Advertiser,"  the  "  Courier  and  Enquirer,"  the
"  Evening  Star,"  and  the  "  Sunday  Times."  As  sur
veyor  of  the  port,  to  which  post  he  was  appointed
by  Gen.  Jackson  in  1832,  and  judge  of  the  court  of
sessions,  he  enjoyed  civic  esteem,  while  his  personal
efforts  as  sheriff  in  behalf  of  imprisoned  debtors
showed  the  warmer  side  of  his  nature,  which  politi
cal  and  journalistic  strife  could  not  stifle.  A  curi
ous  incident  of  his  life  was  his  project  in  1820"
to  rehabilitate  the  Jewish  nation  at  Grand  island
in  Niagara  river.  His  enthusiasm  went  so  far  that
he  erected  at  Whitehaven,  on  the  eastern  side  of
the  island,  opposite  Tonawanda,  a  monument  of
brick  and  wood,  with  the  inscription  "  Ararat,  a
City  of  Refuge  for  the  Jews,  founded  by  Mordeeai


NOA1LLES


NOBLE


M.  Xoah  in  the  Month  of  Tishri,  5586  [September,
1825]  and  in  the  Fiftieth  Year  of  American  Inde
pendence."  This  has  since  disappeared.  His  most
important  published  work  is  "  Travels  in  England,
France,  Spain,  and  the  Barbary  States  "  (London.
1819).  He  wrote,  in  addition,  a  large  mass  of
miscellaneous  addresses  and  essays,  political  and
religious,  a  collection  of  which  appeared  under  the
title  •'  Gleanings  from  a  Gathered  Harvest "  (New
York,  1845).  His  addresses  include  one  on  the
"Restoration  of  the  Jews "(1845).  He  also  pub
lished  a  "Translation  of  the  Book  of  Jasher"
(1840),  and  was  the  author  of  several  successful
dramas,  including  "  The  Fortress  of  Sorrente,"
"  Paul  and  Alexander,"  "  She  would  be  a  Soldier."
"  Marion,  or  the  Hero  of  Lake  George,"  "  The
Grecian  Captive,"  and  '•  The  Siege  of  Tripoli."

NOAILLES,  Louis  Marie,  Viscount  de  (no-ay),
French  soldier,  b.  in  Paris,  17  April,  1756;  d.  in
Havana.  Cuba.  9  Jan.,  1804.  He  was  a  brother-in-
law  of  the  Marquis  de  Lafayette,  and  entered  the
army  in  1771  as  major  of  the  Xoailles  regiment.
He  was  a  brevet  brigadier-general  when  he  went  in
1779  to  the  United  States  as  a  volunteer.  He  took
part  in  the  campaigns  of  1779-'81,  fought  under
D'Estaing  at  Savannah,  and  at  Yorktown  was  com
missioned  to  arrange  with  Cornwallis  the  details  of
the  capitulation.  He  was  elected  in  1789  to  the
states-general  by  the  nobility  of  Xemours,  but,  being
imbued  with  democratic  principles,  he  proposed  in
the  night  of  14  July  the  abolition  of  the  privileges
of  the  nobility,  and  the  motion  was  carried  with
enthusiasm  through  his  eloquence.  He  presided
over  the  constituent  assembly  in  1791,  but  when
the  reign  of  terror  began  he  emigrated  to  England
in  May,  1795,  and  in  the  following  January  to  the
United  States,  where  he  lived  for  ten  years.  He
settled  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  engaged  in  bank
ing,  and  soon  made  a  fortune.  He  was  also  ad
mitted  to  the  bar.  Early  in  1803  business  interests
made  his  presence  necessary  in  Santo  Domingo,
and  he  sailed  for  Port  au  Prince,  to  find  the  colony
in  a  state  of  anarchy.  Gen.  Rochambeau,  his
former  companion  in  the  United  States,  was  at  the
head  of  the  French  forces  ,and  immediately  gave
the  viscount  an  important  command.  Xoailles  de
feated  the  insurgents  in  several  encounters,  stormed
Fort  Dauphin,  and  being  besieged  there  afterward
by  overwhelming  forces  defended  himself  for  five
months.  Running  short  of  ammunition,  and  pro
visions  being  almost  exhausted,  he  tried  vainly  to
break  through  the  British  fleet,  and  then  tried  a
difficult  enterprise,  which  succeeded  through  his
boldness.  Embarking  his  troops  he  awaited  the
arrival  of  the  English  supply  fleet,  and  during  a
dark  night  sailed  in  company  with  it  for  some  time,
reaching  Santiago  de  Cuba  in  safety.  There  he
made  preparation  to  send  his  troops  to  France,
and,  sailing  with  300  men  on  a  brigantine  for
Havana,  encountered  at  sea  an  English  man-of-
war,  which  he  captured  after  a  desperate  combat
on  31  Dec.,  but  was  mortally  wounded  during  the
action.  He  reached  Havana.  1  Jan.,  1804,  and  soon
died.  His  last  battle  has  been  represented  on  can
vas  by  the  marine  painter.  Jean  Gudin.

NO BIH,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rome.  Italy.  8
April.  1812  ;  d.  in  Santa  Clara.  Cal.,  1  March.  1856.
He  belonged  to  a  well-known  family,  and  his  early
education  was  directed  by  some  of  the  best  masters
in  Rome.  In  1828  he  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus,
and.  after  filling  professorships  in  the  colleges  of
the  order  in  Italy,  he  was  ordained  priest  in  1843.
A  short  time  afterward  he  accompanied  Father  De
Srnet  (q.  r.)  to  Oregon,  where  he  took  charge  of
the  men  of  the  Hudson  bay  company  and  the


Indians  along  the  shores  of  Columbia  river.  He
gained  the  affection  of  the  latter  by  his  fearlessness
and  devotion  during  a  virulent  epidemic,  and
availed  himself  of  his  popularity  among  them  to
acquire  a  knowledge  of  their  languages.  In  June,
1845,  he  began  to  visit  the  tribes  of  New  Caledonia.
His  journal,  dated  Fort  Colville.  June,  1846.  and
published  in  the  "  Oregon  Missions "  (Xew  York,
1847).  gives  a  vivid  description  of  his  labors  and
privations.  He  spent  eleven  days  among  the  In
dians  of  Xesqually  river,  and  during  that  time
abolished  among  them  the  custom  of  burning  the
dead  and  inflicting  torments  on  the  bodies  of  the
surviving  wives  and  husbands.  Among  the  Chil-
cotins  he  succeeded  first  in  abolishing  polygamy,
and  then  in  converting  the  several  tribes.  He  was
equally  successful  among  other  tribes,  and  built  a
large  number  of  frame  churches.  During  one
year  he  lived  on  herbs  and  roots,  and  for  the  six
years  when  he  resided  with  the  Indians  his  chief
food  was  the  flesh  of  horses,  dogs,  and  sometimes
of  wolves.  In  1849  he  was  ordered  by  his  superi
ors  to  California.  After  staying  a  few  months  in
San  Francisco  to  recruit  his  enfeebled  constitution,
he  was  sent  to  San  Jose.  His  labors  during  the
cholera  in  1850  made  his  name  well  known  over  a
large  part,  of  the  country.  He  was  appointed  pas
tor  of  the  mission  of  Santa  Clara  in  1851,  and
shortly  afterward  founded  the  College  of  Santa
Clara,  which  grew  into  prosperity  under  his  direc
tion,  and  was  for  a  long  time  the  principal  seat  of
learning  in  California.

NOBLE,  Annette  Lucile,  author,  b.  in  Albion,
Orleans  co.,  X.  Y.,  12  July,- 1844.  She  was  gradu
ated  at  Phipps  Union  seminary,  Albion,  in  1863,
and  has  contributed  largely  to  magazines  and  jour
nals.  Her  stories  have  been  translated  into  several
languages,  and  her  books  for  the  young  have  had  a
large  circulation  in  Holland.  She  is  the  author  of
"Eleanor  Willoughby  "  (Boston,  1870);  "St.  Au
gustine's  Ladder ''  (1872) ;  "  Judge  Branard's  Infan
try"  (Philadelphia,  1873);  "  Under  Shelter  "  (Xew
York,  1876) ;  "  Out  of  the  Way  "  (1877) ;  "  The  Queer
House  in  Rugby  Court "  (1878) ;  "  Silas  Gower's
Daughters"  (1878);  "Uncle  Jack's  Executors"
(1880);  "Eunice  Lathrop,  Spinster "(1881);  "How
Billy  went  up  in  the  World  "  (1883) :  "  Miss  Janet's
Old'House  "  (1884) :  "  The  Professor's  Girls  "  (1885),
with  a  sequel  (1888);  "Dave  Marquand"  (1886);
and  "After  the  Failure"  (Philadelphia,  1887).

NOBLE,  Anguste  Emile,  French  explorer,  b.
in  Essequibo,  Guiana,  in  1771 ;  d.  in  Fontainebleau
in  1827.  Inheriting  a  large  fortune,  he  followed
his  taste  for  travel  and  adventure,  and  undertook,
in  1796,  an  expedition  to  the  provinces  that  are
watered  by  the  Xapo,  which  were  then  credited
with  fabulous  riches.  He  explored  this  country
for  three  years  and  lived  for  several  months  among
the  Yumbo  Indians,  but,  being  unable  to  find  any
riches,  crossed  the  Andes  to  Peru,  and  arrived  in
Lima  in  1800.  He  afterward  visited  Chili,  and  re
sided  several  years  in  Buenos  Ayres,  but  left  that
city  in  1810  at  the  beginning  of  the  movement  for
independence,  and  sailed  for  Martinique.  He  was
captured  by  an  English  man-of-war  and  detained
in  Jamaica  till  1814.  and  his  papers  were  confis
cated.  He  afterward  fixed  his  residence  in  Fon
tainebleau.  Xoble  published  "  Voyage  au  cours  du
Xapo  "  (Paris,  1819) ;  "  Etudes  sur  les  Indiens  de
1'Amerique  du  Sud  (1821):  "  Grammaire  compa-
ree  des  langues  Charrua  et  Quechua ''  (1823) ;  "  An-
nales  des  voyages  entrepris  au  XVIe,  XVII6,  et
XVIIIe  .siecle  a  la  recherche  de  1'El  Dorado  "  (1824) ;
and  "  Considerations  generates  sur  la  formation  des
langues  Indiennes"  (1826).


528


NOBLE


NOBREGA


NOBLE,  James,  senator,  b.  in  Battletown,  Fred
erick  co.,  Va.,  about  1790 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,
26  Feb.,  1831.  In  his  youth  he  removed  to  Ken
tucky  with  his  family,  and  he  subsequently  settled
in  Indiana,  educated  himself,  and  became  influen
tial  in  the  politics  of  that  state.  He  was  one  of  the
first  U.  S.  senators  from  Indiana,  serving  from  13
Dec.,  1816,  until  his  death.

NOBLE,  John  Willoek,  lawyer,  b.  in  Lan
caster,  Ohio,  26  Oct.,  1831.  He  was  educated  at
Miami  university,  Ohio,  and  at  Yale,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1851,  studied  law.  and  was  city  attor
ney  of  Keokuk,  Iowa,  in  1859-'60.  He  became  1st
lieutenant  and  adjutant  in  the  3d  Iowa  cavalry  in
August,  1861,  and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Athens,
Mo.,  as  a  private  before  he  was  mustered  into  ser
vice.  He  became  judge-advocate  of  the  Army  of
the  Southwest,  and  afterward  of  the  Department
of  Missouri,  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Pea  Ridge
and  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  and  served  under  Gen.
Andrew  J.  Smith  against  Forrest,  and  under  Gen.
James  H.  Wilson  in  Alabama  and  Georgia,  lie
was  bre vetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  13
March,  1865,  mustered  out  at  Atlanta  in  August,
and  resumed  the  practice  of  law,  serving  as  U.  S.
district  attorney  at  St.  Louis  in  1867-'70,  and  re
ceiving  the  thanks  of  Gen.  Grant  before  the  cabinet
in  1869.  He  has  won  reputation  in  his  profession,
and  has  taken  part  in  many  important  suits.

NOBLE,  Louis  Legrand,  clergyman,  b.  in
Lisbon,  N.  Y.,  26  Sept.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Ionia,  Mich.,  6
Feb.,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Bristol  college,
Pa.,  in  1837,  and  at  the  General  theological  semi
nary  in  New  York  city  in  1840,  was  ordained  dea
con,  28  June,  1840,  by  Bishop  Benjamin  T.  Onder-
donk,  and  priest,  4  June,  1841,  by  Bishop  Ives.  He
was  assistant  minister  in  St.  Peter's  church,  Al
bany,  N.  Y.,  in  1840.  rector  of  Christ  church,
Elizabeth  City,  N.  C.,  in  1841-'4,  rector  of  St.
Luke's  church,  Catskill,  N.  Y.,  in  1844,  of  Grace
Church,  Chicago,  111.,  in  1855.  of  the  Church  of
the  Messiah,  Glenn's  Falls,  N.  Y.,  in  1856,  of  Trinity
church,  Fredonia,  N.  Y.,  in  1857,  of  Christ  church,
Hudson,  N.  Y.,  in  1859,  and  of  St.  John's  church,
Ionia,  Mich.,  in  1880.  In  addition  to  parochial
work,  Mr.  Noble  also  served  as  professor  of  English
and  history  in  St.  Stephen's  college,  Annandale,
N.  Y.,  being  appointed  in  1874.  Besides  shorter
poems,  he  published  "  Ne-Ma-Min,  an  Indian
Story,"  in  three  cantos  (1852);  "The  Course  of
Empire,  Voyage  of  Life,  and  other  Pictures  of
Thomas  Cole,  N.  A.,  with  Selections  from  his  Let
ters  and  Miscellaneous  Writings,  Illustrative  of  his
Life,  Character,  and  Genius"  (New  York,  1853);
"  The  Lady  Angeline,  a  Lay  of  the  Appalachians  ;
the  Hours,  and  other  Poems"  (1857);  and  "A
Voyage  to  the  Arctic  Seas  in  Search  of  Icebergs,
with  Church,  the  Artist "  (1861).

NOBLE,  Patrick,  governor  of  South  Carolina,
b.  in  Abbeville  district,  S.  C.,  in  1787;  d.  there,  7
April,  1840.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1806,  studied  law  with  John  C.  Calhoun,  and  was
his  partner  after  being  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1809.
He  was  elected  to  the  state  house  of  representatives
in  1812,  and  was  its  speaker  from  1818  till  1824,
and  again  in  1832.  In  1836  he  was  made  president
of  the  state  senate,  and  he  was  governor  of  South
Carolina  from  1838  till  1840.  He  was  a  state-rights
Democrat,  and  was  popular  with  the  masses.

NO  BO  A,  Diego,  South  American  statesman,  b.
in  Guayaquil  in  1789  ;  d.  there,  3  Nov.,  1870.  He
studied  law  in  Quito  and  afterward  returned  to
Guayaquil,  where  he  took  part  in  the  revolution  of
9  Oct.,  1820.  The  government  appointed  him  treas
urer  of  the  province,  which  post  he  retained  when


the  latter  was  incorporated  with  Colombia  as  a  de
partment.  In  1827  he  was  elected  intendant  of
Guayaquil,  to  oppose  the  dictatorship  of  Simon
Bolivar,  but,  when  the  reaction  in  favor  of  the  latter
took  place  a  few  months  afterward,  Noboa  was
obliged  to  go  into  exile.  He  returned  in  1830,
when  Ecuador  was  declared  an  independent  repub
lic,  and  was  appointed  minister  to  Peru.  After
ward  he  was  elected  senator  of  the  republic,  and
later,  by  popular  vote,  member  of  the  provisional
government  that  was  established  in  consequence  of
the  revolution  of  6  March,  1845,  against  Gen.
P^lores.  In  1850  he  was  elected  supreme  chief  of
the  republic,  and  afterward  the  national  convention
at  Quito  appointed  him  constitutional  president  of
Ecuador.  On  17  July,  1851,  a  military  revolution
overthrew  his  government  and  obliged  him  to  go
to  Central  America  and  Peru.  In  1856  he  returned
to  Guayaquil,  where  he  died  in  retirement.

NOBOA,  Manuel  Vasquez  de,  Chilian  states
man,  b.  in  Concepcion  in  1783;  d.  in  Santiago  in
1855.  In  1803  he  was  graduated  in  law,  but,  when
in  1810  the  war  of  independence  began,  he  took
part  in  it  on  the  patriot  side.  At  a  popular  meet
ing  in  Concepcion,  to  appoint  a  junta  like  that  of
Santiago,  he  was  elected  one  of  its  members.  When
the  Spanish  expedition  under  Gen.  Pareja  (q.  v.)
landed  in  San  Vicente.  26  March,  1812,  the  latter
proposed  to  the  junta  a  basis  of  arrangement  by
which  they  should  recognize  Ferdinand  VII.  No-
boa,  who  presided  over  the  junta,  fearing  that  the
members  might  be  inclined  to  submit,  refused  to
discuss  the  conditions,  and  left  for  the  capital  in
quest  of  the  army.  At  La  Angostura  he  met  Gen.
Carrera,  who  inarched  against  Concepeion,  and
Noboa  took  part  in  the  campaign  of  the  south  as
military  judge.  After  the  defeat  of  Rancagua  he
emigrated  with  his  family  to  the  Argentine  Repub
lic,  where  he  met  the  rival  generals  0'IIiggins  and
Carrera.  When  the  two  brothers  Carrera  were
shot  in  Mendoza,  Noboa  was  their  defender,  for
which  act  he  was  exiled  to  Buenos  Ayres,  where  he
suffered  great  poverty.  Afterward  he  went  to
Montevideo,  where  he  was  appointed  attorney-
general  of  the  province,  but,  fearing  that  the
Spaniards  would  take  possession  of  Montevideo
again,  he  returned  to  Chili  in  1819.  On  his  arrival
at  Valparaiso  he  was  imprisoned  by  order  of  the
supreme  director,  and  exiled  to  Peru,  where  he  was
appointed  district  attorney  of  Tmjillo.  He  re
turned  to  Chili  after  the  fall  of  OTIiggins,  and,  in
consequence  of  the  dissensions  between  the  three
provinces,  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  commis
sion  that  promulgated  the  act  of  union  of  the  prov
inces  and  the  organic  laws.  During  the  govern
ment  of  Freire  he  formed  part  of  the  senate  that
passed  the  law  for  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  Chili.
24  July,  1823,  and  in  1825  he  was  appointed  min
ister  of  the  supreme  court  of  justice.  He  was
deputy  to  the  convention  of  1828,  and  afterward
councillor  of  state.

NOBREtrA,  Manoel  de  (no-bray-gah),  b.  in  Por
tugal  in  1517;  d.  in  Brazil  in  1570.  He  entered
the  Jesuit  novitiate  of  Coimbra  in  1544,  and  em
barked  for  Brazil  in  1549  at  the  head  of  a  band  of
missionaries.  After  landing  he  endeavored  to  re
form  the  Portuguese  colonists,  whose  vices  interfered
with  his  success  in  converting  the  natives.  Not
succeeding  in  this,  he  set  out  alone  and  on  foot  to
travel  among  the  native  tribes,  many  of  whom
were  cannibals.  He  was  the  first  Jesuit  in  America
that  attempted  this  task.  He  induced  thousands
of  Indians  to  give  up  their  roving  life  and  to  form
Christian  colonies,  where  they  were  gradually
trained  to  habits  of  industry.  Even  in  his  old  age


XODA


XOGARET


529


he  continued  to  visit  these  converts,  always  going
on  foot  from  one  colony  to  another.  When  the
Portuguese  colony  was  in  danger  of  ruin  from  the
attacks  of  the  Tamayos,  Nobrega  offered  to  go
among  the  savages  and  try  to  obtain  peace.  He
was  accompanied  by  the  missionary  Jose  de  An-
chieta  (q.  v.),  and  was  successful  in  his  mission.
Nobrega  was  afterward  regarded  as  the  savior  of
the  colony.  He  was  for  twenty  years  before  his
death  provincial  of  the  Jesuits  in  Brazil,  during
which  period  he  established  numerous  residences
and  colleges,  and  was  instrumental  in  civilizing  a
large  part  of  the  country.  Among  his  works  are  a
series  of  letters  that  describe  his  missionary  work
in  Brazil.  They  were  written  between  1545  and
1555,  and  a  translation  into  Italian  was  published
at  Venice  (1559).  He  also  wrote  *'  Carta  escrita  da
Citade  de  San  Salvador  de  Bahia  no  anno  de  1550,
ao  P.  Geral,"  Latin  translation  (Louvain,  15(39).  A
large  number  of  manuscripts  containing  Nobrega's
letters  and  diaries,  written  in  Brazil,  are  preserved
in  the  library  of  the  Jesuit  college  at  Lisbon.  His
life  has  been  written  by  Charles  Sainte  Foy.

NODA,  Tranqailino  S.  de  (no-dah),  Cuban  au
thor,  b.  in  Guanajay  in  September,  1808;  d.  in  Ha
vana  in  May,  1807.  He  began  his  literary  career  in
1827  by  an  exhaustive  memoir  on  the  cultivation  of
the  coffee-plant,  to  which  a  first  prize  was  awarded
by  the  Sociedad  economica  of  Havana.  In  1831  he
passed  his  examination  as  land-surveyor,  and  began
to  survey  the  western  part  of  Cuba,  drawing  maps
of  several  parts  of  the  island.  By  this  time  he
began  also  to  write  papers  on  the  history  of  Cuba,
which  were  published  in  "Memorias  de  la  Sociedad
Econumica."  In  1838  he  wrote  "  Cartas  a  Silvia,"  a
collection  of  interesting  papers  about  the  traditions,
legends,  geography,  and  natural  history  of  Cuba.
He  made  a  voyage  to  Yucatan  in  1839,  and  the  re
sults  of  his  investigations  in  that  country  were  em
bodied  in  his  "  Apuntes  sobre  Yucatan."  He  also
wrote  "  Educacion  Elemental  "  (1847),  and  "  Eco-
nomia  Politica  aplicada  a  Cuba"  (1859).  The  gov
ernment  intrusted  him  with  several  important  com
missions  relating  to  the  statistics  and  topography
of  the  island.  To  his  efforts  were  due  the  opening
of  new  roads,  the  establishment  of  new  lines  of
steamers,  and  the  creation  of  several  scientific  and
learned  societies  to  develop  the  agricultural  and  in
dustrial  resources  of  Cuba.  In  1863  he  began  the
publication  of  an  historical  novel,  "  Habaguanex,"
the  last  cacique  of  Havana,  which  he  left  incomplete.
Among  his  other  literary  works  are  •'  El  Atlante
Cubano."  "  Xuevo  Arte  de  Taquigrafia,"  numerous
scientific  papers  on  various  subjects,  sketches  for
two  dictionaries  of  African  languages,  and  transla
tions  in  verse  of  Voltaire's  tragedies  "Adelaide
Duguesclin"  and  "Jules  Cesar."

NODAL,  Bartolome  tfarcia  and  (Jonzalo  (no'-
dal),  Spanish  navigators,  b.  in  Pontevedra.  prov
ince  of  Galicia,  at  the  beginning  of  the  17th  cen-  I
tury.  Philip  III.,  being  very  uneasy  on  account  of
the  facility  with  which  the  Dutch  crossed  in
twenty-four  hours  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific
by  the  Strait  of  Le  Maire,  tried  to  close  the  route
by  building  forts  on  both  sides,  and  equipped  two
ships  for  the  purpose,  commanded  by  the  brothers
Xodal,  appointing  Diego  Ramirez  de  Arellano  as
pilot  and  cosmographer.  They  left  Lisbon,  27
Sept.,  1618,  and  touched  at  Rio  Janeiro,  whence
they  sailed  on  6  Dec.  The  Xodals  were  the  first
that  took  exact  soundings  of  the  gradual  slope  of
the  South  Atlantic.  On  6  Jan.,  1G19.  they  discov
ered  islands,  which  they  called  Los  Reyes.  They
arrived  on  the  19th  at  the  Cape  of  Virgins,  on  the
22d  at  Cape  Le  Maire,  which  they  called  San  Vi-
VOL.  iv. — 34


cente,  and  soon  afterward  they  discovered  the  Bay
of  Buen  Succeso,  where  they  anchored.  After  de
termining  the  latitude  of  Cape  Horn,  they  discov
ered  a  small  number  of  islands,  which  they  called
Diego  Ramirez,  and  which  were  during  a  century
and  a  half  the  most  southern  land  that  was  known.
They  returned  to  Europe  in  July,  1619,  after  a
voyage  of  nine  months.  Although  Philip  III.  was
not  wholly  satisfied  with  the  result  of  the  voyage,
the  Spanish  discoveries  in  South  America  'were
completed  by  it.  The  Nodals  published  a  narra
tive,  with  several  charts,  entitled  "  Relacion  del
viaje  que  hicieron  los  capitanes  Bartolome  Garcia
y  Gonzalo  de  Xodal  al  descubrimiento  de  un  es-
trecho  nuevo"  (Madrid,  1621;  Cadiz,  1766).

NOEL,  Nicolas,  French  physician,  b.  in  Rheims,
27  March,  1746;  d.  there,  11 'May,  1832.  He  was
the  son  of  poor  laborers,  and  apprenticed  in  his
youth  to  a  blacksmith,  but,  as  he  showed  a  taste
for  science,  the  vicar  of  his  parish  became  inter
ested  in  him,  and  obtained  for  him  a  fellowship
in  the  Paris  university.  Xoel  had  not  finished  his
studies  when  he  came  to  the  United  States  in
1776,  and,  offering  his  services  to  congress,  was  ap
pointed  surgeon  of  a  regiment  in  Gen.  Xathanael
Greene's  division.  He  served  afterward  in  the  same
capacity  on  board  the  frigate  '•  Boston,"  organized
the  military  hospitals  in  Philadelphia,  and  was
present  at  the  fall  of  Yorktown  in  1781.  On  his
return  to  France  in  1784  he  became  house  surgeon
of  the  Hotel  Dieu  of  Rheims,  entered  the  army  in
1792,  and  was  appointed  in  1793  inspector  of  mili
tary  hospitals  in  Belgium,  but  resigned  in  1795,  and
returned  to  Rheims,  where  he  founded  an  academy
of  medicine  and  a  botanic  garden.  Among  his
works  are  "Journal  d'un  chirurgien  pendant  la
guerre  pour  1'independance  des  colonies  anglaises
de  I'Amerique  du  Xord  "  (Rheims,  1787);  "Traite
historique  et  pratique  de  1'inoculation "  (1789);
and  "  Dissertation  sur  la  necessite  de  reunir  les  con-
naissances  chirurgicales  et  medicales"  (Paris,  1804).

NOOARET,  Stanislas  Henry  Lncien  de,
French  colonist,  b.  in  Marseilles  in  1682;  d.  in
Paris  in  1759.  His  father  was  a  well-known  magis
trate,  and  he  was  educated  for  the  bar,  but,  being
of  an  adventurous  turn  of  mind,  he  left  college
when  scarcely  sixteen  years  old,  and,  enlisting  in
the  army,  served  in  Canada  for  several  years.
Being  assigned  in  1716  to  Louisiana,  he  was  ap
pointed  by  Bienville  (q.  r.)  commander  of  Fort  Ro
salie,  which  had  been  built  a  few  months  before.
The  French  afterward  began  settlements  in  the
basin  of  the  lower  Mississippi,  which  the  Xatchez,
Yazoo,  and  Chickasaw  Indians  destroyed  several
times,  but  Xogaret  formed  an  alliance  with  the
Choctaws  that  enabled  the  French  to  hold  out
against  their  opponents  till  1729,  when  the  Xatchez
stormed  and  burned  Fort  Rosalie  and  murdered
nearly  all  the  settlers,  only  a  few  escaping  with
Xogaret  to  the  Choctaw  villages.  A  few  months
later  Xogaret,  at  the  head  of  a  force  of  French  and
Indian  allies,  re-entered  the  country,  drove  out  the
Xatchez,  and  rebuilt  the  fortress.  During  the  fol
lowing  years  the  French  extended  their  possessions.
Xogaret  contributed  much  to  the  welfare  and  im
provement  of  the  new  colony,  and  founded  also  sev
eral  establishments  in  the  Choctaw  territory.  The
death  of  his  father  and  eldest  brother  left  him  in
1735  heir  to  a  large  estate,  and.  returning  to
France  to  take  possession  of  it,  he  became  a  direc
tor  of  the  Louisiana  company.  XTogaret  published
"  Precis  des  etablissements  fondes  dans  la  vallec
du  Mississippi  par  le  Chevalier  Le  Moyne  de  Bien
ville,  suivi  d'une  histoire  des  guerres'avec  les  In-
diens  Xatchez"  (Paris,  1738).


530


NOG  RE


NOGRE,  Vincent  de  (no-gray),  French  admin
istrator,  b.  in  Blois  in  1629;  d.  in  Paris  in  1094.
He  was  the  son  of  a  judge  in  the  parliament  of
Paris,  and,  after  studying  law.  was  admitted  to  the
bar.  but  as  his  voice  was  weak  he  accompanied  his
cousin,  I)e  Maisonneuve,  the  agent  of  the  Montreal
company,  to  Villemarie  as  his  secretary,  which  post
he  retained  from  1053  till  1003.  Maisonneuve  never
undertook  anything  without  consulting  him,  and
on  several  occasions  he  helped  the  company  out  of
difficulties  in  questions  of  jurisdiction  with  the
governor-general  of  the  colony.  When  in  1059  the
Viscount  d'Argenson  came  on  a  visit  to  Villemarie
and  demanded  the  keys  of  the  fortress.  Nogre
suggested  to  Maisonneuve  a  practical  course  by
which  the  latter  was  enabled  to  retain  control  of
the  fort  without  offending  the  governor-general.
Returning  to  France  in  1001,  Nogre  sought  in  vain
for  several  years  to  recover  his  salary,  which  was  in
arrears,  and  refused  brilliant  offers  from  the  Hun
dred  associates,  as  he  claimed  that  the  protection
afforded  by  the  company  and  the  crown  to  the  set
tlers  was  inadequate,  and  would  cause  the  loss  of
the  colony.  His  memoirs  to  the  king  on  the  state
of  the  colony  of  Canada  caused  a  sensation,  and  the
members  of  the  Montreal  and  Hundred  associates
companies,  fearing  that  his  revelations  would  be
injurious  to  them,  persecuted  him.  destroyed  the
copies  of  his  works,  and  caused  several  pamphlets
to  be  printed  in  reply.  Nogre's  principal  works  are
'•Expose  de  1'etat  de  la  colonie  de  \illemarie  de-
puis  sa  fondation  jusqu'en  1000''  (Paris,  106?)  and
"Histoire  des  etablissements  fondes  par  les  Fran-
cais  dans  la  Nouvelle  France  du  Nord  depuis  sa
decouverte  par  Jacques  Cartier  jusqu'a  I'adminis-
tration  du  Vicomte  d'Argenson,  avec  un  recit  des
guerres  soutenues  contre  les  Huron s,  les  Algonquins
et  les  Iroquois"  (2  vols.,  Amsterdam,  1075).

NOIRCLERC,  Albert  Paul  Charles  de  (nwar-
clare),  Canadian  administrator,  b.  in  Three  Rivers
in  1721 ;  d.  in  Cayenne  in  1779.  He  was  descended
from  the  early  settlers  of  Canada,  and  his  great-
uncle  had  been  a  missionary  among  the  Hurons.
He  entered  the  provincial  administration  of  Que
bec,  and  served  afterward  in  Louisiana,  being
governor  of  Mobile  in  1763,  when  he  was  appointed
the  king's  lieutenant  at  Cayenne.  The  secretary
of  state,  the  Duke  de  Choiseul,  being  deeply  af
fected  at  the  loss  of  Canada,  had  prepared  plans
for  the  foundation  of  the  "  France  equinoxiale  du
sud  "  in  Guiana,  and  Noirclerc  was  summoned  to
Versailles  to  consult  with  the  colonial  department.
The  governor  of  Guiana  was  then  Chevalier  Tur-
got,  a  brother  of  the  philosopher,  and  as  he  disap
proved  of  the  duke's  schemes  he  forbade  Noirclerc,
upon  the  latter's  arrival  in  Cayenne,  to  carry  them
out.  and  sailed  a  few  days  later  to  lay  a  memoir
before  the  king.  During  his  absence  a  convoy  of
900  emigrants  from  Alsace  and  Lorraine  arrived
in  Guiana,  and  Noirclerc,  notwithstanding  the  ad
vices  of  experienced  citizens,  established  them  125
miles  from  the  capital.  The  place  was  unhealthy,
as  the  ground  was  lower  than  the  level  of  the  sea,
in  part  inundated  during  the  rainy  season,  and  sur
rounded  by  marshes.  The  emigrants  complained,
and  becoming  uneasy  during  an  epidemic  of  fever
fled  to  Cayenne,  and  were  furnished  a  passage  home
in  spite  of  Noirclerc's  protestations.  The  latter
was  soon  afterward  summoned  to  Versailles  to
explain  his  conduct,  which  he  easily  justified  to
the  Duke  de  Choiseul,  and  was  promoted  colonial
intendant.  He  returned  to  Guiana  with  300  emi
grants,  whom  he  established  in  the  deserted  settle
ments  of  Saint  Louis  in  1709.  Through  his  unre
mitting  efforts,  the  colony  prospered  somewhat


during  his  administration,  but  succumbed  to  the
same  causes  that  ruined  the  first  establishment,
and  soon  after  Noirclerc's  death  the  place  was
abandoned.  Noirclerc  published  "  Observations
sur  la  resirie  elastique  de  Cayenne"  (Paris,  1767);
"  Memoire  sur  la  colonie  de  la  France  Equinoxiale
du  Sud  "  (1768) ;  and  "  Memoire  sur  la  maniere
d'assembler,  de  prepare!1  et  de  conservcr  les  vege-
taux  tropicaux"  (1774).

NOLTE,  Vincent,  merchant,  b.  in  Leghorn.
Italy,  in  1779;  d.  after  1852.  He  became  a  mer
chant  in  Leghorn  and  afterward  in  Hamburg,  but
went  to  Paris  in  1804,  and  made  several  visits  to  the
United  States  as  agent  of  a  commercial  house  be
tween  that  year  and  1838,  travelling  widely  over  the
country,  and  residing  here  for  several  years  at  a
time.  He  was  long  in  New  Orleans,  and  was  an
eye-witness  of  the  British  defeat  there  in  1815.
This  and  his  other  experiences  in  this  country  he
describes  in  "  Fifty  Years  in  Both  Hemispheres "
(English  translation,  New  York,  1854).  He  devoted
himself  to  literature  for  some  time  in  Trieste,  and
in  1848-'9  edited  the  "  Deutsche  Freihafen,"  a  free-
trade  journal,  in  Hamburg.  He  contributed  to  the
press  on  finance  and  political  economy,  and  among
other  works  published  "  View  of  the  Commercial
World  in  1840";  and  a  revised  edition  of  William
Benecke's  "  System  of  Insurance  "  (Hamburg,  1852).

NOORT,  Olivier  Van  (nort),  Dutch  navigator,
b.  in  Utrecht  in  1568 ;  d.  after  1621.  Some  mer
chants  of  his  country  equipped  an  expedition  to
go  to  the  South  sea  by  the  Strait  of  Magellan,  and
Noort  received  the  command.  He  left  Rotterdam
on  13  Sept.,  1598,  touched  at  Rio  Janeiro,  but  was
driven  back,  and  along  the  coast  suffered  many
losses  by  the  attacks  of  the  Indians.  He  resolved
to  winter  in  the  deserted  island  of  Santa  Clara,
whence  he  sailed  again  on  2  June,  1599.  On  the
29th  he  discovered  an  island  near  the  coast  of
Patagonia,  and  stopped  there  to  repair  damages.
On  23  Nov.  he  entered  the  Strait  of  Magellan,  and
landed  on  the  northern  coast,  where  he  was  at
tacked  by  the  Indians  and  suffered  many  losses.
Soon  afterward  he  anchored  among  the  Penguin
islands,  and  subsequently  he  discovered  the  bays
of  Olivier,  Mauritius,  and  Henry,  but  could  not
explore  the  latter  on  account  of  the  ice.  On  6  Feb.
he  left  the  Strait  of  Magellan,  and,  entering  the
South  sea,  sailed  along  the  Chilian  and  Peruvian
coasts,  pillaging  and  burning  as  he  went,  and  cap
turing  several  Spanish  ships.  The  viceroy,  Luis
Vclasco,  sent  a  fleet  to  capture  him,  but  Noort
sailed  for  the  Ladrone  group.  He  pillaged  the
Philippines,  visited  Java  and  Borneo,  and,  sailing
round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  arrived  at  Rotter
dam,  26  Aug.,  1001.  A  narrative  of  his  voyage
was  published  under  the  title  of  "Beschrijving
van  de  moeyelyke  reis  rondo m  de  werldaar  de
globe,  door  Olivier  van  Noort,  waarin  zyne  vreem  de
lotgevallen  in  voorkomen "  (Amsterdam,  1612;
German  translation  by  Gotthard  Arties,  Leipsic,
1613;  French  translation,  Antwerp,  1013).

NORDHEIMER,  Isaac,  educator,  b.  in  Memels-
dorf,  Germany,  in  1809 ;  d.  in  New  York  city.  3
Nov.,  1842.  After  receiving  a  thorough  education
preparatory  to  becoming  a  rabbi,  he  entered  the
gymnasium  of  Wiirzburg  in  1828,  was  transferred
to  its  university  in  1830.  and  completed  his  studies
at  Munich,  where  he  obtained  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.
in  1834.  To  secure  a  wider  field.  Dr.  Nordheimer
came  to  New  York  in  1835,  and  received  the  ap
pointment  of  instructor  in  sacred  literature  at
Union  theological  seminary,  where  he  remained
from  1838  till  1842.  He  held  the  professorship  of
Hebrew  and  cognate  languages  at  the  University


NORDHOFF


NORQUAY


531


of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1836-'42.  His  learning
and  character  made  him  successful  as  a  teacher,
and  he  enjoyed  the  friendship  of  the  notable  bibli
cal  scholars  of  his  time,  while  many  of  his  pu
pils  now  occupy  posts  of  eminence.  In  1888  he
published  in  New  York  the  first  volume  of  his
Hebrew  grammar,  and  in  1841  the  second  volume
(2d  ed..  with  additions  and  improvements,  2  vols.,
New  York,  1842).  His  other  works,  besides  con
tributions  to  the  "Biblical  Repository,"  were  " A
Grammatical  Analysis  of  Select  Portions  of  Scrip
ture,  or  a  Chrestomathy"  (New  York,  1838);  and
"The  Philosophy  of  Ecclesiastes "  in  the  "Biblical
Repository"  (July.  1838X  His  great  clearness,  his
perfection  of  analysis,  his  philosophic  method,
and  his  thorough  command  of  Oriental  languages
imide  his  instruction  of  signal  value.  Dr.  Nord-
heimer  left  several  works  in  manuscript ;  a  Chal-
dee  and  Syriac  grammar  and  an  Arabic  grammar
in  German  ;  a  larger  Arabic  grammar  in  English  ;
a  Hebrew  concordance,  incomplete;  Ecclesiastes
translated  and  explained,  in  German  ;  and  a  mass
of  philological  notes.

NORDHOFF,  Charles,  journalist,  b.  in  Erwitte.
Westphalia.  Pras-ia,  31  Aug..  1830.  In  1835  he
came  with  his  parents  to  this  country,  and  attended
school  in  Cincinnati,  where  he  was  apprenticed  to  a
printer  in  1843.  In  1844  he  went  to  Philadelphia
and  worked  in  a  newspaper  office,  but  he  soon
shipped  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  where  he  served  three
years,  making  a  voyage  around  the  world.  He  re
mained  at  sea  in  the  merchant,  whaling,  and  mac
kerel  fishery  service  until  1853.  when  he  again  be
came  employed  in  newspaper  offices,  first  in  Phila
delphia,  and  afterward  in  Indianapolis,  Ind.  From
1S5T  till  1861  he  was  editorially  employed  by  a  pub
lishing-house  in  New  York.  From  1801  till  1871  he
was  on  the  staff  of  the  New  York  "  Evening  Post,"
and  he  subsequently  contributed  to  the  "  Tribune."
He  travelled  in  California  in  1871-'2,  and  visited
the  Hawaiian  islands  in  1873.  Since  1874  he  has
been  the  special  Washington  correspondent  of  the
"New  York  Herald."  He  edited  an  American
edition  of  Kern's  "  Practical  Landscape  Garden
ing  "  (Cincinnati,  1855),  and  is  the  author  of  ••  Man-
of-War  Life :  a  Boy's  Experience  in  the  U.  S.  Navy  "
(Cincinnati,  1855);"  "The  Merchant  Vessel"  (1855);
"Whaling  and  Fishing"  (1856);  "Nine  Years  a
Sailor"  (1857);  "Stories  from  the  Island  World"
(New  York,  1857);  "Secession  is  Rebellion:  the
Union  Indissoluble"  (1860);  "The  Freedmen  of
South  Carolina :  Some  Account  of  their  Appear
ance,  Character.  Condition,  and  Customs"  (1863);
"America  for  Free  Working  Men"  (1865);  "Cape
Cod  and  All  Along  Shore,"  a  collection  of  stories
(1868) ;  "  California  for  Health.  Pleasure,  and  Resi
dence"  (1872);  "Northern  California,  Oregon,  and
the  Sandwich  Islands  "  (1874) ;  "  Politics  for  Young
Americans"  (1875);  "The  Communistic  Societies
of  the  United  States"  (1875):  "The  Cotton  States
in  the  Spring  and  Summer  of  1875  "  (1876) ;  and
"God  and  the  Future  Life"  (1881).

NORES,  Simon  de  (no'-res).  Dutch  naval  officer,
b.  in  Muyden,  near  Amsterdam,  in  1581 ;  d.  in  Am
sterdam  in  1643.  He  was  the  son  of  a  pilot,  and
followed  the  same  profession  till  about  1610.  when
he  entered  the  service  of  the  Dutch  East  Indian
company.  In  1624  he  proposed  to  John  Usseling,
president  of  the  company,  a  plan  for  attacking  the
Spanish  possessions  in  South  America,  which  was
accepted.  An  expedition  was  sent  out  on  22  Dec..
1624.  under  Admiral  Jacob  Wilekens.  Nores  com
manding  the  first  division  of  the  fleet,  and  taking
an  active  part  in  all  the  operations  of  the  campaign.
He  remained  as  lieutenant  of  Piet  Hein  (q.  r.)  when


Willekens  returned  to  Holland  in  August,  1525.
and.  being  left  in  command  of  Bahia  during  Hein's
expedition  against  Espiritu  Santo,  defended  the
city  against  a  powerful  Spanish  and  Portuguese
fleet.  After  holding  it  for  two  months,  he  was
forced  to  sign  a  capitulation  in  October.  1525,  and
was  detained  a  prisoner  for  several  months,  till
Hein's  return  from  Holland  and  his  recapture  of  the
city,  3  May,  1526.  Being  appointed  vice-admiral
on  his  return  to  Holland,  he  commanded  from  1627
till  1631  several  expeditions  that  ravaged  the
Venezuelan  and  Brazilian  coasts,  and  twice  cap
tured  the  treasure-ship  that  bore  the  yearly  tribute
of  the  colonies  to  Spain.  He  retired  in  1632,  set
tled  in  Amsterdam,  and  at  his  death  was  one  of  the
consulting  directors  of  the  Indian  company.

NORMAN, Benjamin Moore,  author,  b. in
Hudson,  N.  Y.,  22  Dec.,  1809; d.  near  Summit,
Miss.,  1  Feb..  1860. After  the  death  of  his  father,
a  bookseller  at  Hudson,  he  left  a  clerkship  in  New
York  to  take  charge  of  the  business,  and  he  was
subsequently  engaged  in  bookselling  in  Philadel
phia,  and  in  1837  established  a  book-store  in  New
Orleans. He  was  conspicuous  for  his  philanthropy
;  in  the  epidemic  of  yellow  fever  in  New  Orleans  in
1841. He  is  the  author  of  "  Rambles  in  Yucatan  "
i  (New  York.  1842);  "New  Orleans  and  its  Environs"
!  (New  Orleans,  1845);  and  "Rambles  by  Land  and
Water"  (Now  York,  1845).

NORMAND, Jacques Etienne (nor-mong),
French  communist,  b.  in  Abbeville  in  180$);  d.  in
San  Antonio,  Tex.,  in  1867. He  became  a  convert
of  the Saint Simonists.  and  attached  himself  to
".  Barthelemy  Enfantin,  and  afterward  to  Jean  Rey-
|  baud,  but  separated from  them,  and  during  the
1  revolution  of  1848  petitioned  the  legislative  assem-
:  bly  to  be  permitted  to  organize  a  communist  colony
j  in  Picardy. Prince  Louis  Napoleon,  on  his  elec-
I  tion  as  president, decreed  the  expulsion  of  Nor-
i  mand  from  the  territory  of  the  republic,  and  the
latter,  emigrating  to  this  country,  travelled  for  two
j  years  in  the  eastern  and  southern  states. In  1851
j  he  went  to  Texas  to  join  another  expelled  commu-
•  nist, Victor  Considerant,  and, as he had large
I  means,  he  bought  2.000  acres  of  land  near  San  An-
|  tonio  and  established  there  with  a  band  of  adven
turers  the  communistic  colony of La Reunion,
which  prospered  somewhat  at  the  outset,  as  Nor-
l  mand  supplied  all  expenses,  while  the  settlers  lived
j  in  idleness. But  numerous  women  of  bad  charac-
|  ter  also  joined  the  colony,  and,  as  Normand  and
Considerant  insisted  on  a  community  of  wives,  the
authorities  of  Texas  expelled  the  colony. Normand
took  refuge  in  San  Antonio,  and  several  times  pe
titioned the  legislature  for  the  reopening  of  his
1  colony,  but  to  no  avail. He  made  several  attempts
I  in  1857  and 1861 to establish  new communities
near  El  Paso,  and  again  in La  Reunion,  but  was
arrested  on  the  latter  occasion  and  imprisoned  for
!  five years. He published, among other  works,
j  "  Principes  de  soeialisme"  (Paris.  1846);  "Theorie
i  de  la  commune  naturelle  "  (1855):  "  Theorie  de  la
1  republiquecommuniste  universelle"  (Brussels,  I860).
NORQUAY,  John,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Manitoba,  8 May,  1841. He  is  of  Scottish  and
Indian  ancestry,  and  was  educated  at  St.  John's
j  academy.  Red  river  settlement,  where  he  gained  a
i  scholarship  in  1854. Mr.  Norquay  took  an  active
:  part  in  the  discussion  on  the  Red  river  rebellion  in
1870,  and  by  the  moderation  of  his  views  secured
'  the  confidence  of  the  authorities  as  well  as  of  the
half-breeds. He  was  elected  to  the  first  Manitoba
parliament  for  High  Bluff  in  1870,  and  in  Decem
ber,  1871,  was  appointed  minister  of  public  works
|  and  agriculture. He  resigned  with  his  colleagues


532


NORRIS


NORRIS


in  July,  1874,  joined  the  Davis  administration  in
1875,  and  in  May,  1876,  became  minister  of  public
works.  In  October,  1878,  with  Joseph  Royal,  he
formed  an  administration,  becoming  premier  and
provincial  treasurer.  On  27  Aug..  1886,  Mr.  Nor-
quay  resigned  the  treasurership,  and  he  was  ap
pointed  railway  commissioner  on  10  Sept.  He  was
elected  to  the  Manitoba  parliament  for  St.  Andrews
in  1874,  and  re-elected  in  1878, 1879, 1888,  and  1886.
He  is  the  only  member  that  has  held  a  seat  in  the
legislative  assembly  of  Manitoba  continuously  from
its  inception  till  the  present  time  (1888).  He  has
represented  the  province  on  several  delegations  to
the  federal  government  at  Ottawa,  and  has  secured
the  enlargement  of  its  boundaries,  and  an  increase
of  the  subsidy  from  the  Dominion.  The  acts  relat
ing  to  municipalities,  drainage,  and  county  court  <
are  among  the  principal  measures  that  have  re
sulted  from  his  legislation.  His  vigorous  railway
extension  policy  has  been  of  great  benefit  tc  Mani
toba,  though  in  pursuance  of  it,  in  1887,  in  connec
tion  with  the  construction  of  the  Red  river  valley
railroad,  it  led  him  into  conflict  with  the  Dominion
government.  This  road  would  connect  Winnipeg
with  the  northern  boundary  of  Minnesota,  and  was
regarded  as  infringing  upon  the  charter  rights  of
the  Canada  Pacific  railway,  which  had  been  granted
a  monopoly  of  traffic  for  twenty  years  from  the
date  of  its  opening.  Notwithstanding  the  interdict
of  the  Dominion  government,  Premier  Norquay  j
and  the  Manitoba  legislature  determined  to  build
the  Red  river  valley  railway,  and  in  the  mean  time
the  dispute  was  referred  to  the  British  privy  council.
In  January,  1888,  Mr.  Norquay  and  the  members
of  his  administration  resigned.

NORRIS,  Edward,  clergyman,  b.  in  Glouces
tershire,  England,  in  1589  ;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  10
April,  1640.  He  was  a  teacher  and  preacher  in
his  native  town  until  1640,  when  he  emigrated  to
the  Massachusetts  colony,  and  from  18  March  of
that  year  till  his  death  was  pastor  of  the  church
in  Salem.  He  was  one  of  the  most  tolerant  men
of  his  age,  declined  to  join  in  the  persecution  of
the  Gortonists  or  Anabaptists,  and,  when  a  severe
platform  of  church  discipline  was  adopted  by  the
assembly  of  ministers  in  1648,  persevered  in  his
own  rules  of  conduct  for  the  Salem  church,  and  in
consequence  of  his  moderation  was  greatly  revered
by  all  his  fellow-townspeople.  He  appeared  as  a
writer  on  the  political  events  of  the  day  in  1653,
and  favored  the  war  with  the  Dutch  settlers  as  a
"  just  and  proper  undertaking."  During  the  witch
craft  delusion  he  withstood  popular  clamor  and
used  his  influence  to  resist  the  persecutions.  He

Bublished  a  treatise  on  "  Asking  for  Temporal  j
lessings " (London, 1636) ; a "  Reply to John
Task's  True  Gospel  Vindicated  "  (1637) ;  and  "  The
New  Gospel  not  the  True  Gospel"  (1638).

NORRIS,  Isaac,  proprietor,  b.  in  London,  Eng
land,  21  July.  1671;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4
June,  1735.  His  father,  Thomas,  removed  to  Ja
maica  when  the  son  was  seven  years  old.  Isaac
went  to  Philadelphia  in  1690  to  arrange  for  the  re
moval  of  the  family  to  that  city,  but  on  his  return
found  that  they  had  all  perished  in  the  great
earthquake  at  Port  Royal.  He  then  went  back  to
Philadelphia,  entered  "into  business,  and  became
one  of  the  wealthiest  proprietors  in  the  province.
While  he  was  in  England  in  1706  he  assisted
William  Penn  in  his  difficulties  and  rescued  him
from  imprisonment.  On  his  return,  two  years
later,  he  was  elected  to  the  governor's  council,  and
from  that  time  until  his  death  continued  in  public
life.  He  was  in  the  assembly  for  many  years,
speaker  of  the  house  in  1712,  justice  for  Philadel


phia  county  in  1717,  and,  on  the  organization  of
the  high  court  of  chancery,  became  a  master  to
hear  cases  with  the  lieutenant-governor.  He  was
elected  mayor  of  Philadelphia  in  1724,  and  on  the
death  of  David  Lloyd  was  unanimously  chosen
justice  of  the  supreme  court,  but  declined  and  re
mained  in  the  county  court.  Although  a  strict
Quaker,  he  lived  in  great  luxury  for  that  age  and
drove  a  four-horse  coach  on  which  was  emblazoned
a  coat  of  arms.  He  owned  the  "  slate-roof  house,"
which  was  the  residence  of  William  Penn  during
his  second  visit  to  Pennsylvania,  and  a  dwelling
on  Fair  Hill,  which  was  one  of  the  handsomest
buildings  of  that  day,  and  which  was  subsequently
burned  by  the  British  during  the  Revolution.  For
many  years  he  was  one  of  the  chief  representa
tives  of  the  proprietaries,  and  by  the  will  of  Penn
he  was  named  a  trustee  of  the  province  of  Penn
sylvania.  In  1694  he  married  Mary,  daughter  of
Thomas  Lloyd,  president  of  the  council. — Their
son,  Isaac,  statesman,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  3
Oct.,  1701:  d.  in  Fair  Hill,  near  Philadelphia,  13
June,  1766.  engaged  in  business  till  1743,  and  ac
quired  a  large  fortune  in  addition  to  what  he  in
herited.  He  was  a  common  councilman  and  al
derman,  a  member  of  the  assembly  in  1734,  and
chairman  of  its  most  important  committees.  He
was  a  Quaker  of  the  strictest  sect,  and  endeavored
to  keep  the  policy  of  Pennsylvania  consistent  with
the  principles  of  his  religion.  On  the  prospect  of
war  with  France  and  Spain  in  1739,  lie  opposed
the  organization  of  volunteer  companies  and  prep
aration  for  the  defence  of  the  province.  His  fol
lowers,  in  opposition  to  the  war  party,  were  known
as  the  "  Norris  party,"  and  his  subsequent  election
to  the  assembly  was  the  occasion  of  violent  political
struggles  between  the  Quakers  and  other  residents
of  the  city.
He  was  one
of  the  com
missioners  to
treat  with  the
Albany  In
dians  in  1745
and  1755,  and
he  and  his
colleagues  ef
fected  the  pur
chase  of  sev
eral  million
acrescom  pris
ing  the  south
western  part
of  Pennsylva
nia.  He  was
elected  speak
er  of  the  as
sembly  in  1751,  and  held  that  office  fifteen  years.
In  the  first  year  of  his  administration  the  old  state-
house  bell  was  ordered  from  England,  and  Norris
proposed  the  inscription  "  Proclaim  liberty  through
out  the  land  unto  all  the  inhabitants  thereof."  (See
illustration.)  During  his  speakership  the  contest
was  waged  between  the  people  and  the  proprietaries
on  the  subject  of  taxation  and  legislative  control  of
the  Penn  family  estates.  Norris,  at  the  head  of  the
Quakers,  joined  the  opposers  of  privilege,  and  in
a  debate  in  the  assembly  declared  "  No  man  shall
ever  stand  on  my  grave  and  say,  '  Curse  him,  here
lies  he  who  betrayed  the  liberties  of  his  country ! ' "
He  was  appointed  with  Bcnjainin  Franklin  a  com
missioner  to  England  in  1757  to  solicit  the  removal
of  grievances  that  were  occasioned  by  the  proprie
tary  instructions,  but  declined  on  account  of  the
failure  of  his  health.  Although  he  opposed  the


NORRIS


NORTH


533


encroachments  of  the  Penns,  he  would  not  support
the  proposition  to  convert  Pennsylvania  into  a  royal
province,  resigning  his  speakership  when  in  1764  a
petition  to  that  effect  passed  the  assembly.  He
was  returned  at  the  next  election,  and  again  re
signed  in  1764.  Norris  was  an  excellent  French,
Latin,  and  Hebrew  scholar,  collected  a  valuable
library,  and  was  active  in  educational  and  benevo
lent  enterprises.  See  "  Genealogical  Record  of  the
Norris  Family,"  by  J.  Parker  Norris  (Philadelphia,
1805). — The  first  Isaac's  great-grandson.  George
Washington,  surgeon,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  6
Nov.,  1808 ;  d.  there,  4  March,  1875,  was  the  son
of  Joseph  Parker  Norris,  who  for  many  years  was
president  of  the  Bank  of  Pennsylvania.  He  was
graduated  in  letters  in  1827  !>nd  in  medicine  in
1830  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  sub
sequently  studied  in  Paris,  where  he  became  a
member  of  the  Societe  mcdicale  d'observation.  In
1836  he  was  elected  one  of  the  surgeons  to  the
Pennsylvania  hospital,  and  retained  this  post  for
twenty-seven  years.  In  1848  he  was  chosen  clini
cal  professor  of  surgery  in  the  University  of  Penn
sylvania,  which  post  he  resigned  in  1857,  when  he
was  elected  a  trustee  of  the  university.  His  lec
tures  delivered  in  the  Pennsylvania  hospital  won
for  him  renown  throughout  the  United  States  as
an  admirable  diagnostician  and  careful  practitioner
of  surgery.  In  1842  he  published  an  essay  "On
the  Occurrence  of  Non-Union  after  Fractures :  its
Causes  and  Treatment."  This,  with  his  papers  on
the  ligature  of  arteries,  secured  for  him  foreign  as
well  as  home  reputation,  and  have  been  widely
quoted  in  books  on  surgery,  both  in  this  country
and  in  Europe.  He  republished  these  papers,  with
other  essays,  in  a  volume  entitled  "  Contributions
to  Practical  Surgery"  (Philadelphia,  1873).  He
was  for  many  years  vice-president  of  the  College
of  physicians  of  Philadelphia,  and  in  1858-'9  was
president  of  the  State  historical  society.  His
"  Early  History  of  Medicine  in  Philadelphia  "  was
printed  privately  after  his  death  (1886). — George
Washington's  son,  William  Francis,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  6  Jan.,  1839,  was  graduated  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1858  and  at  its  medical
school  in  1861,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  appointed
resident  physician  to  the  Pennsylvania  hospital.
He  was  assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army  in
1863-'o,  and  was  brevetted  captain  for  meritorious
service.  In  18C5  he  resigned  and  established  him
self  in  practice  in  Philadelphia,  making  a  specialty
of  diseases  of  the  eyes.  Since  1873  he  has  been  pro
fessor  of  ophthalmic  surgery  in  the  University  of
Pennsylvania.  He  is  one  of  the  surgeons  to  Wills  eye
hospital,  fellow  of  the  College  of  physicians  and  of
Pennsylvania  academy  of  natural  sciences,  and  a
member  of  numerous  medical  societies.  His  pub
lications  have  been  limited  to  contributions  to  pro
fessional  periodicals  and  to  the  "  Transactions  of
the  several  societies  of  which  he  is  a  member.

NORRIS,  John,  benefactor,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,
10  June,  1748;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass..  22  Dec.,  1808.
He  was  for  many  years  a  merchant  in  Salem  and
a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  senate.  He  was
one  of  the  founders  of  Andover  theological  semi
nary  and  a  large  contributor  to  benevolent  and  re
ligious  enterprises. — His  widow,  MARY,  bequeathed
in  1811  §30,000  to  Andover  seminary  and  a  similar
sum  to  foreign  missions.

NORRIS."  Moses,  senator,  b.  in  Pittsfield,  N.  H.,
8  Nov.,  1799;  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C.,  11  Jan.,
1855.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1828,
practised  law  in  Barnstead,  N.  II.,  was  in  the  state
senate  in  1830-'40,  and  was  state  solicitor  for  Mer-
rimack  county  in  1843.  He  was  elected  to  con-


[  gress  as  a  Democrat  in  1842,  served  in  1843-'?,
was  speaker  of  the  legislature  in  1848,  and  the
same  year  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator,  which  office
he  held  until  his  death.

NORRIS,  Thaddeus,  author,  b.  in  Warrenton,
Va.,  15  Aug.,  1811;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  10
April,  1877.  He  removed  to  Philadelphia  in  1829
and  engaged  in  business.  From  his  boyhood  he
had  been  an  ardent  lover  of  angling,  and  in  after-
years  he  became  an  authority  on  the  haunts,  hab
its,  and  instincts  of  fish.  He  was  also  a  successful
manufacturer  of  rods  and  flies.  He  was  largely
concerned  in  the  preliminary  arrangements  for
the  erection  of  the  aquaria  at  the  Philadelphia
Centennial  exhibition  in  1876.  Mr.  Norris  con
tributed  constantly  to  sporting  papers  and  pub
lished  •'  The  American  Anglers  Book  "  (Philadel
phia,  1864)  and  "American  Fish  Culture''  (1868).

NORTH,  Caleb,  soldier,  b.  in  Chester  county,
Pa.,  15  July,  1753;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  7  Nov.,
1840.  He  was  a  merchant  at  Cowntry.  Pa.,  at  the
beginning  of  the  Revolution,  at  which  time,  it  is
said,  he  hired  a  British  deserter  to  teach  him  the
manual  of  arms.  He  was  a  captain  in  the  4th
battalion  and  served  in  the  Canada  campaign,
when  on  his  return  from  Ticonderoga  he  was  pro
moted  major  of  the  10th  regiment,  and  as  such
rendered  important  service.  At  Paoli.  by  the  par
ticular  exertions  of  Gen.  Anthony  Wayne.  Maj.
North,  and  Capt.  Stout,  a  rear-guard  was  formed
by  which  two  pieces  of  cannon  and  the  remainder
of  the  brigade  were  saved.  He  was  detached  the
same  night  to  direct  the  retreat  of  Gen.  William
Smallwood,  and  a  vidette  was  killed  by  his  side.
After  taking  part  in  the  battle  of  Germantown,  he
was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  llth  Penn
sylvania  regiment  and  was  in  the  battle  of  Mon-
mouth.  In  July,  1778,  he  was  transferred  to  the
9th  Pennsylvania,  and  in  January,  1781,  to  the
2d,  with  which  he  took  part  in  the  southern  cam
paign.  After  the  surrender  of  Cornwallis  he  had
charge  of  the  British  prisoners  on  their  march
from  Virginia  to  York  and  Lancaster,  Pa.,  con
ducting  Tarleton's  noted  legion  to  Philadelphia.
I  He  retired  from  the  army  at  the  close  of  the  war,
resumed  business  at  Coventry,  and  subsequently
removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  in  1819  he  was
chosen  high-sheriff.  From  1828  until  his  death  he
was  president  of  the  Society  of  Cincinnati  in  Penn
sylvania,  being  the  last  survivor  of  the  field-officers
of  the  Pennsylvania  line.

NORTH,  Elisha,  physician,  b.  in  Goshen.  Conn..
8  Jan.,  1771;  d.  in  New  London,  Conn.,  29  Dec.,
1843. He  was  the  son  and  grandson  of  physicians,
and  early  determined  to  follow  that  profession.  For
this  purpose  he  studied  in  Hartford  under  Lemuel
Hopkins,  and  then  in  Philadelphia  under  Benjamin
Rush. After  being  admitted  to  practice  he  settled
in  Goshen,  where  he  followed  his  profession  until
1812,  when  he  removed  to  New  London,  and  in
both  places  attained  considerable  reputation  for  his
skill  and  judgment. Dr.  North  was  always  fore
most  in  adapting  improvements  in  medicine,  and
was  among  the  earliest  to  practise  vaccination  in
the  United  States. He  was  the  first  to  introduce
vaccine  matter  in  New  York,  sending  to  Dr.  Edward
Miller,  of  that  city,  a  person  that  had  been  vaccinat-
j  ed  expressly  for  the  purpose  of  supplying  the  phy-
I  sicians  with  genuine  matter. Dr.  >orth  paid  special
!  attention  to  diseases  of  the  eye,  and  established  the
first  eye  infirmary  in  the  United  States  at  New
!  London  in  1817. When  the  new  and  obscure  dis-
'  ease  known  as  spotted  fever  raged  in  New  England
i  from  1806  till 1810,  Dr.  North  treated  it  with
1  marked  success,  and  his  publication  on  the  subject


534


NORTH


NORTIIEND


minister  in  1770.


received  general  approbation.  He  published,  be
sides  many  fugitive  essays,  "A  Treatise  on  a  Ma
lignant  Epidemic  commonly  called  Spotted  Fever  "
(New  York,  1811);  "Outlines  of  the  Science  of
Life"  (1829);  and  "  Uncle  Toby's  Pilgrim's  Prog
ress  in  Phrenology"  (New  London,  1830).  See
'•  Life  and  Writings  of  Elisha  North,  M.  D.,"  by  H.
Carrington  Bolton,  Ph.  D.  (printed  privately,  1887).
NORTH,  Frederick,  Earl  of  Guilford,  b.  in
England,  13  April,  1733 ;  d.  in  London,  5  Aug.,
1792.  He  was  educated  at  Eton  and  at  Trinity
college,  Cambridge,  entered  the  house  of  commons

as  a  Tory  at  an
early  age,  became  a
lord  of  the  treasury
in  1703,  and  in  this
year  moved  the  ex
pulsion  of  John
Wilkes.  He  sup
ported  the  Amer
ican  stamp-act  in
1705.  and  the  right
s^  of  Great  Britain
•tj  to  tax  the  colonies.
lie  was  chancellor
of  the  exchequer
and  leader  of  the
house  of  commons
in  1707,  and  first
lord  of  the  treas
ury  and  prime
His  administration  extended  to
March,  1783,  and.  says  a  contemporaneous  English
writer,  "  teemed  with  calamitous  events  beyond
any  of  the  same  duration  to  be  found  in  our  an
nals."  The  American  war  was  its  great  feature,  and
North's  efforts  were  principally  directed  to  meas
ures  for  the  coercion  of  the  colonies.  He  proposed
the  scheme  for  enforcing  the  tea  duty  in  1773,  and
the  Boston  port  bill  the  next  year,  but,  although
he  did  not  waver  in  his  opinion  as  to  the  right  of
parliament  to  tax  the  colonies,  he  entertained  seri
ous  doubts  as  to  the  expediency  of  continuing  the
war  during  the  last  four  years  of  his  administra
tion,  and  was  induced  to  persevere  only  through  re
gard  to  the  wishes  of  George  III.  Being  defeated
in  the  house  of  commons  on  this  question,  he  re
signed,  and  subsequently  joined  Fox  in  opposition
to  the  Shelburne  cabinet.  In  April,  1783,  he  re
turned  to  office  as  a  joint  secretary  of  state  with  Fox
in  a  coalition  ministry  that  was  formed  by  the  Duke
of  Portland,  the  unpopularity  of  which  caused  its
dissolution  in  the  succeeding  November.  He  soon
afterward  retired  from  public  life.  During  his  last
five  years  he  was  totally  blind.  Those  who  were
near  Lord  North  in  his  old  age  never  heard  him
murmur  at  his  having  become  blind  ;  but  his  wife
is  the  witness  that  "  in  the  solitude  of  sleepless
nights  he  would  sometimes  fall  into  very  low  spirits
and  deeply  reproach  himself  for  having,  at  the
earnest  desire  of  the  king,  remained  in  administra
tion  after  he  thought  that  peace  ought  to  have
been  made  with  America."  Two  years  before  his
death  he  succeeded  to  the  title  of  Earl  of  Guilford.
NORTH,  Simeon,  educator,  b.  in  Berlin,  Conn.,
7  Sept.,  1802;  d.  in  Clinton.  N.  Y.,  12  Feb.,  1884.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1825,  at  its  divinity-
school  in  1828,  and  was  tutor  there  in  1827-'9.  He
t  hen  became  professor  of  Greek  and  Latin  at
Hamilton  college,  held  office  for  ten  years,  and  from
1839  until  his  resignation  in  1857  was  president  of
the  college.  He  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of
the  Congregational  church  in  1842.  Western  "Re
serve  college  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in
1842,  and  Wesleyan  university  that  of  D.  D.  in


1849.  He  was  the  half-century  annalist  of  Hamil
ton  in  1872.  President  North  was  an  accurate  and
profound  scholar,  with  a  genius  for  imparting  in
formation,  and  great  suavity  of  disposition.  He
became  president  of  Hamilton  when  its  affairs
were  in  a  gloomy  condition,  and  brought  them  into
prosperity.  His  later  life  was  passed  in  retirement.
His  publications  include  "The  American  System
of  Collegiate  Education"  (Clinton,  N.  Y.,  1839);
"  Faith  in  the  World's  Conversion  "  (1842) ;  "  Anglo-
Saxon  Literature,"  an  address  before  the  Connecti
cut  Alpha  of  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  (1847);
"The  Weapons  in  Christian  Warfare"  (1849);
"  Obedience  in  Death  "  (1849);  and  "  Half-Century
Letter  of  Reminiscences  "  (1879).  See  "  Memorial
of  President  North  "  (Utica,  N.  Y.,  1884).— His
nephew,  Edward,  educator,  b.  in  Berlin,  Conn.,  !)
March,  1820,  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  college  in
1841,  since  1843  has  been  professor  of  Greek  lan
guage  and  literature  in  that  institution.  The  Uni
versity  of  New  York  gave  him  the  degree  of  L.  H.
D.  in  1870.  and  Madison  university  that  of  LL.  I),
in  1880.  Prof.  North  has  identified  himself  with
the  history  of  Hamilton  college,  and  more  than
any  other  has  shaped  its  character  and  achieve
ments  during  the  last  half-century.  For  forty
years  he  has  been  the  necrologist  of  Hamilton,  and
since  1881  has  been  a  trustee  of  that  college.  He
was  president  of  the  New  York  state  teachers'  asso
ciation  in  1865.

NORTH,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Fort  Frederick,
Pemaquid,  Me.,  in  1755;  d.  in  New  York  city,  3
Jan.,  1830.  He  was  the  son  of  John  North,  who
commanded  Fort  Frederick,  Me.,  in  1751,  and  Fort*
St.  George  in  Thomaston,  Me.,  in  1758.  He  en
tered  the  Revolutionary  army  in  1775,  and  served
under  Benedict  Arnold  in  the  unfortunate  expedi
tion  to  Canada  in  that  year.  He  was  appointed  in
May,  1777,  captain  in  Henry  Jackson's  Massachu
setts  regiment,  with  which  lie  participated  in  the
battle  of  Monmouth.  In  1779  he  became  aide-de
camp  to  Baron  Steubcn,  whom  he  greatly  aided  in
introducing  his  system  of  discipline  in  the  Con
tinental  army.  Later  he  accompanied  Steuben  to
Virginia,  participating  in  the  campaigns  in  that
colony,  and  was  present,  at  the  surrender  of  Corn-
wallis.  He  was  appointed  by  act  of  congress  major
in  the  2d  U.  S.  regiment  on  20  Oct.,  1780,  and  be
came  adjutant-general  of  the  army  on  19  July,
1798,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general,  but  was
mustered  out  on  10  June,  1800.  In  March,  1812,
he  was  again  appointed  adjutant-general  of  the
U.  S.  army,  but  declined.  Meanwhile  he  had  served
in  the  New  York  assembly,  where  he  held  the  office
of  speaker,  and  he  was  one  of  the  first  canal  com
missioners.  He  was  chosen  as  a  Federalist  to  the
U.  S.  senate,  serving  from  21  May,  1789,  till  3
March,  1799.  The  bulk  of  Baron  Steuben's  prop
erty  was  bequeathed  to  Gen.  North,  who  divided  it
among  his  military  companions.  Gen.  North  was  a
member  of  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati.  He  mar
ried  Mary  Duane,  daughter  of  Judge  James  Duane.

NORTHENI),  Charles,  educator,  b.  in  Newbury,
Mass.,  2  April,  1814.  He  studied  at  Amherst,  but
was  not  graduated.  Subsequently  he  was  principal
of  the  Epps  school,  Salem,  Mass.,  and  for  many
years  superintendent  of  the  public  schools  in  Dan-
vers,  Mass.,  and  New  Britain,  Conn.  He  was  presi
dent  of  the  American  institute  of  instruction  in
1864.  Mr.  Northend  published  numerous  school-
books,  and  a  book  entitled  "  Teacher  and  Parent  "
(1855). — His  brother,  William  Dnmmer,  1).  in
Newbury,  Mass.,  26  Feb.,  1823,  was  graduated  at
Bowdoin  in  1843,  studied  law  in  Salem,  Mass.,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1845.  He  was  in  the


XORTIIROP


NORTON


535


state  senate  in  1801-'2,  and  since  1880  has  been
president  of  the  Essex  bar  association.  He  has
published  numerous  magazine  articles  and  ad
dresses  and  speeches,  and  a  volume  of  "  Speeches
and  Essays  on  Political  Subjects  "  (Salem,  18(59).

NORTHROP,  Cyrus,  educator,  b.  in  Ridgefield,
Conn.,  30  Sept.,  1834.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1857,  arid  at  the  law-school  in  1859,  and  in
1801-'3  was  clerk,  first  of  the  Connecticut  house  of
representatives,  and  then  of  the  senate.  He  was
professor  of  rhetoric  and  English  literature  in  Yale
from  1803  till  1884,  when  he  became  president  of
the  University  of  Minnesota.  From  1809  till  1881
Prof.  Northrop  was  collector  of  the  port  of  New
Haven.  He  has  delivered  many  addresses,  of
which  a  dozen  or  more  have  been  published.

NORTHROP,  Harry  Pinekney,  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  5  May,  1842.  He  began  his
classical  studies  at  Georgetown  college,  D.  C.,  but
his  health  failed,  and  he  was  removed  to  Mount  St.
Mary's  college,  Emmettsburg,  Md.,  where  he  was
gradual  ed  in  1800.  The  same  year  he  entered  the
theological  seminary  there,  and  after  studying  four
years  went  to  Rome  and  entered  the  American  col
lege.  He  was  ordained  priest  in  Rome  in  June,
18G5.  On  his  return  to  the  United  States  he  was
for  several  months  attached  to  the  Church  of  the
Nativity  in  New  York.  In  1800  he  went  to  Charles
ton,  S.  C.,  and  was  stationed  at  St.  Joseph's  church
for  one  year  as  assistant  pastor.  In  1808  he  volun
teered  for  the  missions  in  North  Carolina,  and  was
four  years  at  New  Berne  in  that  state.  Again  re
turning  to  Charleston,  he  was  for  six  years  assist
ant  pastor  of  the  pro-cathedral  and  pastor  of  Sul
livan's  island.  His  next  charge  was  St.  Patrick's
church.  Charleston,  of  which  he  was  pastor  for  one
year.  He  was  raised  to  the  episcopate  on  8  Jan.,
1882.  as  vicar-apostolic  of  North  Carolina,  receiving
the  title  of  bishop  of  Rosalia.  He  was  consecrated
in  the  cathedral  of  Baltimore  by  Archbishop  Gib
bons.  By  papal  brief  of  27  Jan.,  1883,  he  was  trans
ferred  to  the  see  of  Charleston,  S.  C.,  retaining  the
administration  of  the  vicariate  of  North  Carolina.
He  was  present  at  the  third  plenary  council  of
Baltimore  in  1884.

NORTHROP,  Lucius  Bellinger,  soldier,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C.,  8  Sept.,  1811.  He  was  graduated
at  the  IT.  S.  military  academy  in  1829,  and  was  then
appointed  2d  lieutenant  of  dragoons  and  stationed
at  Fort  Gibson  and  other  places  in  the  west  for
eight  years.  He  was  severely  wounded  while  fol
lowing  an  Indian  trail,  and  after  his  recovery  he
returned  to  Charleston  on  sick-leave,  never  resum
ing  active  service.  He  studied  medicine  at  Jeffer
son  college,  Philadelphia,  and  on  his  return  to
Charleston  practised  occasionally  for  charity  only.
The  war  department,  having  been  informed  that  he
was  practising  medicine,  dropped  him  from  the
army,  but  when  Jefferson  Davis  became  secretary
of  war  he  not  only  reinstated  him.  but  promoted
him  to  the  rank  of  captain  with  full  pay.  When
South  Carolina  seceded  he  was  among  the  first  to
resign  his  commission,  and  when  a  provisional
government  was  established  at  Montgomery,  Ala.,
Jefferson  Davis  offered  him  the  place  of  commis
sary-general,  which,  after  declining  twice,  he  ac
cepted  at  the  urgent  solicitation  of  Mr.  Davis,  who
had  been  his  classmate  at  West  Point  and  his
friend  ever  since.  When  Richmond  became  the
capital  of  the  Confederacy  he  removed  to  that  city
and  remained  at  the  head  of  the  commissary  de
partment  until  within  a  few  weeks  of  the  fall  of
the  Confederacy.  It  is  related  that,  after  the  first
battle  of  Bull  Run,  on  being  requested  to  make
some  provision  for  feeding  the  prisoners  then  in


Libby  prison,  he  replied :  "  I  know  nothing  of  Yan
kee  prisoners ;  throw  them  all  into  the  James  river,"
and  subsequently  did  all  in  his  power  to  thwart
the  efforts  of  those  who  were  humanely  laboring  to
render  the  subsistence  received  by  the  prisoners
less  precarious.  By  the  spring  of  1804  Northrop
had  succeeded  in  having  a  law  passed  abolishing
the  office  of  commissary  of  prisons,  thus  leaving
the  whole  matter  of  providing  food  for  them  in  his
own  hands.  "  From  this  date,"  says  Edward  A.
Pollard  in  his  "Secret  History  of  the  Confed
eracy."  "whatever  there  was  of  distress  for  food,
among  the  prisoners  is  to  be  properly  and  dis
tinctly  charged  to  one  man  in  the  Confederacy,
Northrop."  He  was  referred  to  in  the  Confederate
congress  as  "  a  certain  commissary-general  who  is
a  curse  to  our  country,"  "  and  has  attempted  to
starve  the  prisoners  in  our  hands."  Senator  Orr,
of  South  Carolina,  with  the  aid  of  several  congress
men,  attempted  to  procure  his  removal  from  office,
but  was  defeated  by  the  opposition  of  Jefferson
Davis,  whose  "  affection  for  Northrop  "  is  declared
by  Mr.  Pollard  to  be  "  grotesque,  inexplicable,  in
sane."  After  the  fall  of  Richmond,  Northrop  retired
to  North  Carolina  and  engaged  in  farming,  but  in
July,  1805,  he  was  arrested  by  the  National  authori
ties"  and  confined  in  Richmond  until  the  following
November,  when  he  was  released.  He  then  bought
a  farm  near  Charlottesville,  Va.,  upon  which  he
has  since  resided.

NORTHRUP,  Ansel  Judd,  author,  b.  in  Smith-
field,  Madison  co.,  N.  Y.,  30  June,  1833.  He  was
graduated  at  Hamilton  college  in  1858,  studied  in
Columbia  law-school,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1859,  since  which  time  he  has  practised  his  pro
fession  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.  Since  1883  he  has  been
county  judge  for  Onondaga  county.  He  has  pub
lished  "  Camps  and  Tramps  in  the  Adirondacks.
and  Grayling  Fishing  in  Northern  Michigan"
(Syracuse'.  1880),  and  "  Sconset  Cottage  Life  "  (New
York,  1881).  He  has  in  preparation  (1888)  a  gene
alogy  of  the  Northrup  family.

NORTHRUP,  George  Washington,  educator,
b.  in  Antwerp.  Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.,  15  Oct.,  1820.
He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1854,  and  at
Rochester  theological  seminary  in  1857.  In  1858
he  was  called  to  the  professorship  of  church  history
in  the  Rochester  seminary,  and  in  1807  he  became
president  of  Chicago  Baptist  theological  semi
nary,  Morgan  Park.  He  was  early  ordained  to  the
Baptist  ministry,  and  has  attained  note  as  a
preacher.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Rochester  in  1804.  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Kala-
mazoo  college  in  1879.

NORTHRUP,  Jeremiah,  Canadian  senator,
b.  in  Falmouth,  N.  S.,  in  1815.  He  is  descended
from  Jeremiah  Northrup.  a  loyalist,  who  went  to
Nova  Scotia  from  the  United  States  at  the  close  of
the  Revolution  and  represented  Falmouth  in  the
first  provincial  parliament  that  sat  in  Nova  Scotia
for  twenty-five  years  until  his  death.  Jeremiah  was
educated 'at  Halifax,  became  a  merchant  and  ship
owner,  director  of  the  Ocean  marine  insurance
company,  a  member  of  the  committee  of  the  Prot
estant  industrial  school,  and  a  governor  of  Dal-
housie  college.  He  was  a  commissioner  for  sign
ing  treasury  notes,  and  represented  Halifax  in  the
provincial  legislature  from  1807  until  he  was  elected
to  the  Dominion  senate.  10  Oct.,  1870.

NORTON,  Asahel  Stroner,  clergyman,  b.  in
Farmington,  Conn.,  20  Sept..  1705  ;  d.  in  Clinton,
N.  Y.,  10  May,  1853.  His  father.  Ichabod  Norton,
was  a  colonel  in  the  war  of  the  Revolution.  The
son  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1790,  licensed  as  a
Congregational  preacher  in  1792,  and  in  1793  be-


536


NORTON


NORTON


came  pastor  of  the  church  in  Clinton,  N.  Y.,  which
charge  he  retained  till  November,  1833.  He  was
one  of  the  founders  of  Hamilton  college,  and  was
appointed  to  deliver  the  Latin  address  at  the  inau
guration  of  the  first  president,  Azel  Backus.  He
was  a  member  of  the  corporation  of  the  college
from  its  foundation  till  1833,  and  for  forty  years
exerted  an  important  influence  in  western  New
York.  In  1819  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Union  college.

NORTON,  Augustas  Theodore,  clergyman,  b.
in  Cornwall,  Conn.,  28  March,  1808 ;  d.  in  Alton,
111.,  29  April,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1832,  taught  at  Catskill,  N.  Y.,  while  studying  the
ology,  and  was  licensed  by  the  presbytery  of  Colum
bia  in  September,  1834.  After  preaching  in  vari
ous  churches  in  Illinois,  and  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
where  he  organized  the  2d  Presbyterian  church,
he  was  installed  in  February,  1839,  as  pastor  of  the
1st  Presbyterian  church,  Alton,  111.,  and  remained
there  about  twenty  years.  In  September,  1859,  Mr.
Norton  was  active  in  mission  work.  In  May,  1845,  he
established  the  "  Presbytery  Reporter,"  and  edited
and  published  it  for  twenty-three  years.  He  was  a
corporate  member  of  the  American  board  of  com
missioners  for  foreign  missions,  and  published  a
valuable  "  History  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  in
the  State  of  Illinois  "  (St.  Louis,' 1879).

NORTON,  Chappie,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Eng
land  in  1746;  d.  19  March,  1818.  His  father  was
Fletcher  Norton,  first  Lord  Grantlev.  The  son  en
tered  the  army,  and  was  appointed  captain  in  the
19th  foot  in  June,  1763,  major  in  July,  1769,  cap
tain  and  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  Coldstream
guards  in  June,  1774,  brevet  colonel  in  November,
1780,  and  general  in  April,  1802.  He  came  to  New
York  in  August,  1779,  served  in  the  Revolutionary
war,  and  received  frequent  and  honorable  mention.
He  represented  Guilford  in  the  British  parliament
for  many  years,  and  was  governor  of  Charlernont.

NORTON,  Daniel  Sheldon,  senator,  b.  in
Mount  Vernon,  Ohio,  12  April.  1829 ;  d.  in  Wash
ington,  D.  C.,  14  July,  1870.  He  was  educated  at
Kenyon  college,  and  served  one  year  in  the  war  with
Mexico  in  the  2d  Ohio  regiment.  He  subsequently
studied  law,  visited  California  and  Nicaragua  in
1850-'!,  and  on  his  return  to  Ohio  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1852,  and  began  practice.  In  1855  he  re
moved  to  Minnesota,  and  in  1857  was  elected  to
the  state  senate,  and  served  in  both  branches  of  the
legislature  till  1865.  He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator
from  Minnesota  as  a  Union-Conservative  to  suc
ceed  Morton  S.  Wilkinson,  and  served  from  4
March,  1866,  till  his  death.  Senator  Norton  was  a
delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  National  union  con
vention  in  1866,  and  on  most  questions  of  National
policy  voted  with  the  Democrats.

NORTON,  Frank  Henry,  journalist,  b.  in
Ilingham,  Mass.,  20  March,  1836.  His  father  was
for  twenty-one  years  U.  S.  consul  at  Pictou,  Nova
Scotia.  The  son  was  educated  at  private  schools,
and  entered  the  book  business,  but  in  1855  became
assistant  librarian,  and  afterward  assistant  superin
tendent,  in  the  Astor  library,  which  he  left  in  1865.
He  was  chief  librarian  of  the  Brooklyn  mercantile
library  in  1866-'7,  and  in  1872  entered  journalism.
He  was  proprietor  and  editor  of  the  New  York
"  Era  "  in  1879-'81,  and  since  1883  has  been  con
nected  with  the  "  Herald."  He  was  one  of  the
founders  and  for  several  years  president  of  the
American  numismatic  and  archa3ological  society.
Mr.  Norton  has  contributed  to  current  literature
since  1855.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Historical  Regis
ter  of  the  Centennial  Exhibition,  1876,  and  the
Paris  Exposition,  1878  "  (New  York,  1878) ;  "  Life


of  Winfield  Scott  Hancock,"  with  Rev.  David  K.
Junkin,  D.  D.  (1880);  "Life  of  Alexander  H.
Stephens  "  (1883) ;  and  "  Daniel  Boone,"  a  romance
(1883).  He  has  also  written  numerous  plays,  in
cluding  "  Alhambra,"  a  burlesque  produced  in  New
York  in  1872;  l>Azrael,"a  fairy  spectacle  (1872) ;
"  Cupid  and  Psyche,"  a  burlesque  played  in  New
Orleans  and  St.  Louis  (1873) ;  and  "  Leonie,"  a
melodrama,  in  Albany  and  Buffalo  (1872).

NORTON,  Herman,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
Hartford,  N.  Y.,  2  July,  1799  ;  d.  there,  20  Nov.,
1850.  He  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  college  in
1823,  and  ordained  by  the  presbytery  of  Oneida,  9
Feb.,  1826.  He  was  engaged  as  a  revivalist  in
1826-'30,  as  pastor  of  churches  in  New  York  and
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  till  1838,  and  then  as  a  supply
and  evangelist  till  1843.  He  was  secretary  of  the
American  Protestant  society,  and  of  the  American
and  foreign  Christian  union  in  1843-'50,  residing
in  New  York.  His  published  works  include  "  The
Christian  and  Deist  in  Contrast  " ;  "  Record  of
Facts  Concerning  the  Persecutions  at  Madeira";
"  Signs  of  Danger  and  Promise  " ;  and  "  Startling
Facts  for  American  Protestants."

NORTON,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stortford,
Hertfordshire,  England.  6  May,  1606  ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  5  April.  1663.  He  was  educated  at  Cam
bridge  university  and  became  a  curate  in  his  native
town.  Having  embraced  the  tenets  of  the  Puri
tans  he  came  to  Plymouth,  Mass.,  in  1635,  and
preached  there  during  the  winter.  Early  in  1636
he  removed  to  Boston,  and  before  the  close  of  the
year  became  minister  of  the  church  at  Ipswich.
He  was  an  active  member  of  the  convention  that
formed  the  "Cambridge  platform"  in  1648.  In
1652  he  became  colleague  of  Rev.  John  Wilson  as
minister  of  the  First  church  at  Boston,  and  in  1662
he  accompanied  Gov.  Bradstreet  as  agent  of  the
colony  to  present  an  address  to  Charles  II.  after
his  restoration,  and  to  petition  in  behalf  of  New
England.  The  king  assured  them  that  he  would
confirm  the  charter  of  the  colony,  but  he  required
that  justice  should  be  administered  in  his  name,
and  attached  other  conditions  that  the  colonists
regarded  as  arbitrary.  Upon  the  return  of  the
agents  to  Massachusetts  they  were  regarded  with
suspicion,  and  the  report  was  circulated  that  they
had  sold  the  liberties  of  the  country.  This  greatly
affected  Mr.  Norton's  popularity  as  a  preacher,  and
it  is  supposed  that  it  hastened  his  death.  The  first
Latin  book  that  was  composed  in  the  colonies,
"  Responsio  ad  totum  questionum  syllogen  "  (Lon
don,  1648),  was  by  him,  and  was  written  in  answer
to  questions  relating  to  church  government  that
were  sent  to  New  England  from  Holland  by  Apol-
lonius.  He  also  wrote  "  A  Discussion  on  the  Suf
ferings  of  Christ"  (  1653);  "The  Orthodox  Evan
gelist  "  (1654) ;  "Election  Sermon"  (1657);  "Life
of  Rev.  John  Cotton  "  (1658) ;  "  The  Heart  of  New
England  Rent  by  the  Blasphemies  of  the  Present
Generation  "  (1660) ;  a  letter  in  Latin  to  John  Dury,
a  catechism,  and  other  works.  He  left  some  writ
ings  in  an  unfinished  state,  of  which  the  principal
one  was  a  large  "  Body  of  Divinity."  which  is  pre
served  in  the  archives  of  the  Massachusetts  histori
cal  society.  His  life  was  written  by  Rev.  Alexander
W.  McClure  in  "  Lives  of  the  Chief  Fathers  of  New
England"  (1850). — His  nephew,  John,  b.  in  Ips
wich,  Mass.,  in  1651  ;  d.  in  1716,  was  the  son  of
Rev.  William  Norton.  His  mother  was  the  daugh
ter  of  Emanuel  Downing,  and  the  niece  of  Gov.
John  Winthrop.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1671,  and  ordained  as  successor  to  Rev.  Peter  Ho-
bart  over  the  First  church,  in  Hingham,  Mass.,  in
1678.  In  the  same  year  he  married,  and  published


NORTON


NORTON


537


a  "  Funeral  Elegy  "  upon  Mrs.  Anne  Bradstreet,  a
stiff  production  of  little  merit  except  piety  of  sen
timent  and  propriety  of  formal  versification.  Prof.
Moses  Coit  Tyler,  in  his  "  History  of  American  Lit
erature,"  ascribes  poetic  genius  to  its  author,  which
indicates  that  his  poem  was  not  inferior  to  the
average  verses  of  his  contemporaries.  His  only
other  publication  was  an  "  Election  Sermon,"  de
livered  26  May,  1708,  and  published  under  the
title  of  "  An  Essay  tending  to  promote  Educa
tion."  Mr.  Norton  was  a  pious  scholar,  and  is
reported  to  have  been  an  amiable  man.  beloved  and
respected  in  the  community  of  which  he  was  the
spiritual  head.  The  Hingtiam  meeting-house  in


which  he  preached  and  which  is  represented  in  the
illustration  was  built  in  1681.  and  still  stands.  It
is  the  oldest  house  of  worship  in  New  England. —
His  descendant,  Andrews,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hing
ham,  Mass.,  31  Dec.,  1786  ;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  18
Sept.,  1852,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1804,  and
afterward  pursued  a  course  of  literary  and  theologi
cal  study  there.  After  serving  as  tutor  at  Bowdoin
in  1809-'10,  and  at  Harvard  in  1811-'12,  he  became
editor  of  "  The  General  Repository."  From  1813
till  1821  he  was  librarian  at  Harvard,  and  in  the
former  year  he  became  lecturer  on  biblical  criticism
and  interpretation.  In  1819  he  was  elected  Dexter
professor  of  sacred  literature  in  the  New  divinity
school  at  Cambridge,  which  chair  he  occupied  till
1830,  when  ill  health  forced  him  to  resign.  He
spent  the  rest  of  his  days  in  literary  retirement  at
Cambridge  until  1849,  when  he  made  Newport  his
summer  residence.  In  his  theological  views  and
writings  Mr.  Norton  united  opposite  schools  of
thought.  He  was  radical  as  a  critic;  and  interpre
ter,  conservative  as  an  expositor  of  Christian  doc
trine,  and  while  leading  the  van  in  the  Unitarian
protest  against  Calvinism  he  was  foremost  in  op
position  to  the  naturalistic  school,  of  which  Theo
dore  Parker  was  the  principal  representative.  As
a  lecturer  on  scriptural  interpretation  he  had  few
equals  and  no  superiors  in  the  United  States.  Be
sides  contributing  to  numerous  periodicals,  he  edit
ed  the  "  Miscellaneous  Writings  of  Charles  Eliot  "
(1814);  the  "Poems  of  Mrs.  Hemans"  (1826);
and,  in  conjunction  with  Charles  Folsom,  "  The
Select  Journal  of  Foreign  Periodical  Literature  "
(4  vols.,  Boston,  1833-'4) :  and  wrote  "  A  Statement
of  the  Reasons  for  not  believing  the  Doctrines  of
Trinitarians  as  Concerning  the  Nature  of  God  and
the  Person  of  Christ "  (Boston,  1833  ;  new  ed.,  with
a  memoir  of  the  author,  1856) ;  "  Historical  Evi
dences  of  the  Genuineness  of  the  Gospels  "  (3  vols.,


dences  of  the  Genuineness  of  the  Gospels"  (1855).
He  was  also  the  author  of  fugitive  poems. — His
son.  Charles  Eliot,  author,  b.  in  Cambridge.  Mass.,
16  Nov.,  1827,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1846,
and  shortly  afterward  entered  a  Boston  counting-


house  to  gain  a  knowledge  of  the  East  India  trade.
In  1849  he  went  as  supercargo  of  a  ship  bound  for
India,  in  which  country  he  travelled  extensively,
and  returned  home  through  Europe  in  1851.  He
made  other  visits  to  Europe  in  1855-'7,  and  from
1868  till  1873.  In  1855  he  edited  with  Dr.  Ezra
Abbot  his  father's  translation  of  the  gospels  with
notes  (2  vols.),  and  his  "  Internal  Evidences  of  the
Genuineness  of  the  Gospels."  During  the  civil  war
he  edited  at  Boston  the  papers  issued  by  the
Loyal  publication  society,  and  in  1864-'8  he  was
joint  editor  with  James  Russell  Lowell  of  the
"North  American  Review."  He  has  published
"  Considerations  on  some  Recent  Social  Theories  "
(Boston,  1853) ;  "  The  New  Life  of  Dante,"  an  essay,
with  translations  (Cambridge,  1859) :  "  Notes  of
Travel  and  Study  in  Italy  "  (I860) :  "  A  Review  of
a  Translation  into  Italian  of  the  '  Commentary  '  by
Benvenuto  da  Imola  on  the 'Divina  Commedia'"
(1861) ;  "  The  Soldier  of  the  Good  Cause  "  (Boston,
1861);  "  William  Blake's  Illustrations  of  the  Book
of  Job,  with  Sketch  of  the  Artist's  Life  and
Works  "  (1875) ;  "  List  of  the  Principal  Books  relat
ing  to  the  Life  and  Works  of  Michael  Angelo.  with
Notes  "  (Cambridge,  1879) :  and  "  Historical  Studies
of  Church-Building  in  the  Middle  Ages:  Venice,
Siena.  Florence  "  (New  York,  1880).

NORTON,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Berlin,  Conn.,
in  1716 ;  d.  in  East  Hampton,  Conn.,  24  March,
1778.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1737,  ordained
at  Deerfield  in  1741,  and  settled  in  Bernardstown,
Mass.  He  was  chaplain  at  Fort  Massachusetts  at
the  time  of  its  capture,  and  was  taken  to  Canada,
where  he  remained  one  year.  Mr.  Norton  was  in
stalled  on  30  Nov.,  1748,  as  pastor  of  the  Congrega
tional  church  at  East  Hampton.  Conn.,  where  he
labored  till  his  death.  He  published  a  narrative
of  his  captivity  (Boston,  1748;  new  ed.,  with  notes
by  Samuel  G.  Drake,  1870).

NORTON,  John  or  Tryoninhokaraven,  chief
of  the  Six  Nations.  He  was  of  mixed  Scotch  and
Indian  parentage  and  was  educated  at  an  English
school.  He  translated  the  Gospel  of  John  into  Mo
hawk,  and  his  version  was  printed  in  London  by
the  Bible  society  (1807)  and  distributed  among  the
Mohawks  on  Grand  river.  Canada.

NORTON,  John  Nicholas,  clergyman,  b.  in
Waterloo,  N.  Y.,  in  1820 ;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky..  18
Jan.,  1881.  He  belonged  to  an  old  Virginia  family,
though  he  was  born  and  educated  in  New  York.
He  was  graduated  at  Hobart  college,  Geneva,  N.  Y.,
in  1842,  and  at  the  General  theological  seminary
in  1845,  was  ordained  deacon  in  Trinity  church,
Geneva,  20  July,  1845,  by  Bishop  Delancey,  and
priest  in  St.  Paul's  church,  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  24
Aug.,  1846,  by  the  same  bishop.  His  first  post  was
that  of  assistant  minister  of  St.  Luke's  church,
Rochester,  in  1845.  He  removed  to  Kentucky  in
December,  1846,  became  rector  of  Ascension  church,
Frankfort,  and  engaged  also  in  teaching.  He  oc
cupied  this  post  until  August,  1870,  when  he  ac
cepted  a  call  to  become  associate  rector  of  Christ
church,  Louisville,  Ky.,  where  he  labored  during
the  remaining  years  of  his  life.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  I),  from  Hobart  in  1862,  and  subse
quently  from  two  other  colleges.  Dr.  Norton
was  a  member  of  the  standing  committee  of  the
diocese  of  Kentucky,  for  nine  years  a  deputy  to  the
General  convention,  and  a  trustee  of  the  Theologi
cal  seminary  of  Kentucky.  His  publications  were
numerous,  amounting  in  all  to  nearly  forty  vol
umes.  They  include  "  The  Boy  who  was  trained
up  to  be  a  Clergyman  "  (Philadelphia.  1854) ;  "  Full
Proof  of  the  Ministry,"  sequel  to  the  preceding
(New  York,  1855) ;  "  Lives  of  the  Bishops  of  the


538


NORTON


NORTON


Protestant  Episcopal  Church,"  beginning  with
Bishop  White  (1857),  followed  by  Bishop  Seabury
and  fifteen  others(1867-'9);  "Life of  Bishop  Hebcr"
(1858) ;  "Life  of  George  Washington  "  (I860) ;  "  Life
of  Benjamin  Franklin"  (Frankfort,  Ky.,  1801);
"Life  of  Archbishop  Cranmer  "  (1863);  "Life  of
Archbishop  Laud"(Boston,1804);  "Short  Sermons  "
(1858)  ;  "  Sketches,  Literary  and  Theological  "
(1872);  "The  King's  Ferry-Boat,"  sermons  (1870);
and  "Old  Paths,"  sermons  (1880).— His  brother,
(ireorg'e  Hatley,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ontario  county,
N.  Y.,  7  May,  1824,  entered  Hobart  college  in
18:58,  but  was  not  graduated.  He  studied  law  in
Fauquier  county,  Va.,  in  1840-'3,  but,  resolving  to
enter  the  ministry,  went  to  the  Theological  semi
nary  of  Virginia,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1840.
He  was  ordained  deacon  in  July,  1846,  by  Bishop
Meade,  and  priest  in  May,  1848,  by  the  same  bishop.
He  accepted  the  rectorship  of  St.  James's  church,
Warrenton,  Va.,  in  1846,  and  held  that  post  for
twelve  years,  but  removed  to  Ohio  in  1858,  and  be
came  rector  of  Trinity  church,  Columbus.  In
1859  he  was  called  to  St.  Paul's  church,  Alexandria,
Va.,  which  post  he  holds  at  the  present  date  (1888).
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  I),  from  William  and
Mary  in  1868.  Dr.  Norton  has  held  various  offices
of  trust  in  church  affairs.  He  was  delegate  to  the
general  council  of  his  church  in  the  seceding
states  in  1862-'o,  deputy  to  the  General  conven
tion  in  the  United  States  in  1868-?86,  and  has  been
a  member  of  the  standing  committee  of  the  dio
cese  and  a  trustee  of  the  Theological  seminary  of
Virginia  since  1865.  He  was  elected  professor  of
systematic  divinity  in  the  theological  seminary  in
1874,  and  president  of  Kenyon  college,  Ohio,  in
1876,  but  declined  both  posts.  Dr.  Norton  has
contributed  to  some  extent  to  current  religious
literature,  and  has  also  published  an  "Inquiry  into
the  Nature  and  Extent  of  the  Holy  Catholic
Church"  (Philadelphia,  1853).

NORTON,  John  Pitkin,  chemist,  b.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  19  July,  1822  ;  d.  in  Farmington,  Conn.,  5
Sept.,  1852.  He  early  determined  to  be  a  farmer,
a  choice  in  which  his  parents  acquiesced  with  the
provision  that  he  should  be  educated  for  that  occu
pation,  and  so,  while  his  summers  were  devoted  to
the  care  of  his  father's  farm  in  Farmington,  the
winters  were  spent  in  scientific  studies  in  New
Haven.  In  1844  he  went  to  Edinburgh,  where  he
spent  two  years  in  the  laboratory  of  the  Agricul
tural  chemical  association.  WThile  he  was  in  Scot
land  he  prepared  several  scientific  papers,  two
of  which  were  read  before  the  British  association
for  the  advancement  of  science,  and  for  an  essay
on  oats  he  received  a  prize  of  fifty  sovereigns  from
the  Highland  agricultural  society.  On  his  return
to  the  United  States  he  was  made  first  professor  of
agricultural  chemistry  and  of  vegetable  and  animal
physiology  in  Yale,  to  date  from  19  Aug.,  1846,
but,  as  the  giving  of  instruction  in  these  branches
was  deferred  for  one  year,  he  returned  to  Europe
for  the  purpose  of  further  study  at  Utrecht.  He
entered  on  the  active  duties  of  his  chair  in  the
autumn  of  1847,  and  continued  there  until  his
death.  The  large  number  of  students  that  attended
his  scientific  lectures  and  those  of  the  younger
Silliman  led  to  the  ultimate  founding  of  the  Yale
(now  Sheffield)  scientific  school.  Prof.  Norton
delivered  numerous  addresses  before  agricultural
societies,  which  were  published  in  pamphlet-form,
and  contributed  papers  to  the  "  American  Journal
of  Science."  He  was  a  regular  contributor  to  the
Albany  "  Cultivator,"  and  published  "  Elements  of
Scientific  Agriculture  "  (Albany,  1850)  and  "  Ap
pendix  to  Stephen's  Book  of  the  Farm,"  the  Ameri


can  appendix  to  the  "Farmer's  Guide  to  Scientific
and  Practical  Agriculture"  (2  vols.,  New  York,
1858).— His  brother,  Charles  Ledyard,  author,  b.
in  Farmington,  Conn.,  11  June,  1837,  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1859,  and  continued  his  studies  in  the
direction  of  chemistry  until  the  autumn  of  1860.
He  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  7th  regiment,  New
York  National  guard,  in  1861,  and  served  in  Mary
land.  In  September,  1862,  he  was  appointed  a
lieutenant  in  the  25th  Connecticut  volunteers  ami
attached  to  an  expedition  to  the  Department  of  the
Gulf  under  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks,  becoming  an
aid  to  Gen.  Henry  W.  Birge.  He  was  promoted
captain  in  February,  1863,  and  participated  in  the
first  Red  river  campaign  and  the  siege  of  Port
Hudson.  In  October,  1863,  he  was  assigned  to  the
29th  Connecticut  volunteers,  and  organized  that
regiment  in  New  Haven,  Conn.  He  was  commis
sioned  colonel  of  the  78th  U.  S.  colored  troops  in
December,  1863,  and  joined  his  regiment  in  Louisi
ana,  serving  in  the  Department  of  the  Gulf  until
the  end  of  the  war,  mainly  in  garrison  and  out
post  duty.  Col.  Norton  was  then  given  command
of  a  wide  district  in  western  Louisiana  during  the
early  reconstruction  period.  In  November,  1H65,  he
was  ordered  to  New  Orleans  and  charged  with  the
reception  and  despatch  of  troops  in  transit  to  the
north  for  discharge.  He  was  mustered  out  of  ser
vice  in  January,  1866,  and  spent  a  year  in  cotton-
planting  in  Louisiana  and  in  travel  in  Europe.
On  his  return  he  entered  journalism  in  New  York
city,  and  was  on  the  staff  of  the  "  Christian  Union  "
in  1869-'79,  and  was  managing  editor  the  last  three
years  of  that  time.  In  1881-'4  he  was  managing
editor  of  the  "  Continent  "  magazine.  He  has  since
devoted  his  attention  to  literature,  contributing
to  magazines  on  historical  and  out-of-door  topics.
He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  New  York  canoe
club,  and  is  the  author,  with  John  Habberton.  of
"Canoeing  in  Kanuckia"  (New  York,  1878).

NORTON,  Lewis  Mills,  chemist,  b.  in  Athol.
Mass.,  26  Dec.,  1855.  He  studied  at  the  Massachu
setts  institute  of  technology,  where  in  1875  he  re
ceived  a  certificate  of  chemistry,  and  then  served
as  assistant  until  1877.  Subsequently  he  studied
at  the  school  of  medicine  in  Paris,  and  at  the
chemical  laboratories  in  the  universities  of  Berlin
and  Gottingen,  receiving  in  1879  the  degree  of  Ph.
D.  at  the  latter.  After  his  return  to  the  United
States  he  was  chemist  of  the  Amoskeag  manufac
turing  company  in  Manchester,  N.  H.,  until  1882,
when  he  returned  to  the  institute  of  technology,
becoming  in  1883  professor  of  organic  and  indus
trial  chemistry.  Dr.  Norton  has  published  papers
that  give  the  results  of  his  scientific  researches  in
the  proceedings  of  the  German  chemical  society
and  in  the"  American  Chemical  Journal."  He  is
a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  has  in  prepara
tion  a  "  Dictionary  of  Chemical  Synonyms."

NORTON,  Sidney  Augustus^  educator,  b.  in
Bloomfield,  Ohio,  11  Jan.,  1835.  He  was  graduated
at  Union  college  in  1856,  taught  natural  science
in  Poughkeepsie,  was  tutor  at  Union  in  1857,  and
in  1858  became  principal  of  a  high-school  in  Ham
ilton.  Ohio.  He  was  connected  with  the  Cleveland
high-school  in  1858-'64,  and  was  then  professor  of
chemistry  in  Miami  medical  college.  In  1873  he
was  called  to  fill  a  similar  chair  in  Ohio  state  uni
versity,  which  he  has  since  held.  Prof.  Norton  has
stu  lied  chemistry  in  the  universities  at  Bonn,  Leip-
sic,  and  Heidelberg,  in  Germany.  He  received  the
degree  of  M.  D.  from  Miami  in "1869  in  course,  and
from  Western  Reserve  in  1869,  that  of  Ph.  I),  from
Kenyon  in  1878,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  VVooster
in  18T81.  Besides  writing  various  scientific  and  edu-


NORTON


NOTT


539


cational  papers,  he  edited  Wells  and  Quackenbos's
'•  Grammar  "  (Portland,  Me.,  1863),  and  is  the  author
of  text-books  on  "  Physics "  (Cincinnati,  1875) ;
••  Inorganic  Chemistry  "  (1878) ;  "  Natural  Philoso
phy"  (1879);  and  "Organic  Chemistry  "  (1884).

NORTON,  Thomas  Herbert,  chemist,  b.  in
Rushford,  N.  Y.,  80  June,  1851.  He  was  graduated
at  Hamilton  college  in  1873,  and  then  went  to
Europe,  where  he  studied  chemistry,  receiving  in
1875  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  the  University  of
Heidelberg.  He  was  assistant  in  chemistry  at  the
University  of  Berlin  in  1877.  and  in  1878-'83  mana
ger  of  the  chemical  works  of  the  Compagnie  gen-
erale  des  cyanures  in  Paris.  He  then  returned  to
the  United  States,  and  in  1883  was  appointed  pro
fessor  of  chemistry  at  the  University  of  Cincinnati.
Prof.  Norton  has  contributed  to  science  important
researches  on  the  metals  of  the  cerium  group,  vari
ous  discoveries  in  organic  chemistry,  and  other
miscellaneous  investigations,  including  valuable
processes  in  the  manufacture  of  ammonia.  He
;ias  also  achieved  distinction  as  a  pedestrian,  hav
ing  travelled  12.000  miles  on  foot  through  Europe
and  western  Asia,  and  was  the  first  to  demonstrate
the  feasibility  of  pedestrianism  in  Greece  and
Syria.  He  is  a  member  of  the  chemical  societies
of  Berlin.  St.  Petersburg,  London,  and  Paris.

NORTON.  William  Augustus,  civil  engineer,
b.  in  East  Bloomfleld,  N.  Y..  25  Oct.,  1810;  d.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  21 -Sept.,  1883.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1831,  and
his  military  duty  included  two  vears'  service  as  as
sistant  professor  of  natural  and  experimental  phi
losophy  at  the  military  academy,  with  the  excep
tion  of  a  few  months  during  1832,  when  he  was
engaged  in  the  Black  Hawk  expedition,  holding
meanwhile  the  rank  of  2d  lieutenant  in  the  4th  ar
tillery.  He  resigned  from  the  army  on  30  Sept.,
1833,  to  accept  the  professorship  of  natural  philoso-

8hy  and  astronomy  in  the  University  of  the  city  of
'e'\v  York.  This  chair  he  held  until  1839,  when
he  was  called  to  a  similar  office  in  Delaware  col
lege,  Newark,  Del.,  and  in  1849  he  became  presi
dent  of  that  institution.  In  1850  he  accepted  the
professorship  of  natural  philosophy  and  civil  engi
neering  in  Brown,  and  in  1852  he  was  given  the  chair
of  civil  engineering  in  the  Sheffield  scientific  school
of  Yale,  which  he  held  until  his  death.  His  scientific
work  included  researches  in  the  domains  of  molecu
lar  physics,  terrestrial  magnetism,  and  astronomi
cal  physics,  and  appeared  chiefly  in  the  "  Ameri
can  Journal  of  Science,"  or  were  read  at  the  meet
ings  of  the  American  association  for  the  advance
ment  of  science,  or  before  the  National  academy
of  sciences.  In  1842  he  received  the  degree  of
A.  M.  from  the  University  of  Vermont.  Prof.  Nor
ton  was  a  member  of  various  scientific  societies,
and  after  1873  of  the  National  academy  of  sciences.
Noah  Porter  said  of  him :  "  Norton  was  eminently
a  liberal  student,  and  kept  himself  fully  abreast
of  the  speculations  and  science  of  the  times."  He
published  "  An  Elementary  Treatise  on  Astrono
my  "  (New  York.  1839)  and  "  First  Book  of  Natu
ral  Philosophy  and  Astronomy"  (1858).

NORVELL,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1790;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  11  April,  1850.
He  was  a  printer  by  trade,  and  edited  a  paper  in
Philadelphia,  but  subsequently  removed  to  Michi
gan,  and  was  identified  with  the  early  history  of  the
state.  He  was  postmaster  of  Detroit  in  1828-'30,
afterward  U.  S.  district  attorney,  and  on  the  ad
mission  of  Michigan  into  the  Union  as  a  state  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Democrat,  serving
in  1835-'41.  Six  of  his  seven  sons  served  with
credit  in  the  National  army  during  the  civil  war.


NORWOOD,  Thomas  Mason,  senator,  b.  in
Talbot  county,  Ga..  26  April.  1830.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Emory  college,  Ga.,  in  1850,  admitted  to
the  bar.  in  1852,  and  opened  a  law-office  in  Savan
nah  in  1857.  He  was  in  the  legislature  in  1861-'2,
was  alternate  elector  on  the  Seymour  and  Blair
ticket  in  1868,  and  in  1870  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.
senate  as  a  Democrat,  sen-ing  in  1871-7.  His  seat
was  unsuccessfully  contested  by  Foster  Blodgett.
Mr.  Norwood  won  celebrity  in  the  political  canvass
of  1870  by  a  series  of  newspaper  articles  which  he
published  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Nemesis."  Two
speeches  that  he  delivered  during  the  43d  congress
were  models  of  polished  invective.

NOTT,  Abraham,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wethers-
field,  Conn..  29  Jan.,  1696  ;  d.  in  Saybrook.  Conn..
24  Jan.,  1756.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1720,
and  from  his  ordination  in  1722  was  pastor  of  the
Congregational  church  in  Saybrook.  Conn.,  until
his  death.  He  was  remarkable  for  physical
strength,  and  it  is  said  that  he  could  lift  a  barrel  of
cider  above  his  head  and  hold  it  at  arms-length.
— His  grandson,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Say-
brook.  Conn.,  23  Jan.,  1754  ;  d.  in  Franklin,  Conn..
26  May,  1852,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1780,  stud
ied  divinity  under  Jonathan  Edwards,  and  in
1781  became  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church
in  Franklin,  Conn.,  where  he  continued  until  his
death,  a  period  of  seventy-one  years.  During  his
pastorate  he  also  taught  a  boys'  school,  and  was
regarded  as  one  of  the  most  successful  educators
of  his  day.  Yale  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1825.  Dr.  Nott  was  styled  the  "  Patriarch  of  the
New  England  Clergy."  His  publications  include
two  sermons,  one  of  which  was  delivered  on  the
50th,  and  the  other  on  the  60th  anniversary  of
his  ordination.  See  his  "  Autobiography  "  (Frank
lin.  1850). — Samuel's  brother,  Eliphalet,  clergy
man,  b.  in  Ashford.  Conn.,  25  June,  1773  ;  d.  in
Schenectady.  N.  Y.,  29  Jan.,  1866.  was  left  an  orphan
at  an  early  age,  and  was  brought  up  by  his  brother
Samuel  in  Frank
lin,  where  he  taught
to  obtain  means  to
enter  college.  He
was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1795,
studied  theology,
and  the  same  year
was  licensed  to
preach  by  the  New
London  Congrega
tional  association,
which  sent  him  as
a  missionary  into
the  then  half-set
tled  part  of  New
York  state  that
borders  on  Otsego
lake.  He  there  es
tablished  an  acad
emy,  and  acted  in  the  double  capacity  of  its
principal  and  pastor  of  the  church  in  Cherry  Val
ley.  In  1798-1804  he  was  pastor  of  the  1st  Pres
byterian  church  in  Albany,  and  in  1804  he  was
elected  president  of  Union  college.  This  institu
tion  was  then  in  its  infancy,  with  small  funds,  and
neither  suitable  buildings  nor  apparatus,  and  it
was  in  debt.  He  at  once  began  the  work  of  pro
viding  for  its  needs,  and  of  removing  its  disabili
ties.  Through  his  efforts  the  legislature  passed  a
law  in  1814  by  which  financial  aid  was  afforded
the  college  from  a  lottery,  at  that  time  a  legal  and
unexceptionable  means  of  raising  money,  the  man
agement  of  which  was  confided  to  Dr.  Nott,  and


540


NOTT


NOUE


conducted  by  him  for  many  years.  As  an  educator
Dr.  Nott  was  eminently  practical.  lie  conducted
the  government  of  the  college  on  the  parental  sys
tem,  and  opposed  the  rigidity  of  conventional
rules.  lie  was  in  consequence  greatly  beloved  by
his  students.  During  his  incumbency  4,000  stu
dents  were  graduated,  and  in  1854  the  semi-cen
tennial  anniversary  of  the  college  was  celebrated
in  the  presence  of  more  than  COO  of  his  former
pupils  that  had  assembled  to  do  him  honor.  A
short  time  previous  to  his  death  he  endowed  the
college  with  property  that  was  valued  at  $500.000.
As  a  preacher  he  was  original,  scholarly,  and  im
pressive.  He  ardently  advocated  the  temperance
cause,  and  wrote  and  lectured  extensively  on  the
subject.  As  early  as  1811  he  made  speeches  against
slavery,  and  throughout  his  life  he  was  an  advocate
of  civil  and  religious  liberty.  He  paid  much  at
tention  to  physical  science,  especially  to  the  laws
of  heat,  and  obtained  about  thirty  patents  for  in
ventions  in  that  department,  of  which  the  most
notable  was  the  first  stove  for  burning  anthracite
coal,  which  bore  his  name,  and  was  extensively
used.  Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1805,  and  Brown  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1828.  His  pub
lications  consist  principally  of  sermons  and  occa
sional  addresses ;  of  the  latter,  that  on  the  death  of
Alexander  Hamilton  has  a  national  reputation.
He  also  published  "  Councils  to  Young  Men  "  (New
York,  1845)  and  "  Lectures  on  Temperance "
(1847).  See  a  "  Memoir  "  by  Cornelius  Van  Sant-
voord.  D.  D.,  with  a  contribution  and  revision  by
Prof.  Tayler  Lewis  (187(5). — Samuel's  son,  Samuel,
missionary,  b.  in  Franklin,  Conn.,  11  Sept.,  1788  ;  d.
in  Hartford.  Conn.,  1  June,  1869,  was  graduated  at
Union  in  1808,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary
in  1810.  In  1812  he  was  one  of  the  first  band  of
missionaries  that  was  sent  by  the  American  board
to  India.  The  failure  of  his  health  compelled  his
return  in  181(3,  and  he  subsequently  taught  in  New
York  city.  He  was  pastor  successively  of  churches
in  Galway,  N.  Y.,  and  Wareham,  Mass.,  and  estab
lished  at  the  latter  place  in  1849  a  private  academy,
which  he  conducted  successfully  for  seventeen
years.  His  publications  include  "  Sixteen  Years'
Preaching  and  Procedure  at  Wareham "  (New
York,  1845)  and  "  Slavery  and  the  Remedy  "  (1856).
— Another  grandson  of  Abraham,  Abraham,  ju
rist,  b.  in  Saybrook,  Conn.,  in  1768 ;  d.  in  Fail-field,
S.  C.,  18  June,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1781,  and  studied  for  the  ministry,  but  abandoned
it  for  law  and  went  to  Georgia,  where  he  taught.
He  settled  in  Camden,  S.  C.,  in  1791,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  in  1800  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Federalist,  serving  one  term.  He
then  removed  to  Columbia,  S.  C.,  practised  his
profession  with  great  success  till  1810,  when  he
was  appointed  law  judge,  and,  on  the  organization
of  the  court  of  appeals  in  1824,  became  its  presi
dent,  and  held  office  until  his  death. — His  son,
Henry  J  iiiiins.  essayist,  b.  on  Pacolet  river,  S.  C.,
4  Nov.,  1797 ;  d.  at  sea,  13  Oct.,  1837,  was  gradu
ated  at  the  College  of  South  Carolina  in  1812,  and
admitted  to  the  Columbia  bar  in  1818.  He  aban
doned  his  profession  in  1821,  went  abroad,  and  en
gaged  in  literary  pursuits  in  Holland  and  France.
During  his  absence  he  was  elected  professor  of
belles-lettres  in  the  College  of  South  Carolina,  and
on  his  return  he  filled  that  chair  until  1834.  He
visited  New  York  in  1837,  and  on  the  homeward
voyage  the  vessel  on  which  he  was  a  passenger  was
wrecked  off  the  coast  of  North  Carolina,  and  he
and  his  wife  were  drowned.  He  was  a  constant
contributor  to  the  literature  of  the  day,  a  popular
and  finished  essayist,  and  a  successful  lecturer.  He


published  "  Law  Reports,"  with  David  McCord  (2
vols.,  Charleston,  1818-'20),  and  a  series  of  sketches
in  the  "Southern  Review,"  that  were  subsequently
collected  in  book-form  under  the  title  of  "  Novel
ettes  of  a  Traveller"  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1834),
and  left  a  manuscript  novel  that  was  never  printed.
— Another  son,  Josiah  Clark,  ethnologist,  b.  in
Columbia,  S.  C.,  24  March,  1804  ;  d.  in  Mobile,  Ala.,
31  March.  1873,  was  graduated  at  the  College  of
South  Carolina  in  1824,  and  at  the  medical  de
partment  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1827.  After  a  residence  of  two  years  in  the  latter
institution  as  demonstrator  of  anatomy  under  Dr.
Philip  S.  Physic,  he  settled  in  Columbia.  S.  C.  He
studied  abroad  in  1835-'6,  and  in  the  latter  year
removed  to  Mobile,  Ala.,  where  lie  established  a
medical  college  that  the  legislature  endowed  and
made  a  branch  of  the  State  university.  He  was
subsequently,  for  a  short  time,  professor  of  anato
my  in  the  University  of  Louisiana.  Besides  con
tributing  many  articles  to  current  literature  on  his
special  studies  in  natural  history  and  its  kindred
sciences,  he  published  "  Two  Lectures  on  the  Con
nection  between  the  Biblical  and  Physical  History
of  Man  "(New  York,  1849);  "The  Physical  His
tory  of  the  Jewish  Race"  (Charleston,  1850);
"Types  of  Mankind"  (Philadelphia,  1854);  and
"  Indigenous  Races  of  the  Earth  "  (1857).  The  last
two  works  were  prepared  in  connection  with  George
R.  Glidden  (q.  r.),  and  their  object  is  to  refute  the
theory  of  the  unity  of  the  human  race.

NOTT,  Richard  Means,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bos
ton,  Mass..  26  March,  1831;  d.  in  Wakefield,  Mass.,
21  Dec.,  1880.  He  was  a  descendant  of  the  first
Abraham  Nott,  and  a  son  of  the  Rev.  Handel  Ger-
shom  Nott.  He  was  graduated  at  Waterville  col
lege  (now  Colby  university)  in  1852,  and  at  Roch
ester  theological  seminary  in  1859,  after  spending
several  years  in  teaching.  He  at  once  became  pastor
of  the  1st  Baptist  church  in  Rochester,  which  post
he  retained  until  1865,  when,  on  account  of  failing
health,  he  resigned,  and  lived  for  several  years  in
Atlanta,  Ga.  He  subsequently  resumed  the  minis
try,  and  was  pastor  in  Aurora,  I'll.,  and  in  Wakefield,
Mass.  In  1863  he  visited  Spain,  Italy,  and  the  Medi
terranean.  He  was  the  author  of  the  "  Life  of  Ab-
ner  Kingman  Nott"  (New  York.  1860). — Another
son,  Richard  Means's  brother,  Abner  Kinginan,
clergyman,  b.  in  Nashua,  N.  H.,  22  March,  1834;
d.  in  Perth  Amboy,  N.  J.,  7  July,  1859,  was  gradu
ated  at  Rochester  university  in  1855,  and  at
Rochester  theological  seminary  in  1857.  In  the
same  year  he  was  ordained  to  the  ministry,  and
succeeded  to  the  pastorate  of  the  1st  Baptist
church,  New  York  city.  During  his  brief  ministry
of  two  years  he  achieved  extraordinary  popularity.
He  was  drowned  while  bathing.

NOUE,  Charles  Edouard  de  la  (noo),  French
explorer,  b.  in  Anjou  in  1624 ;  d.  in  Versailles  in
1691.  He  entered  the  priesthood,  but  devoted  his
time  to  science,  and  was  sent  in  1665  to  explore
Tierra  del  Fuego  and  the  western  coast  of  Pata
gonia,  over  which  France  claimed  jurisdiction.  He
wandered  for  several  years  through  Patagonia,  was
taken  prisoner  by  the  Indians,  and,  adopting  their
dress  and  habits,  lived  with  them,  learned  their
language,  and  won  their  confidence  so  far  that  he
was  allowed  to  embark  on  a  passing  vessel,  and  re
turned  to  France.  He  published  "  Memoire  a  sa
Majeste  sur  la  mission  de  Fabbee  de  la  Noue  a  la
Terre  de  Feu,  et  dans  le  pays  des  Patagons,  avec
un  vocabulaire  du  langage  de  ces  peuples  "  (2  vols.,
Paris,  1675).  This  work,  by  its  true  description  of
Patagonia,  prevented  any  further  attempts  of  the
French  to  establish  settle'ments  in  that  country.


NOURRISSON


NOVA


541


NOURRISSON,  Guy  L£on,  French  colonist,  b.
in  Saint  Malo  about  1575  :  d.  near  Newfoundland
in  1029.  He  commanded  for  years  a  small  brig  that
plied  between  Saint  Malo  and  North  America.  He
had  occasion  to  land  in  southern  Newfoundland,
and,  being  convinced  of  the  commercial  advantages
of  the  place,  determined  to  establish  a  French
station  there.  He  disclosed  his  project  to  mer
chants  in  Dieppe  and  Saint  Malo,  received  a  hearty
support,  and  formed  a  company,  which  obtained  in

1621  from  Louis  XIII.  a  charter  on  condition  that
it should build  two  fortresses  and  maintain  the
garrisons  for  ten  years. Preparations  for  an  ex
pedition  were  soon  completed,  and  in  the  spring  of

1622  Nourrisson  landed  in  the  peninsula  with  125
men,  and  found  to  his  surprise  that  other  French
men  had  arrived  there  a  month  before. He  finally
forced them  to  acknowledge his authority,  and
prepared  to  establish  a  colony,  when  the  settlers  of
Lord  Baltimore  opposed  his  progress,  claiming  the
possession  of  the  whole  country. Arbitration  was
first  resorted  to,  but  failed,  and  hostilities  began.
The French were  soon overpowered,  and,  being
driven  from  the  peninsula,  they  retired  to  Placen-
tia and  founded  a  station  there,  but  difficulties
arose  also  with  the  French  followers  of  Lord  Falk
land,  and  most  of  the  French  returned  to  their  na
tive  country. Nourrisson,  nevertheless,  maintained
the  station  at  Placcntia  during  the  following  years,
and  brought  over  settlers  several  times. He  was
finally  shipwrecked  off  the  Newfoundland  coast.

NOURSE,  Amos,  senator,  b.  in  Eolton,  Mass.,
17  Dec.,  1794 ;  d.  in  Bath,  Me.,  17  April,  1877.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1812,  and  at  the
medical  department  in  1817,  settled  in  Wiscasset,
and  subsequently  in  Hallowell,  Me.,  and  removed
in  1845  to  Bath,  Me.  He  was  lecturer  on  obstet
rics  in  Bowdoin  in  1846-'54,  and  professor  of  that
branch  in  1855-'66.  In  1857  he  was  elected  U.  S.
senator,  to  fill  the  unexpired  term  of  Hannibal
Ilamlin,  who  had  been  chosen  governor.  He
served  from  24  Jan.  till  3  March,  and  became  judge
of  probate  of  Sagadahoc  county,  Me.,  in  1800.

BOURSE,  Joseph,  register  of  the  treasury,
b.  in  London,  England,  10  July,  1754;  d.  near
Georgetown,  D.  C.,  1  Sept.,  1841.  He  emigrated
with  his  family  to  Virginia  in  1709,  entered  the
Revolutionary  army  as  military  secretary  to  Gen.
Charles  Lee  in  1770,  was  clerk  and  paymaster  of
the  board  of  war  in  1777-'81,  then  was  assist
ant  auditor-general,  and  in  1781-1829  was  regis
ter  of  the  U.  S.  treasury.  For  twenty-five  years
he  was  a  vice-president  of  the  American  Bible
society. — His  nephew,  Joseph  Everett,  author,
b.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  17  April,  1819,  was  gradu
ated  at  Jefferson  college  in  1837,  became  princi
pal  of  Rittenhouse  academy,  Washington,  D.  C.,
in  1840,  and  in  1849  was  licensed  to  preach  in
the  Presbyterian  church.  He  was  professor  of
ethics  and  English  studies  in  the  U.  S.  naval
academy  in  18oO-'G4,  was  commissioned  professor
of  mathematics  at  that  date,  and  retired  in  1881.
In  18(55-'80  he  was  on  duty  at  the  naval  observa
tory  and  in  the  navy.  He  supplied  the  infantry
at  Fort  Adams  during  the  civil  war,  and  subse
quently  occasionally  supplied  churches  in  the  Dis
trict  of  Columbia  and  in  Virginia.  He  represented
the  U.  S.  government  at  the  International  geo
graphical  congress  that  met  in  Paris  in  1875.  He
has  published  "  The  Maritime  Canal  of  Suez:  Brief
Memoir  of  the  Enterprise  and  Comparison  of  its
Probable  Results  with  those  of  a  Ship-Canal  across
Darien  "  (Washington,  D.  C.,  1809):  "Astronomi
cal  and  Meteorological  Observations  "  (1871) ;  "  Me
moir  of  the  Founding  and  Progress  of  the  U.  S.


Naval  Observatory"  (1873);  "Medals  awarded  to
American  Arctic  Explorers  by  Foreign  Societies  "
(1870) ;  '•  Narrative  of  the  Second  Arctic  Explora
tion  by  Charles  F.  Hall  "(1879);  "American  Ex
plorations  in  the  Ice  Zones,"  prepared  from  official
sources  (Boston,  1884) ;  and  "  The  Maritime  Canal
of  Suez  from  its  Inauguration,  17  Nov..  1809,  to
the  Year  1884"  (Washington,  D.  C.,  1884).— His
cousin,  James  Duncan,  journalist,  b.  in  Bards-
town,  Ky.,  20  Sept.,  1817;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  1
June,  1854,  was  graduated  at  St.  Joseph  college,
Bardstown,  Ky.,  in  1830,  studied  both  law  and
medicine,  but  abandoned  them  for  journalism,  and
at  different  periods  edited  three  newspapers  in  his
native  town.  He  subsequently  became  connected
with  the  "St.  Louis  Intelligencer,"  and  was  its
associate  editor  at  the  time  of  his  death.  He  con
tributed  constantly  to  magazines,  and  is  the  au
thor  of  the  novels  "The  Forest  Knight"  (Philadel
phia,  1840):  "Leavenworth.  a  Story  of  the  Missis
sippi"  (1849);  and  a  collection  of  lectures,  that  he
had  previously  delivered  on  the  philosophy  of  his
tory,  that  was  highly  recommended  by  critics  in
this  country  and  abroad,  entitled  "God  in  History,
or  the  Past  and  its  Legacies"  (Louisville,  1852).

NOtJYEL,  Gabriel  Edouard,  Chevalier  de(noo-
vel).  French  colonist,  b.  in  Bapaume  in  1630 ;  d.  in
Fort  Nelson,  Canada,  in  November,  1694.  He  was
a  younger  son  of  a  master  of  the  king's  horse,  and
was  destined  for  the  priesthood,  but  ran  away  from
college,  and,  joining  a  cousin  in  the  service  of  the
Company  of  Montreal,  was  furnished  with  the
means  of  going  to  Canada  in  1055.  But  Maison-
neuve,  the  governor  of  Villemarie,  who  was  a  friend
of  his  father,  refused  him  employment,  and  he  en
tered  the  service  of  the  Company  of  the  cent  asso-
cies,  and  was  sent  to  command  the  Hurons  around
Sault  Sainte  Marie.  He  learned  their  language,  and
repelled,  with  their  aid.  an  invasion  of  Iroquois,
whom  he  defeated  at  Sault  Sainte  Marie  and  pursued
into  their  own  country.  The  governor-general,
Viscount  d'Argenson,  rewarded  young  Nouvel  with
the  brevet  of  captain,  and,  informing  the  father  of
his  son's  valor,  effected  a  reconciliation  between
them  in  1000.  During  the  following  years  Nouvel
took  a  creditable  part  in  a  series  of  actions  against
the  Iroquois,  serving  afterward  in  the  expedition
of  De  Courcelles,  whose  influence  obtained  for  him
in  1072  the  appointment  of  adjutant-general  at
Montreal,  which  office  he  held  for  several  years.
Having  received  grants  of  land,  he  began  a  settle
ment  and  built  a  fort  in  1675  where  afterward
Fort  Niagara  was  erected.  But  his  colonization
scheme  proving  unfortunate,  he  re-entered  the  ser
vice  of  the  Company  of  New  France,  took  part  in
the  operations  at  Hudson  bay,  and  fell  at  the  head
of  a  company  in  the  first  assault  on  Fort  Nelson.

NOVA,  Juan  de  (no'-vah),  Spanish  navigator,  b.
in  the  province  of  Galicia  in  the  second  half  of  the
loth  century ;  d.  in  the  East  Indies  about  1520.  He
had  acquired  a  great  reputation  as  a  pilot  on  the
coast  of  Africa,  and  when  King  Emanuel  of  Portu
gal  desired  to  extend  his  dominions  in  the  newly
discovered  hemisphere,  he  called  Nova  into  his  ser
vice.  The  latter  left  Lisbon,  10  May,  1501,  in  com
mand  of  an  expedition  of  four  vessels,  taking
with  him  Americo  Vespucci  as  geographer.  After
touching  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  he  reached  South
America  on  7  Aug.,  discovering  successively  Cape
San  Rogue,  Cape  San  Agostino,  the  river  San  Fran
cisco,  Cape  San  Thome,  Rio  Janeiro,  the  islands  of
San  Sebastian  and  Santa  Catarina.and  Cape  Santa
Maria.  He  was  the  first  to  open  friendly  relations
between  the  Portuguese  and  the  natives,  and  laden
with  riches  set  sail  again  for  home  on  13  Feb.,


542


NOVVELL


NOYES


1502,  discovering  on  the  return  voyage  the  island
of  St.  Helena,  which  at  that  time  was  uninhabited,
lie  reached  Lisbon  in  July,  1502,  and  years  after
ward  went  to  India  with  Francisco  de  Almeida.

NOWELL,  Increase,  colonist,  b.  in  England  in
1590;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  1  Nov.,  1(555.  He  was
chosen  an  "assistant"  in  1029,  and  arrived  in  this
country  in  the  "  Arabella  "  with  John  Winthrop  in
1030.  lie  was  appointed  ruling  elder  in  August
of  that  year,  but,  becoming  convinced  of  the  im
propriety  of  the  union  of  church  and  state  in  that
office,  he  resigned  in  1632,  was  dismissed  from  the
Boston  pastorate,  and  became  a  founder  of  the
church  in  Charlestown.  He  was  a  commissioner
of  military  affairs  in  1034,  and  secretary  of  Massa
chusetts  colony  in  1644-'9.  At  the  latter  date  he
entered  an  association  against  wearing  the  long
hair  that  was  at  that  time  a  mark  of  "  dignified
office  and  estate,"  and  wrote  and  spoke  with  much
vehemence  on  that  subject.  He  died  in  poverty,
but  the  colony  granted  1,000  acres  of  land  in
Cocheco  county,  N.  H.,  to  his  widow,  in  acknowl
edgment  of  his  services  to  the  state. — His  son,
Samuel,  treasurer  of  Harvard,  b.  in  Boston,  12
Nov.,  1634 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  in  September,
1088,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1653,  and  was
chaplain  under  Gen.  Josiah  Winslow  in  the  In
dian  battle  of  19  Dec.,  1774,  in  which  he  evinced
"a  fearless  mien  while  the  balls  whistled  around
him."  He  was  an  assistant  in  1G80-'0,  and  subse
quently  became  treasurer  of  Harvard.  He  went
to  England  in  behalf  of  the  old  colonial  charter  in
1088,  and  died  there.

NOYAN,  Charles  I>£sir6  Ainafole  Tranquille,
Count  de,  French  soldier,  b.  in  Ruffec  in  1090;  d.
in  New  Orleans,  La.,  in  1739.  He  is  sometimes
confounded  with  a  nephew  of  Bienville,  Chevalier
de  Noyan,  commonly  called  Noyan.  junior.  He  en
tered  the  marines  as  ensign  in  1709,  and  served  for
several  years  in  Santo  Domingo  and  Martinique,
arriving  on  25  Aug.,  1718,  in  Dauphine  island  with
the  expedition  under  Count  de  Richebourg.  In  the
following  October  he  was  detached  to  command
the  "  Illinois,"  but  having  quarrelled  with  a  brother
officer,  he  returned  to  Dauphine  island  in  time  to
take  part  in  the  expedition  of  Bienville  to  Pensa-
cola.  After  the  capture  of  that  place,  Bienville
left  the  fortress  in  charge  of  Chateaugueay  and
Noyan,  with  forty  soldiers,  and  returned  to  Dau
phine  with  the  main  force.  Meanwhile  a  Spanish
fleet  arrived  at  Pensacola,  and,  landing  900  marines,
attacked  the  French.  Chateaugueay  and  Noyan
made  a  desperate  resistance,  but  a  Spanish  sergeant,
who  had  been  taken  prisoner  by  Bienville  and  care
lessly  permitted  to  remain  in  the  city,  incited  a
mutiny  among  the  troops,  and  bribed  the  greater
part  of  the  garrison  to  go  over  to  the  Spaniards.
Chateaugueay  and  Noyan  nevertheless  obtained,  on
6  Aug.,  honorable  terms  of  capitulation,  and  re
turned  to  Dauphine  island,  where  they  preceded
the  Spanish  fleet  by  only  a  few  hours. '  Bienville,
who  had  already  been  informed  of  the  invasion,
assembled  friendly  Indians,  which  he  placed  under
Noyan's  command,  and  thus  was  enabled  to  repel
the  enemy.  After  the  departure  of  the  Spanish,
Bienville,  re-enforced  by  the  marines  of  the  fleet
of  Chateaugneuf,  repaired  to  Pensacola,  and  Noyan,
heading  again  a  company  of  Indians,  was  the  first
to  re-enter  the  fortress.  He  was  afterward  sent  to
build  pile  forts  among  the  Indians  of  the  upper
Mississippi,  and  explored  the  country,  being  also
employed  against  hostile  savages.  On  25  April,
1720,  he  was  appointed  major  of  New  Orleans,
which  post  he  held  for  three  years,  being  promoted
in  1722  assistant  commander  of  the  place.  Hav


ing  obtained  in  1727  a  land  grant  in  western  Mis
sissippi,  he  founded  there  several  settlements  that
were  of  great  advantage  to  the  colony.  When  the
Company  of  the  Mississippi  surrendered  its  charter
to  the  crown  in  1732,  Noyan,  like  many  others,  was
left  without  employment,  and  returned  to  New  Or
leans,  where  he  tried  in  vain  to  recover  his  salary
and  the  advances  that  he  had  made  to  the  com
pany.  He  held  notes  for  these  amounts,  bnt  they
were  never  honored,  as  the  crown  refused  to  recog
nize  the  claims  of  the  settlers.  Their  descendants
in  Louisiana  still  hold  notes  to  the  amount  of
000.000  livres,  for  the  payment  of  which  yearly
petitions  are  presented  to  the  chamber  of  deputies.

NOYES,  Edward  Follensbee.  soldier,  b.  in
Haverhill,  Mass.,  3  Oct.,  1832.  After  an  apprentice
ship  of  nearly  five  years  in  a  printing-office  in
Dover,  N.  H.,  he  prepared  for  college,  and  was
graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1857,  and  at  the  Cin
cinnati,  Ohio,  law-school  in  1858,  practising  in
that  city  till  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  He
then  turned  his  office  into  a  recruiting  headquar
ters,  and  on  27  July,  1801,  was  commissioned  major
of  the  39th  Ohio  infantry.  He  continued  in  this
command  during  all  its  operations  in  Missouri,  and
was  under  Gen.  John  Pope  at  the  capture  of  New
Madrid  and  Island  No.  10.  He  was  commissioned
lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel,  and  while  building
bridges  in  Prospect,  Term.,  lie  also  engaged  in  se
curing  veteran  enlistments,  with  the  result  of  a
larger  addition  of  veterans  to  his  regiment  than  to
any  other  in  the  National  army  from  Ohio.  He
participated  in  all  the  important  engagements  of
the  Atlanta  campaign  till  after  the  battle  of  Ruff
Mills,  where  he  was  severely  wounded,  subsequently
suffering  the  loss  of  a  leg.  On  his  recovery  he  was
assigned  to  the  command  of  Camp  Dennison.  Ik-
received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-general  of  volun
teers  in  April.  1865,  and  was  the  same  month
elected  city  solicitor,  and  two  years  later  judge
of  probate  of  Hamilton  county,  Ohio.  lie  was
chosen  governor  of  Ohio  in  1871,  but  was  defeated
at  the  next  election,  and  in  1877  was  appointed  by
President  Hayes  U.  S.  minister  to  France.  During
his  service  there  he  was  sent  on  a  special  mission
to  the  P]ast,  visiting  all  the  countries  that  border
on  the  Mediterranean.  He  resigned  in  1881,  and
resumed  practice  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.

NOYES,  Eli,  missionary,  b.  in  Jefferson,  Me.,  27
April,  1814;  d.  in  Lafayette,  Ind.,  10  Sept.,  1854.
He  was  self-educated,  began  preaching  in  1834.  and
in  the  next  year,  accompanied  by  his  wife,  sailed
as  a  missionary  of  the  Free-Will  Baptist  church  to
India,  On  his  arrival  he  took  charge  of  the  mis
sion  at  Orissa,  was  successful  as  a  teacher  and
evangelist,  became  a  skilled  linguist,  and  published
a  Hebrew  grammar,  lie  returned  1o  the  United
States  on  account  of  the  failure  of  his  health,  was
for  some  time  a  pastor  in  Boston,  Mass.,  and  edited
"The  Morning  Star,"  a  Free-Will  Baptist  journal.
He  delivered  and  subsequently  published  "Lec
tures  on  the  Truths  of  the  Bible  "  (Boston.  1853).

NOY'ES,  (ieorge  Bapall,  clergyman,  b.  in  New-
buryport.  Mass.,  0  March,  1798;  d.  in  Cambridge,
Mass..  3  June,  1808.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1818,  studied  divinity  there,  was  licensed  to
preach  in  1822,  served  as  tutor  in  1823-7,  and  in
the  latter  year  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  1st  Uni
tarian  society  of  Petersham,  Mass.  From  1840
until  his  death  he  was  professor  of  Hebrew  litera
ture  and  other  oriental  languages,  and  lecturer
on  biblical  literature  at  Harvard,  where  he  re
ceived  the  degree  of  I).  D.  in  1839.  Dr.  Noyes  was
an  eminent  Greek  and  Hebrew  scholar,  and  pro
ficient  in  sacred  literature.  He  devoted  many


XOYES


NOTES


543


years  to  the  translation  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa
ments,  to  which  he  added  copious  notes.  His
works,  which  are  chiefly  in  the  department  of  He
brew  philology,  are  "An  Amended  Version  of  the
Book  of  Job"  (Cambridge.  1827:  2d  ed..  Boston,
1838);  "The  Psalms"  (1827);  "The  Prophets"
(1843 ;  3d  ed..  2  vols.,  1800) ;  "  Proverbs.  Ecclesi-
astes,  and  Canticles"  (1840) ;  "Theological  Essays,
Selected  from  Various  Authors  "  (1850) :  and  "  Xew
Translation  of  the  Old  Testament,"  published  after
his  death  (1809).— His  son.  Stephen  Butterick,
librarian,  b.  in  Brookfield,  Mass.,  28  Aug..  1833 ;  d.
in  Deland,  Fla..  8  March.  1885,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1853,  removed  to  Brooklyn,  X.  Y.,  in
1857,  and  was  in  charge  of  the  AthenaMim  library,
out  of  which  grew  the  Mercantile  library,  and
subsequently  the  Brooklyn  library.  He  was  con
gressional  librarian  in  Washington.  I).  C.,  in
1800-'8.  but  in  the  next  year  returned  to  his  post
at  the  Brooklyn  library,  where  he  labored  for  ten
years  in  the  preparation  of  its  catalogue  (1881).  This
work  is  unrivalled  in  its  system  of  cross-reference,
and  is  used  in  other  libraries  as  well  as  in  that  for
which  it  was  prepared.  During  his  occupation  of
the  office  of  librarian  the  Brooklyn  library  grew
from  3.000  to  83.000  volumes.

XOYES,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wiltshire,
England,  in  1008;  d.  in  Xewbury,  Mass.,  22  Oct.,
1050.  He  was  educated  at  Oxford,  came  to  this
country  in  1034,  and  after  a  short  service  in  Med-
ford  was  pastor  of  the  church  in  Xewbury  from  1035
till  his  death.  He  published  "  The  Temple  Meas
ured"  (London,  1047);  "Catechism"  (1050,  re
printed  in  1001);  and  "Moses  and  Aaron,  or  the
Rights  of  Church  and  State"  (1601).  —  His  son,
James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Xewbury.  Mass.,  11  March,
1040;  d.  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  30  Dec.,  1719,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1059,  began  to  preach  in
1004,  and  was  pastor  of  the  church  in  Stonington
from  1074  until  his  death.  He  was  one  of  the  first
trustees  of  Yale,  a  councillor  in  civil  affairs  in  the
critical  periods  of  his  colony,  and  also  practised
medicine  with  success. — The  second  James's  cousin,
Nicholas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Xewbury,  Mass.,  22
Dec.,  1047;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  13  Dec..  1717,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1007,  and,  after  preaching
thirteen  years  in  Haddam.  removed  in  1083  to  Sa
lem,  where  he  was  pastor  until  his  death.  Although
learned  and  devout,  he  engaged  bitterly  in  the
•witchcraft  persecutions,  and  was  active  in  the  legal
inquiries  that  were  instituted  in  1092.  He  after
ward  retracted  his  opinions,  and  publicly  confessed
his  error.  He  published  "Election  Sermon  "  (1098) ;
a  poem  on  the  death  of  Joseph  Green  (1715);  and
verses  prefixed  to  Cotton  Mather's  "  Magnalia."

XOYES,  James  Oscar,  author,  b.  in  Xiles,  Ca-
yuga  co.,  X.  Y..  14  June,  1829  ;  d.  in  Xew  Orleans,
La.,  11  Sept.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  Hamilton
college  in  1850  and  at  the  medical  department  of
Harvard  in  1853.  He  then  went  abroad,  continued
his  studies  in  the  University  of  Vienna,  visited
Wallachia.  and  was  appointed  on  the  medical  staff
of  Omar  Pacha,  the  commander  of  the  Turkish
forces.  He  was  afterward  correspondent  in  Tur
key.  Palestine,  and  Egypt  of  the  Xew  York  "Trib
une,"  the  Detroit  "  Free  Press,"  and  other  jour
nals.  On  his  return  to  Xew  York  he  engaged  in
literary  pursuits,  and  became  proprietor  and  chief
editor  of  the  "  Knickerbocker  Magazine  "in  1858.
He  went  to  Fort  Monroe,  Va..  as  a  newspaper
correspondent  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,
engaged  in  various  army  contracts,  and  subse
quently  in  planting.  He  settled  in  Xew  Orleans
after  the  war,  was  appointed  commissioner  of  im
migration  for  the  state  of  Louisiana,  and  in  that


capacity  revisited  Europe.  He  was  the  originator
of  an  enterprise  for  connecting  Mississippi  river
with  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  by  a  ship-canal  below
Xew  Orleans,  and  of  one  for  draining  that  city.
At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  an  active  member
of  the  Xew  Orleans  academy  of  arts  and  sciences.
He  published  "Roumania"  (Xew  York,  1857)  and
"  The  Gypsies  "  (1858).

NOYES,  John  Humphrey,  religionist,  b.  in
Brattleborough,  Vt.,  0  Sept.,  1811;  d.  in  Xiagara
Falls,  Canada,  13  April,  1886.  He  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  in  1830.  and  studied  law.  but  subse
quently  took  a  theological  course  at  Andover  and
Yale  seminaries,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  in
1833.  While  a  theological  student  he  fell  under
the  influence  of  revivalist  preachers,  and  in  1834
experienced  what  he  called  a  "  second  conversion.''
and  announced  himself  a  perfectionist.  His  li
cense  to  preach  was  annulled,  and  he  began  to
speak  and  teach  on  the  subject  of  his  new  faith,
his  doctrine  being  that  the  existing  forms  of  re
ligion  were  all  wrong,  that  God  possessed  a  dual
body — male  and  female — and  that  salvation  from
sin  was  a  special  phase  of  experience  that  had  for
its  basis  spiritual  intercourse  with  this  dual  di
vinity,  and  was  able,  even  in  this  life,  to  perfect  its
believers.  Having  founded  a  community,  to  whose
members  he  gave  the  name  of  Perfectionists,  he
settled  with  them  in  Putnam  county,  Vt.,  and  for
the  first  twelve  years  of  his  ministry  confined  his
labors  to  them.  But.  having  adopted  some  of  the
principles  of  Fourierism,  and  induced  his  followers
to  attempt  the  experiment  of  communal  living,
he  was  driven  out  of  Putnam  county  by  the  force
of  public  opinion,  and  in  1848  removed  with  his
followers  to  Oneida.  Madison  co.,  X.  Y..  and  estab
lished  there  what  has  since  been  known  as  the
Oneida  community.  He  made  many  attempts  to
establish  similar  organizations,  but  only  two  pros
pered.  The  one  at  Oneida  consisted  in  1874  of  235
members,  and  that  at  Wallingford,  Conn.,  of  40.
They  adopted  what  they  called  "complex  marriage."
maintained  the  equality  of  the  sexes  in  social  and
business  life,  lived  in  a  "unity  house,"  and  en
gaged  in  farming  and  manufactures,  owning  about
§500.000  worth  of  property.  A  few  years  later
they  were  forced  to  abandon  the  institution  of
complex  marriage,  and  their  other  customs  fell
into  disuse.  A  few  followers  still  survive  (1888),
but  the  community  is  without  a  leader  and  little
esteemed  in  its  own  locality.  Xoyes  edited  the
"Oneida  Circular  "in  1834-*'40,  in  which  he  pro
mulgated  his  views,  and  published  "  The  Second
Coming  of  Christ"  (Wallingford,  Conn.,  1859):
"Salvation  from  Sin  the  End  of  Christian  Faith"
(1869);  "History  of  American  Socialism"  (Phila
delphia,  1870)  ;  and  several  expositions  of  the
practices  in  his  community.

NOYES,  William  Curtis,  jurist,  b.  in  Schodack,
Rensselaer  co.,  X.  Y.,  19  Aug.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Xew
York  city,  25  Dec.,  1804.  He  began  the  study  of
law,  when  he  was  fourteen  years  of  age,  in  the
office  of  Samuel  B.  Ludlow,  of  Albany.  His  parents
soon  afterward  removed  to  Oneida  county,  where
he  entered  the  office  of  Henry  R.  Storrs,  and  in
1827  completed  his  studies  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar.  While  yet  under  the  age  of  thirty  he  was  ap
pointed  district  attorney  of  Oneida  county,  and
soon  rose  to  the  front  rank  of  the  profession  there.
Later  he  removed  to  Xew  York  city.  He  was  never
a  politician,  but  took  a  deep  interest  in  public  af
fairs,  being  a  man  of  extensive  reading  and  learn
ing.  His  conversational  powers  were  of  the  highest
order.  His  appreciation  of  beauty,  art,  and  litera
ture  was  cultivated  and  pure,  and  he  was  surrounded


544


NUGENT


NUNEZ


by  one  of  the  finest  law  libraries  in  this  country,
w'hich,  upon  his  death,  he  gave  to  Hamilton  college.
He  became  one  of  the  most  powerful  advocates  at
the  New  York  bar.  In  1857  he  was  appointed  by
the  legislature  a  com
missioner  with  Alex
ander  W.  Bradford
and  David  Dudley
Field  to  codify  the
laws  of  the  state,  and
he  was  engaged  in
this  work  up  to  the
time  of  his  death.  In
the  autumn  of  that
year  he  was  nominat
ed  as  a  Republican
for  attorney-general
of  the  state,  but  was
defeated  by  Lyman
Tremain.  In  1861  he
was  appointed  by  the
legislature  a  commis
sioner  to  the  peace
conference,  where  he
*  steadily  labored  to

preserve  the  integrity  of  the  republic,  and  at  the
same  time  maintain  the  honor  of  the  loyal  states.
When,  in  the  winter  of  the  same  year,  the  legisla
ture  had  to  elect  a  U.  S.  senator,  he  was  one
of  the  chief  candidates  for  the  nomination.  Mr.
Noyes  was  retained  in  some  of  the  most  cele
brated  cases  of  his  day.  His  masterly  analysis  of
moral  insanity  on  the  trial  of  Huntington,  his
argument,  in  the  court  of  appeals  in  the  New
Haven  railroad  case,  his  elaborate  speech  in  the
suit  of  the  Delaware  and  Hudson  Canal  company
vs.  The  Pennsylvania  Coal  company,  and  his  nu
merous  arguments  in  some  of  the  most  important
will  cases,  were  marked  by  learning,  eloquence,  and
close  logic.  He  was  a  firm  advocate  of  temperance,
and  devoted  much  time  to  addresses  on  this  sub
ject.  His  talents  were  always  enlisted  on  the  side
of  the  people  among  whom  he  lived,  and  more  than
once  fraudulent  judgments  against  the  city  were
vacated  through  his  clear  demonstration  of  their
fallacy.  As  an  equity  lawyer  he  was  without  a
parallel,  and  in  cross-examination  he  had  no  equal.
Few  witnesses  that  went  on  the  stand  before  him
with  the  determination  to  commit  perjury  ever  left
it  without  being  exposed.  In  1856  he  delivered  an
address  before  the  graduating  class  of  the  law  de
partment  of  Hamilton  college,  and,  although  he
never  had  received  a  collegiate  education,  yet  that
institution  conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
True  to  his  motto,  that  it  was  "  better  that  a  man's
brain  should  wear  out  than  rust  out,"  he  continued
to  the  last  in  the  practice  of  his  profession.  His
death  was  the  result  of  apoplexy.

NUGENT,  Sir  George,  British  soldier,  b.  in
Berkshire,  England,  10  June,  1757;  d.  there,  11
March,  1849.  He  was  educated  at  Woolwich  mili
tary  academy,  commissioned  as  a  lieutenant  in
September,  1777,  and  served  with  the  British  army
in  this  country,  being  present  at  the  storming  o'f
Fort  Montgomery  and  Fort  Clinton  in  New  York
state.  He  served  as  captain  in  New  Jersey  and
Connecticut,  and  was  promoted  major  in  May!  1 782.
He  subsequently  served  under  the  Duke  of  York
in  the  Netherlands  and  as  a  major-general  in  the
suppression  of  the  Irish  rebellion  of  1798,  and  was
created  a  baronet  for  military  services  in  1806.  He
was  afterward  governor  of  Jamaica,  became  com-
mander-in-chief  of  the  forces  in  the  West  Indies
in  1811,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  field-marshal  in
1842.  He  married  in  1797  Maria,  a  daughter  of


Cortland  Skinner,  Royalist  attorney  -  general  of
New  Jersey. — His  brother,  Sir  Charles  Edmoiul,
British  naval  officer,  b.  in  Berkshire,  England,  in
1759 ;  d.  in  1844,  served  during  the  Revolutionary
war  as  a  lieutenant  and  captain  at  Fort  Moultrie
and  in  New  York  and  Rhode  Island.  He  attained
the  rank  of  admiral-of-the-blue  in  1808,  and  was
made  admiral  of  the  fleet  in  18:53.

NUGENT,  dreorcre,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  3  May,  1809 ;  d.  in  Atlantic  City,  N.  J.,
131  June,  1883.  He  was  educated  at  Clermont  acade
my,  and  removed  with  his  father  to  Montgomery
county,  Pa.,  where  he  became  a  manufacturer.  In
1832  he  became  a  deacon  in  the  Baptist  church  at
Balligorningo,  and  he  afterward  officiated  as  such
in  Philadelphia  and  Germantown.  In  this  capa
city  he  was  accustomed  to  visit  the  sick  and  the
poor  in  their  homes.  This  gave  him  the  first  idea
of  a  home  for  such  persons,  and  he  was  the  founder
of  the  Baptist  home  of  Philadelphia,  now  a  pros
perous  institution.  After  a  successful  business
career  he  retired  to  Germantown  and  devoted  his
time  to  benevolent  and  charitable  purposes.  He
was  president  of  the  Baptist  home,  treasurer  of  the
Baptist  historical  society,  and  a  member  of  the
Baptist  publication  society  and  the  Sunday-school
union.  lie  took  great  interest  in  the  education  of
the  young,  and  was  a  generous  giver  to  churches
and  other  religious  societies.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  2d  Baptist  church  of  German-
town,  and  gave  the  greater  part  of  the  money  to
build  the  church  edifice.  His  estate  amounted  to
nearly  half  a  million  of  dollars,  and  he  gave  by
will  nearly  all  of  it  to*  found  a  home  for  Baptist
ministers,  their  widows,  and  members  of  Baptist
and  other  evangelical  churches.  It  has  been  char
tered  as  "The  George  Nugent  Home  for  Baptists,"
and  is  located  at  Germantown.  Mr.  Nugent  wrote
and  published  "  The  Baptist  Home  of  Philadel
phia,  its  Origin  and  History"  (Philadelphia,  1880).

NUNES,  Leonardo  (noo'-nes),  Portuguese  mis
sionary,  b.  in  San  Vicente  de  Beira  in  1499  :  d.  on
the  coast  of  Brazil,  30  June,  1554.  lie  was  a  Jesuit,
went  in  his  youth  to  Hispaniola,  was  employed  for
fifteen  years  in  the  missions  of  Central  America,
and,  returning  to  Portugal,  became  director  of  a
college  of  his  order.  When  Thome  de  Sousa  ob
tained  a  grant  of  Brazil  in  1549  he  asked  Nunes  to
accompany  him,  and  the  latter,  with  several  other
Jesuits,  established  the  first  Brazilian  mission,  ac
quiring  an  influence  among  the  Indians  that
greatly  facilitated  the  progress  of  the  Portuguese.
Instead  of  adopting  a  cruel  policy  toward  the  In
dians,  he  made  them  the  allies  and  supporters  of
the  settlers.  In  June,  1554,  Nunes  sailed  for  Lis
bon  to  obtain  more  missionaries,  but  perished  by
shipwreck  in  a  hurricane  near  the  coast.  lie  left
a  dictionary  and  a  grammar  of  the  Tupi  dialect
which  exist"  in  manuscript  in  Coimbra.  and  other
works  that  were  afterward  lost  according  to  Vas-
conce]]_os  in  his  "  Noticia  do  Brazil."

NUNE/,  Casto  Mendez  (noon'-yayth),  Spanish
naval  officer,  b.  in  Galicia  about  1830;  d.  about
1880.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Royal  nautical
college,  entered  the  navy,  and  was  a  commodore
when,  in  1864,  he  joined  the  Spanish  fleet  in  the
Pacific  in  the  iron-clad  ram  "  Numancia."  In  Jan
uary,  1865,  he  went  with  the  squadron  from  the
Chincha  islands  to  Callao,  where  the  treaty  of
peace  between  Admiral  Pareja  (q.  v.)  and  the  Peru
vian  government  was  concluded.  He  remained
stationed  in  Callao,  while  the  admiral  proceeded  to
Chili,  and  when  the  dissatisfaction  about  the  treaty
resulted  in  the  deposition  of  President  Pezet,  7
July,  and  the  consequent  riots,  many  of  the  Spanish


NUNEZ


NUNEZ


545


residents  in  Peru,  fearing  the  enmity  of  the  new
government,  took  refuge  on  board  the  "  Nunmncia."
After  the  declaration  of  war  against  Chili,  17  Sept.,
18(55,  Nunez  was  called  to  enforce  the  blockade  of
Chilian  ports,  and  after  the  suicide  of  Pareja,  on
28  Nov.,  he  assumed  the  command  of  the  fleet.
When  the  Chilian  government  ordered  that  vessels
communicating  with  the  Spanish  fleet  should  not  be
allowed  to  enter  Chilian  ports,  Nunez  threatened
to  bombard  Valparaiso.  The  American  minister,
Gen.  11.  J.  Kilpatrick,  and  Com.  Rodgers  made,
on  23  March,  an  attempt  at  arbitration,  which
failed,  as  the  chief  condition  of  Admiral  Nuiiez
was  the  return  of  the  captured  gun-boat  "  Cova-
donga."  and  consequently  Nuiiez,  notwithstanding
the  protest  of  the  diplomatic  corps,  gave  notice  on
the  27th  to  neutrals  to  evacuate  the  city,  and  on
the  Hist  the  fleet  bombarded  the  port  for  three
hours  without  the  fire  being  returned,  as  Valparaiso
was  defenceless.  The  loss  in  public  and  private
property  was  estimated  at  $1,000,000,  and  in  mer
chandise  at  $9,000.000.  On  14  April  Nunez  sailed
with  the  fleet,  consisting  of  five  wooden  frigates
and  one  gun-boat,  besides  the  flag-ship,  and  on  the
25th  arrived  before  Callao.  That  port  had  mean
while  been  strongly  fortified,  and  was  defended  by-
nine  batteries  and  two  iron-clad  monitors.  The
bombardment  took  place  on  2  May  and  con
tinued  till  5  P.  M.,  when  the  Spanish  fleet  retired,
Nunez  being  severely  wounded.  He  was  promoted
vice-admiral  for  this  action.  After  the  conclusion
of  active  hostilities  he  sailed  with  the  "  Numancia"
for  Manila,  and  returned  via  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope  to  Spain,  thus  being  the  first  to  make  a  voy
age  round  the  world  in  a  heavy  iron-clad  vessel.
During  the  revolution  in  Spain  in  1868,  and  after
ward,  Nunez  refused  to  take  part  in  political  move
ments,  and  later  retired  from  the  service  to  his
home,  _vvhere  he  died.

NUNEZ,  Ignacio,  Argentine  journalist,  b.  in
Buenos  Ayres,  30  July,  179:3;  d.  there,  22  Jan.,
184G.  lie  studied  in  his  native  city,  entered  the
military  service  in  1806,  and  in  1810  was  a  captain,
but  joined  the  cause  of  independence,  and  served
till  1813,  when  he  was  appointed  chief  clerk  to  the
secretary  of  the  constituent  congress.  He  was
secretary  of  war  ad  interim  in  Montevideo  in
1814,  in  1817  secretary  of  the  general  congress  in
Buenos  Ayres,  and  in  1821  assistant  secretary  of
foreign  relations.  In  1826  he  was  sent  as  a  com
missioner  to  the  Army  of  the  Banda  Oriental,  and
in  1829  he  was  elected  to  congress  from  the  province
of  Buenos  Ayres.  He  founded  in  1822  the  Literary
society  of  Buenos  Ayres  and  was  also  president  of
the  Rural  society.  Nunez  was  founder  and  editor
of  "El  Argos"'in  1821,  "El  Centinela"  and  "El
Nacional,"  and  a  contributor  to  "  La  Revista  Eu-
ropea."  Being  a  constant  opposer  of  the  tyranny
of  Rosas,  he  was  imprisoned  in  1837,  and  afterward
decided  to  remove  to  Montevideo,  but  was  taken
sick  and  died  in  the  port  of  his  native  city.  He
wrote  "  Noticias  historicas,  politicas  y  estadisticas
de  las  provincias  del  Rio  de  la  Plata"  (London,
1842),  which  also  appeared  there  in  English,  French,
and  German  translations;  "Noticias  historicas  de
la  Republica  Argentina  "  ;  "  Trabajos  Literarios  " ;
and  "  Apuntes  Biograficos  "  (Buenos  Ayres,  1857).

NUXEZ,  Rafael,  president  of  Colombia,  b.  in
Carthagena,  28  Sept.,  1825.  He  was  graduated  at
the  university  of  his  native,  city  in  1850,  and  began
his  political  career  in  1851,  being  elected  to  con
gress  for  the  province  of  Panama.  In  1853  he  was
appofnted  to  a  cabinet  office  by  Gen.  Obando,  but,
disagreeing  with  the  policy  of  the  administration,
soon  resigned  and  joined  the  opposition.  From
VOL.  iv. — 35


1855  till  1857  he  was  secretary  of  the  treasury
under  President  Mallarino.  He  was  afterward
elected  to  the  senate,  and  was  founder  and  editor
of  "  El  Porvenir,"  of  Carthagena,  and  connected
with  "  La  Demo-
cracia"  and  other
journals  of  Bogo
ta.  In  1861-'2  he
was  secretary  of
the  treasury  under
Gen.  Mosquera,
and  in  1863  he
was  elected  to  the
convention  of  Rio
Negro,  which  de
creed  the  new  Fed
eral  constitution.
He  then  left  Co
lombia  and  resided
for  some  time  in
New  York,  where
he  was  chief  editor
of  "  El  Continen
tal,"  in  which  pa
per  he  warmly  defended  the  cause  of  the  Union,
and  the  independence  of  Mexico  and  Santo  Domin
go.  From  1865  till  1874  he  lived  in  Europe  and
filled  the  post  of  Colombian  consul  in  Havre  and
Liverpool,  writing  during  this  time  series  of  inter
esting  articles  for  the  "  Diario  Oficial  "  of  Bogota,
•'  El  Nacional  "  of  Lima,  and  "  El  Federal "  of
Caracas,  under  the  pen-name  of  David  de  Olmedo,
which  became  widely  known  throughout  Spanish
America  for  their  style,  sound  philosophy,  and
practical  spirit  of  observation.  While  he  was  in
Europe  he  was  elected  senator.  He  returned  to
Colombia  in  1875,  and  in  the  same  year  was  pro
claimed  a  candidate  for  the  presidency  by  the  ma
jority  of  the  Liberal  party  and  many  members  of
the  Conservative  party,  but,  though  favored  by  the
popular  vote  at  the  polls,  he  was  defeated  through
the  machinations  of  the  party  in  power.  At  the
end  of  1875  he  was  elected  governor  of  the  state  of
Bolivar,  the  assembly  of  that  state  elected  him  to
the  senate  in  1878,  and  in  April  of  the  same  year
he  became  secretary  of  the  treasury  and  public
works  under  Gen.  Trujillo,  but  resigned  after  three
months.  In  1879  he  was  again  proclaimed  a  can
didate  for  the  presidency  and  was  elected.  During
his  term  of  office  from  1880  till  1882  he  remodelled
the  administration  of  public  affairs,  promoted  the
construction  of  railroads,  and  increased  political
harmony  by  giving  the  Conservative  party  par
ticipation  in  the  government.  He  restored  friendly
relations  with  Spain,  which  had  never  recognized
the  independence  of  Colombia,  and  a  treaty  of
commerce  with  that  nation  was  signed  in  Paris.
He  was  succeeded  in  1882  by  Dr.  Zaldua,  who  soon
died,  and  the  executive  was  occupied  provisionally
by  Dr.  Jose  E.  Otalora,  but  in  September,  1883,  Dr.
Nunez  was  re-elected  by  a  large  majority.  Ilis
second  administration  began  in  April,  1884,  but,
having  committed  himself  and  his  party  to  consti
tutional  reforms,  he  was  soon  confronted  by  a  re
bellion  in  several  states.  That  of  Panama  was
suppressed  only  by  the  intervention  of  U.  S.  troops
for  the  protection  of  transit  on  the  isthmus,  which
had  been  guaranteed  by  the  U.  S.  government.
When  finally  peace  was  restored  in  August,  1885.
Nunez  said  in  a  speech  to  the  people  of  the  capital :
"The  rebellion  is  ended  and  the  revolution  begins:
the  constitution  of  1863  is  no  more."  A  conven
tion  of  delegates  met,  and  a  new  constitution,
adopting  the  central  form  of  government,  was
framed,  by  which  the  nine  states  were  reduced  to


546


NUNEZ DE MIRANDA


NURSE


the  rank  of  departments  under  the  immediate  con
trol  of  the  central  authority.  Nunez  was  re-elected
president  for  a  term  of  six  years,  to  begin  in  Sep
tember,  188»5.  During  1887  his  stringent  measures
against  the  press,  and  his  banishment  of  many  of
tiie  opposition  leaders,  caused  much  discontent.
On  12  Dec.  he  left  Bogota  for  Cartagena,  and  the
vice-president,  Eliseo  Payan,  assumed  the  execu
tive.  Nunez  is  a  brilliant  writer  and  keeps  abreast
of  the  most  advanced  philosophical  movements
of  the  century.  His  favorite  authors  are  John
Stuart  Mill  aiid  Herbert  Spencer.  As  a  poet  he
has  enriched  Spanish  literature  with  many  com
positions,  of  which  the  most  famous  are  "Quo
sais-je,"  "  Dulce  Ignorancia,"  "  Todavia,"  and
"  Moises."  His  works  include  "  Ensayos  de  Oritica
Social''  (Rouen,  1876);  and  "  La  Reforma  Politica
en  Colombia  "  (Bogota,  1885).  A  collection  of  his
political  articles  that  appeared  in  1881-'4  has  been
issued  in  book-form,  and  a  collection  of  his  poems
was  published  by  Rafael  M.  Merchan,  under  the
title  of  "Versos  de  Rafael  Nunez"  (Bogota.  18*")).

NU>E/ DE MIRANDA.  Antonio.  Mexican
clergyman,  b.  in  Fresnillo,  Mexico,  4  Nov.,  1618:  I
d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  17  Feb.,  1695. He  entered  j
the  Jesuit,  novitiate  in 1037,  taught  successivelv  j
humanities,  philosophy,  and  theology  in  Valladolid,  j
Puebla,  Guatemala,  and  Mexico,  and  was  provin
cial  of  his  order  in  New  Spain. He  became  blind
toward  the  end  of  his  life,  but  continued  to  preach
and  visit the  hospitals  and  prisons. He  wrote
twenty-nine  religious works  (Mexico,  16(54-1708).
a  list  of  which  is  given  in  Backer's  "  Bibliotheque
des  ecrivains de  la  compagnie  de  Jesus"  (Liege,
1858). A  large number  of manuscripts by  the
same  author  are  in  the  University  of  Mexico.

NUNEZ-PEDROSO,  Francisco,  Spanish  ad
venturer,  b.  in  Spain  about  1500 ;  d.  probably  in
New  Grenada.  He  followed  Gonzalo  Jimenez  de
Quesada  to  South  America  in  1536,  soon  afterward
reached  the  grade  of  captain  in  that  leaders  band,
and  took  part  in  all  the  engagements  with  the
Indians  of  New  Grenada.  In  1550  he  obtained
leave  to  found  a  city  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Mag-
dalena  on  land  that  was  then  inhabited  by  Guali
Indians.  He  was  granted  a  favorable  site  by  the
cacique  Marqueta,  and  built  in  the  same  year  a
town  which  he  dedicated  to  St.  Sebastian  on  28
Aug.  In  1556  the  city  was  removed  to  the  neigh
borhood  of  Guali  river,  and  called  Mariquita,  a
corruption,  according  to  some,  of  the  name  of  the
cacique,  but,  according  to  others,  the  name  of  a
female  Indian  slave  of  Quesada.

NUXE/-VELA,  Blasco,  first  viceroy  of  Peru,
b.  in  Castile  in  the  latter  part  of  the  15th  century ;
d.  in  Auaquito,  Peru,  18  Jan.,  1546.  He  had  been
governor  of  Malaga  and  Cuenca,  and  as  one  of  his
brothers  was  gentleman  of  the  bed-chamber  of  the
Emperor  Charles  V.,  and  another  was  archbishop  I
of  Burgos,  he  enjoyed  high  favor  at  court,  and
was  appointed  in  1539  commissioner  to  Nombre  de
Dios,  to  transport  treasure  from  Peru  to  Spain.
Meanwhile  the  repeated  representations  of  Bishop
de  las  Casas  (q.  v.)  in  favor  of  the  Indians  had  con
firmed  the  emperor  in  his  resolution  to  abolish  the
servitude  of  the  natives,  notwithstanding  the  op
position  of  the  council  of  the  Indies  and  numerous
clergymen  and  jurists.  To  execute  this  decree  in
Peru,  he  resolved  to  establish  there  an  audience
and  a  viceroyalty  as  in  Mexico,  but  unfortunately
he  chose  for  this  purpose  Nunez-Vela,  who,  al
though  just  and  rigorous  in  the  fulfilment  of  his
duty,  was  impetuous  and  arbitrary.  He  was  ap
pointed  in  April.  1543,  viceroy  and  president  of
the  audiencia,  and  arrived  in  Nombre  de  Dios,  10


Jan.,  1544,  and  in  Tumbez  on  4  March.  In  conse
quence  of  the  measures  that  he  took  during  his
voyage  for  the  protection  of  the  Indians  and  the
establishment  of  the  new  form  of  government,  he
was  received  with  great  animosity  by  the  people
and  clergy.  He  arrived  in  Lima  on  15  May,  where
the  news  of  his  arbitrary  measures  had  already
arrived,  and  in  consequence  he  met  with  passive
but  determined  resistance  from  the  authorities.
Numerous  petitions  for  the  suspension  of  the  new
ordinance  poured  in  from  all  sides,  but  Nunez  con
tinued  to  abuse  his  power,  and  finally,  after  he  had
imprisoned  Vaca  de  Castro,  his  predecessor,  and
assassinated  Guillen  Suarezde  Carvajal  with  his  own
hand,  13  Sept.,  1544,  he  was  arrested  by  order  of
the  judges  of  the  andieneia.  He  was  taken  to  the
island  of  San  Lorenzo  on  20  Sept.,  and  afterward
to  Iluacho.  to  be  transported  to  Spain,  but  was
liberated  by  Judge  Alvarez.  Meanwhile  Gonzalo
Pizarro  had  revolted  against  the  royal  authority,
usurping  the  government  of  Peru,  and,  owing  to  the
feeling  against  the  viceroy,  gained  many  adherents.
Pizarro  marched  upon  Lima,  and,  seeing  that  the

Popular  opinion  was  in  his  favor,  the  bishops  of
'eru,  at  a  meeting  on  21  Oct.,  1544,  signed  an
agreement,  delivering  the  government  to  Pizarro,
on  condition  that  he  should  surrender  it  when  he
should  be  ordered  by  the  king,  and  on  24  Oct.  he
made  his  entry  into  Lima.  Nunez- Vela,  who  had
gathered  a  small  force  at  Tumbez,  marched  to
Quito,  where  he  organized  an  army,  and,  on  4
March,  1545,  began  his  march  upon  Piura.  The
campaign  that  was  thus  begun  ended  in  the  battle
of  Anaquito,  18  Jan.,  1546.  Nunez-Vela  was  de
feated,  and  when  he  had  been  stunned  by  a  blow
from  a  battle-ax  was  recognized  by  Benito  Suarcz
de  Carvajal,  brother  of  the  man  that  he  had  mur
dered.  Carvajal  ordered  one  of  his  slaves  to  de
capitate  Nunez  and  dragged  his  head  with  a  rope
to  the  pillory  in  the  square  of  Quito.

NURSE,  Rebecca,  reputed  witch,  b.  in  Yar
mouth.  England,  in  February.  1621 :  d.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  19  July,  1 692.  Her  maiden  name  was  Towne,
and  she  became  the  wife  of  Francis  Nurse,  who
settled  in  Salem  village,  and  in  1078  purchased  the
valuable  Bishop  farm.  Although  Rebecca  stood  in
the  highest  esteem  for  goodness  of  heart  and  piety
and  was  one  of  the  most  respectable  women  in  the
town,  yet  the  "  afflicted  children,"  as  they  were
called,  after  accusing  two  or  three  persons  of  lower
station,  pointed  out  this  aged  matron,  who  was
now  an  invalid,  as  one  of  their  tormentors.  She
was  arrested  on  24  March,  1692,  for  practising
"  certain  detestable  arts  called  witchcraft."  She
was  confronted  before  the  examining  magistrates
with  the  children,  who  went  into  spasms  on  seeing
her.  Several  grown  women  also  accused  her,  not
only  of  tormenting  them,  but  of  having  killed
people  by  witchcraft.  She  was  tried  on  29  June,
and,  notwithstanding  the  weighty  testimony  of
many  persons,  the  clamors  of  the  townspeople,  and
the  bias  of  the  court  against  her,  the  jury  delivered
a  verdict  of  "  Not  guilty."  The  judges  expressed
dissatisfaction,  and  directed  attention  to  the  fact
that  the  accused  had  at  the  trial  spoken  of  a  wit
ness  against  her  who  had  confessed  to  being  a
witch  as  "one  of  our  company."  Her  meaning,  as
she  subsequently  explained,  was  that  they  had  been
confined  together  in  jail  on  the  same  charge.  The
jury  went  out  again  and  brought  in  a  verdict  of
guilty.  She  was  excommunicated  by  the  church
after  her  conviction,  and  hanged  with  four  other
convicted  witches  on  the  appointed  day,  a  com
mittee  of  citizens  having  dissuaded  the  governor
from  granting  a  reprieve  in  her  case,  as  he  intended.


NUTT


NYEL


547


NUTT,  Cyrus,  educator,  b.  in  Truinbtill  county,
Ohio,  4  Sept.,  1814;  d.  in  Bloomington,  Ind.,  23
Aug.,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Alleghany  col
lege,  Meadville,  Pa.,  in  1836,  was  principal  of  the
preparatory  department  of  Indiana  Asbury  (now
De  Pauw)  university,  and  afterward  professor  of
languages  till  1845,  when  he  became  pastor  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  Bloomington.  In
1846-'9  he  was  professor  of  Greek  in  Indiana  As
bury  university,  then  for  five  years  president  of  a
female  college  in  Port  Wayne,  and  for  the  next
three  presiding  elder  of  the  Richmond  district  in
Indiana.  In  1857  he  became  acting  president  of
Indiana  Asbury  university,  and  in  I860  president
of  the  State  university  at  Bloomington.  Several
of  his  baccalaureate  sermons  were  published.

NUTT,  George  Washington  Morrison,  dwarf,
b.  in  Manchester,  N.  II.,  1  April,  1844 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  25  April,  1881.  He  was  first  placed  on
exhibition  in  Barnum's  museum  in  New  York  city,
accompanied  Charles  S.  Stratton  ("  Tom  Thumb  ")
on  a  tour  around  the  world  in  1869-'72.  and  subse
quently  conducted  theatrical  shows  in  Portland,
Oregon,  and  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  in  partnership
with  his  brother,  Rodney,  who,  besides  himself,
was  the  only  diminutive  member  of  the  family.
Afterward  he  managed  travelling  companies.
"  Commodore "  Nutt,  as  he  was  called,  though
well-proportioned,  was  only  43  inches  high.

NUTTALL,  Enos,  colonial  Anglican  bishop,  b.
in  England,  26  Jan.,  1842.  He  was  educated  by
private  tutors,  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the
Established  church,  and  became  incumbent  of  St.
George's  church,  Kingston,  Jamaica,  in  1866.  In
1880  he  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Jamaica.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1880.  He  has  pub
lished  numerous  social  and  ecclesiastical  pamphlets
and  addresses  and  several  sermons.

NUTTALL,  Thomas,  naturalist,  b.  in  Settle,
Yorkshire,  England,  in  1786 ;  d.  in  St.  Helen's,
Lancashire,  10  Sept.,  1859.  He  learned  the  print
er's  trade  in  England,  but  in  his  twenty-second
year  came  to  the  United  States,  and  at  the  sugges
tion  of  Benjamin  S.  Barton  studied  natural  history,
and  subsequently  devoted  the  remainder  of  his
life  to  scientific  pursuits.  His  interest  in  the  sub
jects  of  botany  and  ornithology  led  him  to  travel
extensively  throughout  this  country,  and  in  the
course  of  his  journeys  he  visited  nearly  all  of  the
states  of  the  Union,  penetrating  westward  thi'ough
the  territory  of  Arkansas,  and  southward  to  the
Everglades  of  Florida,  traversing  also  the  districts
that  border  on  the  Mississippi,  the  northern  lakes,
and  reaching  the  then  far-distant  Pacific,  on  which
he  sailed  to  the  Sandwich  islands.  In  1822  he  be
came  professor  of  natural  history  in  Harvard  and
curator  of  the  botanical  gardens,  which  appoint
ments  he  held  until  1828.  He  returned  to  Eng
land  in  1842,  and  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  chiefly
on  the  estate  of  Nutgrove,  near  Liverpool,  which
had  been  bequeathed  to  him  on  condition  that  he
should  reside  upon  it.  Elias  Durand  said  of  him  :
"  No  other  explorer  of  the  botany  of  North  Ameri
ca  has  personally  made  more  discoveries ;  no  writer
on  American  plants,  except  perhaps  Professor
Asa  Gray,  has  described  more  new  genera  and
species."  Besides  contributions  to  periodicals,  he
published  "  The  Genera  of  North  American  Plants
and  a  Catalogue  of  the  Species  to  1817"  (2  vols.,
Philadelphia,  1818):  "A  Journal  of  Travels  into
the  Arkansas  Territory  during  the  Year  1819"
(1821) ;  "  Manual  of  the  Ornithology  of  the  United
•States  and  Canada,"  I.  Land  Birds  (Cambridge,
1832);  II.  Water  Birds  (Boston,  1834):  and  •«  The
North  American  Sylva,  or  a  Description  of  the


Forest-Trees  of  the  United  States,  Canada,  and
Nova  Scotia,  not  described  in  the  work  of  Francois
Andre  Michaux"  (3  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1842-'9).

NYE,  Edgar  Wilson,  humorist,  b.  in  Shirley.
Piscataqua  co.,  Me..  25  Aug.,  1850.  He  was  edu
cated  in  an  academy  at  River  Falls,  Wis.,  removed
to  Wyoming  territory,  studied  law,  and  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1876.  He  began  early  to  con
tribute  humorous  sketches  to  the  newspapers,  using
the  pen-name  of  "  Bill  Nye,"  was  connected  with
various  western  journals,  and  afterward  settled  in
New  York  city.  He  has  published  "  Bill  Nye  and
the  Boomerang "  (Chicago,  1881) ;  "  The  Forty
Liars  "  (1883) ;  "  Baled  Hay  "  (1884) ;  "  Bill  Nye's
Blossom  Rock  "  (1885) ;  and  "  Remarks  "  (1886)'.

NYE,  James  Warren,  senator,  b.  in  De  Ruyter,
Madison  co.,  N.  Y.,  10  June,  1814 ;  d.  in  White
Plains,  N.  Y.,  25  Dec.,  1876.  He  was  educated  at
Cortland  academy.  Homer,  N.  Y.,  leaving  it  in
1832  to  study  law  "in  Troy,  N.  Y.  After  being  ad
mitted  to  the  bar,  he  practised  in  his  native  county,
gained  a  reputation  as  an  effective  speaker  before
a  jury,  was  chosen  district  attorney,  and  in  1840
was  elected  county  judge,  serving  eight  years.  He
was  a  Democrat  in  politics  up  to  the  time  of  the
Barn-burner  campaign.  In  1848  he  was  an  un
successful  candidate  for  congress  as  a  Free-soil
Democrat.  Removing  to  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  he  prac
tised  there  till  1857,  when  he  went  to  New  York  city,
having  been  appointed  the  first  president  of  the
Metropolitan  board  of  police,  which  office  he  held
till  about  1860.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Repub
lican  party  from  its  formation,  and  was  identified
with  its  Radical  wing.  He  was  a  witty  and  elo
quent  platform  orator,  and  during  the  canvass  of
1860  did  effective  service  for  his  party  in  a  tour
through  the  west  in  company  with  William  H.
Seward.  In  1861  President  Lincoln  appointed  him
governor  of  Nevada  territory,  where  he  counter
acted  the  influence  of  the  Pro-slavery  party  and,
with  Thomas  Starr  King,  of  San  Francisco,  did
much  to  keep  the  Pacific  states  and  territories  in
the  Union  during  the  early  period  of  the  civil  war.
On  the  admission  of  Nevada  as  a  state,  in  1865,  he
was  elected  U.  S.  senator,  and  drew  the  short  term,
and  in  1867  was  re-elected.  He  was  noted  for  his
humor  and  conversational  powers.  After  he  re
tired  from  public  life  his  mind  became  impaired.

NYEL,  Louis  Isidore,  French  missionary,  b.
in  Alsace  early  in  the  18th  century.  After  study
ing  with  the  Jesuits  he  entered  their  order.  He
embarked  for  China  at  Saint  Malo  on  26  Dec.,
1703,  but  the  vessel  on  which  he  sailed  experi
enced  contrary  winds  and  was  obliged  to  anchor
in  Callao,  from  which  place  the  missionary  went
to  Lima.  He  intended  to  go  thence  by  way  of
Mexico,  and  by  the  Philippine  islands  to  China,
but  whether  he  executed  his  project  is  uncertain.
He  wrote  an  account  of  his  adventures  on  the  coast
of  America  to  Pere  la  Chaise,  the  confessor  of
Louis  XIV.,  dated  Lima,  20  May,  1705.  It  is  en
titled  "  Traversee  de  Saint  Malo  au  Perou,  Detroits
de  Magellan  et  de  Le  Maire,  ports  du  Chili,  descrip
tion  de  Lima:  relation  de  deux  nouvelles  missions
etablies  depuis  quelques  annees  dans  1'Amerique
meridionale."  He  also  wrote  "  Histoire  de  la  vie
et  de  la  mort  du  P.  Cyprien  Baraze,"  one  of  the
first  founders  of  these  missions.  These  are  pub
lished  in  vol.  ix.  of  the  "Lettres  edifiantes"  (edi
tion  of  1781).  His  account  of  the  voyage  is  full
of  interesting  geographical  details,  and  his  descrip
tion  of  the  Moxos  Indians  atti'acted  attention  for
-its  bearing  on  ethnographic  questions.  Some  of
Nyel's  letters  were  translated  into  German,  and
published  in  the  "  Weltbott  "  of  Stocklein.


548


OAKES


O'BEIENE


O


OAKES,  James,  soldier,  b.  near  Liraestoneville,
Pa.,  4  April,  182(5.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1846,  assigned  to  the  2d  dra
goons,  served  in  the  Mexican  war,  and  was  brevetted
1st  lieutenant  for  gallantry  at  Medelin,  near  Vera
Cruz,  and  captain  for  Molino  del  Key.  He  was
then  on  frontier  and  garrison  duty,  being  wound
ed,  12  Aug.,  1850,  in  a  skirmish  with  Indians,  and
on  3  March,  1855,  was  promoted  captain  in  the  3d
cavalry.  After  frequent  service  on  scouting  par
ties  against  Indians,  he  was  made  major  on  6  April,
1861,  and  declined  the  commission  of  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  on  17  May.  He  led  a  regi
ment  in  the  Tennessee  and  Mississippi  campaign
of  1862,  and  was  afterward  on  mustering  and  re
cruiting  service,  also  commanding  the  district  of
Illinois  in  18C3-'6.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general,  U.  S.  army,  on  30  March,  1865,  and  com
missioned  colonel,'  31  July,  1866.  On  29  April,
1879,  he  was  retired  from  active  service.

OAKES,  Urian,  clergyman,  b.  in  England  in
1631 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  25  July,  1681.  He
was  brought  to  America  in  1634,  and  while  yet
very  young  published  in  Cambridge  a  series  of  as
tronomical  calculations.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1649,  and,  after  concluding  his  theo
logical  studies,  preached  for  a  short  time  at  Rox-
bury,  and  then  went  to  England  and  was  settled
as  a  minister  at  Tichfield,  Hampshire.  In  1662  he
was  forbidden,  as  a  non-conformist,  to  preach,  but
he  found  an  asylum  among  friends,  and  afterward
presided  over  another  congregation.  When  Jona
than  Mitchell  died  in  1668,  he  was  called  to  take
charge  of  the  church  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  and  ac
cepted,  but  did  not  begin  his  pastoral  labors  till  8
Nov.,  1671.  After  the  death  of  Dr.  Leonard  Hoar
he  assumed  the  duties  of  president  of  Harvard
college,  7  April,  1675,  but  was  not  formally  inau
gurated  until  2  Feb.,  1680.  His  commencement
sermons  are  noted  for  the  purity  of  their  Latinity.
He  published  some  sermons  and  a  Latin  eulogy
and  an  elegy  in  English  verse  on  his  friend  Thom
as  Shcpard  (Cambridge,  1677).  —  His  brother.
Thomas,  physician,  b.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  18
June,  1644;  d.  in  Eastham,  Mass.,  15  July,  1719,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1662,  studied  medi
cine  in  London,  England,  and  became  eminent  as
a  physician.  He  was  a  representative  in  the  pro
vincial  assembly  in  1689,  and  was  chosen  speaker.
Subsequent  ly  he  was  a  member  of  the  council,  was
agent  for  Massachusetts  in  England  in  1692,  when
the  new  charter  was  framed,  and  was  again  a  rep
resentative  in  1706.

OAKEY,  Emily  Sullivan,  author,  b.  in  Al
bany,  N.  Y.,  8  Oct.,  1829;  d.  there,  11  May,  1883.
She  was  graduated  in  1850  at  Albany  female  acad
emy,  in  which  she  became  teacher  of  rhetoric,
English  literature,  and  Latin  in  1854,  and  in  later
years  taught  also  logic,  German,  and  French  till
her  death.  She  contributed  to  magazines  and
newspapers,  was  the  author  of  "  Sowing  the  Seed,"
a  popular  religious  song,  and  published  "  Dia
logues  and  Conversations  "  (New  York.  1879)  and
a  volume  of  poetry  entitled  "At  the  Foot  of  Par
nassus"  (Albany,  1883).

OAKLEY,  Henry  Augustus,  financier,  b.  in
New  York  city,  20  Sept.,  1827.  He  received  a
classical  education,  and  in  1851  became  secretary
of  the  Howard  fire  insurance  company,  of  which
he  was  subsequently  chosen  vice-president,  and
finally  president,  lii  1850-'!  he  was  president  of


the  Mercantile  library  association  of  New  York.
In  1862  he  served  in  the  civil  war  as  an  officer  of
New  York  militia.  He  was  president  of  the  New
York  Bible  society  in  1869-'70,  of  the  New  York
board  of  underwriters  in  1869-'71,  of  the  National
board  of  underwriters  in  1871-'6,  and  has  been  an
officer  in  many  of  the  principal  societies  and  chari
ties  of  New  York.  He  has  been  a  frequent  con
tributor  to  the  literary  press,  and  is  the  author  of
'•  A  Christmas  Reverie,  and  other  Sketches  "  (print
ed  privately,  New  York,  -1849) ;  "  Outline  of  a
Course  of  English  Reading"  (1853);  "Historical
Sketch  of  the  Howard  Insurance  Company  "  (1875) ;
and  "  Addresses  as  President  of  the  National
Board  of  Fire  Underwriters  "  (1876).

OAKLEY,  Thomas  Jackson,  jurist,  b.  in
Dutchess  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1783  ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  12  May,  1857.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1801,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
practised  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.  In  1810-'12
he  was  surrogate  of  Dutchess  county.  He  was
elected  as  a  Federalist  to  congress,  and  served
from  24  May,  1813,  till  2  March,  1815.  In  1816
and  1818  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  legislature.
He  was  appointed  attorney-general  of  New  York
state  in  1819,  and  in  1820  was  again  a  member  of
the  legislature.  He  was  again  elected  to  congress
as  a  Clinton  Democrat,  and  took  his  seat  on  3  Dec.,
1827,  but  resigned  in  1828,  on  receiving  the  ap
pointment  of  judge  of  the  superior  court  of  New
York  city.  When  that  court  was  reorganized  in
1846  he  was  elected  chief  justice,  and  filled  that
office  until  his  death.  The  degree  of  LL.  I),  was
bestowed  upon  him  by  Union  college  in  1853.

OBANDO,  Jose  Maria  (o-ban'-do),  Colombian
general,  b.  in  Garcia  in  1797;  d.  on  the  battle-field
of  Cruz  Verde,  29  June,  1861.  At  the  age  of  two
years  he  was  abducted  and  carried  to  Popayan,
where  he  was  adopted  by  a  gentleman  named
Obando,  and  his  origin  is  still  unknown.  At  first
he  served  in  the  royalist  army  as  a  guerilla  and
obtained  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  but  in
1822  he  united  with  the  Revolutionary  party  and
served  under  Bolivar  in  the  province  of  Pasto.
After  the  establishment  of  independence  he  was
several  times  minister  of  state  in  the  department
of  war  and  marine,  and  in  1832  he  was  appointed
minister  to  Ecuador  to  negotiate  a  treaty  of  peace.
He  engaged  in  several  revolutionary  movements
and  was  persecuted,  but.  afterward  cleared  himself
of  all  the  charges  against  him.  In  1849  he  was  a
member  of  the  Granadian  congress  and  secretary
of  the  chamber  of  deputies.  In  1850  he  was  ap
pointed  governor  of  the  province  of  Cartagena,  and
in  1852  he  became  president  of  the  republic.  In
June,  1854,  there  was  a  revolutionary  movement  and
the  constitutional  government  was  replaced  by  a
dictatorship.  Gen.  Obando  was  accused  of  com
plicity  in  this  revolution  and  again  unjustly  perse
cuted,  but  in  1860  he  was  commissioned  to  suppress
a  revolution  in  Cauca,  and  died  in  defending  the
Federal  svstem  against  the  Centralists.

O'BEIRNE,  Thomas  Lewis,  Irish  clergyman,
b.  in  County  Longford,  Ireland,  in  1748;  d.  in
County  Meath,  Ireland,  15  Feb.,  1823.  He  was
educated  for  the  Roman  Catholic  priesthood,  in
the  Jesuit  college  at  St.  Omer,  France,  but  took
orders  in  the  English  church,  and  in  1775  accom
panied  Lord  Howe  to  America  as  chaplain.  In
1776  he  preached  in  St.  Paul's  church  in  New
York  city.  He  became  Anglican  bishop  of  Os-


OBER


O'BRIEN


549


sory  in  1796.  and  two  years  later  was  transferred
to  the  see  of  Meath.  Besides  three  volumes  of
"  Sermons  "  and  a  poem  on  "  The  Crucifixion."  he
published  a  "  Vindication  "  of  the  conduct  of  his
patrons,  Gen.  Sir  William  and  Admiral  Lord
Howe,  in  America,  and  other  political  tracts.

OBER,  Frederic  Albion,  author,  b.  in  Bever
ly,  Mass.,  13  Feb.,  1849.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  evinced  a  fondness  for  natural
history,  collecting  while  yet  a  boy  nearly  all  the
birds  of  Xew  England  and  noting  their  habits,  and
in  1872  abandoned  business  to  hunt  in  Florida.
In  1874  he  made  a  second  trip,  successfully  ex
plored  Lake  Okechobee,  and  published  in  periodi
cals  a  description  of  the  lake  and  its  shores.  In
1876-'8  he  made  a  trip  to  the  Lesser  Antilles  to
collect  birds  for  the  Smithsonian  institution,  and
discovered  twenty  new  species.  On  a  second  ex
cursion  he  discovered  two  other  birds  that  were
before  unknown,  and  made  a  complete  exploration
of  the  Caribbees.  In  1881,  moved  by  a  desire  to
see  the  vestiges  of  early  American  civilization,  he
journeyed  through  Mexico,  and  during  that  and
two  subsequent  trips  gathered  the  material  for
several  books.  On  his  return  from  various  explo
rations  he  prepared  accounts  of  his  travels  at  the
request  of  scientific  societies,  and  later  a  series  of
popular  lectures,  illustrated  with  photographic-
views,  projected  by  the  magic  lantern.  His  lec
tures,  originally  delivered  before  the  Lowell  insti
tute  in  Bost on,  include  "Mexico,  Historical  and
Picturesque,"  "  Ancient  Cities  of  Mexico,"  "  The
Mexican  Indian,"  "Adventures  in  the  West  In
dies,"  and  "  Through  Florida  with  Gun  and  Came
ra."  His  published  works  are  "Camps  in  the  Car
ibbees"  (Boston,  1879);  "Young  Folks'  History  of
Mexico"  (1883);  "Travels  in  Mexico"  (1884);
'•  Mexican  Resources :  a  Guide  to  and  through
Mexico"  (1885);  "The  Silver  City,"  a  book  for
boys  (1885) ;  and  another  juvenile  book  entitled
"  Montezuraa's  Gold-Mines"  (1887).

OBERHOLTZER,  Sara  Louisa,  poet,  b.  in
Uwchlan,  Chester  co.,  Pa.,  20  May,  1841.  Her
maiden  name  was  Vickers.  She  was  educated  at
the  state  normal  school  in  Millersville,  and  on  1
Jan.,  1862,  married  John  Oberholtzer,  of  Xorris-
town.  Pa.  She  began  at  an  early  age  to  contribute
poems  and  articles  in  prose  to  newspapers  and
magazines,  and  has  published  in  book-form  "  Vio
let  Lee,  and  other  Poems"  (Philadelphia,  1872) ;
"  Come  for  Arbutus,  and  other  Wild  Bloom "
(1882) ;  "  Hope's  Heart  Bells,"  a  story  of  Quaker
life  (1884) :  and  "  Daisies  of  Verse  "  (1886).

OBOOKIAH,  Henry,  missionary,  b.  on  the  isl
and  of  Hawaii  about  1792;  d.  in  Cornwall,  Conn.,
17  Feb.,  1818.  He  was  brought  to  Xew  Haven.
Conn.,  in  a  merchant  vessel  in  1809.  After  he  had
obtained  an  excellent  English  education  in  the
families  of  friends  in  Andover,  Mass.,  and  Goshen
and  Canaan,  Conn.,  the  ministers  of  Litchfield
county,  Conn.,  formed  the  plan  of  a  special  school
to  prepare  natives  of  heathen  countries  for  mis
sionary  service.  He  was  active  in  soliciting  money
for  the  proposed  mission-school,  which  was  estab
lished  at  Cornwall,  Conn.,  in  1817.  There  were
brought  into  it  other  Kanakas  besides  Obookiah,
as  well  as  pupils  from  Hindustan  and  some  Xorth
American  Indians.  While  there  he  was  seized
with  a  fatal  fever,  after  nearly  completing  a  Ha
waiian  dictionary,  grammar,  and  spelling-book,  be
sides  translating  the  book  of  Genesis  into  his  na
tive  language.  His  "  Memoirs "  were  published
(Xew  York,  1818).

O'BRIEN.  Cornelius,  Canadian  archbishop,  b.
in  Xew  Glasgow,  Prince  Edward  island,  4  May,


1843.  After  finishing  his  classical  studies  at  St.
Dunstan's  college,  Charlottetown,  in  1864,  he  went
to  the  Urban  college  of  the  propaganda,  Rome,
where  he  took  a  seven  years'  course  of  philosophy
and  theology,  and  on  its  completion  obtained  the
degrees  of  "doctor  of  philosophy  and  doctor  of
theology  in  public  competition.  He  was  ordained
in  1871,  and  on  his  return  was  appointed  professor
in  St.  Dunstan's  college.  In  1873  he  was  made
rector  of  the  cathedral  of  Charlottetown,  and  in
1874  he  was  transferred  to  the  parish  of  Indian
river.  In  1880  he  went  to  Rome  with  Bishop
Mclntyre,  of  Charlottetown,  and  he  accompanied
Archbishop  Hannan.  of  Halifax,  on  his  visit  to  the
pope  in  1881.  On  the  death  of  Archbishop  Han-
nan,  in  1882,  he  was  nominated  for  the  vacant  see.
He  was  consecrated  archbishop  in  the  cathedral  of
Halifax  on  21  Jan.,  1883,  and  at  once  devoted
himself  to  the  development  of  the  resources  of  his
diocese.  He  built  the  fine  church  of  St.  Patrick  in
1883,  and  rebuilt  the  Orphanage  of  Halifax  on  a
large  scale  in  the  following  year.  He  opened  St.
Patrick's  home,  a  reformatory  and  industrial  school,
in  1885,  and  other  charitable  and  educational  in
stitutions.  The  extensive  parochial  schools  that
he  has  erected  in  connection  with  St.  Patrick's
church  are  considered  the  most  complete  in  Hali
fax.  Archbishop  O'Brien  has  founded  twelve
churches  and  nine  parochial  schools,  and  has  ac
quired  property  in  different  parts  of  his  diocese
with  the  purpose  of  establishing  other  institutions.
The  diocese  at  present  contains  eighty  churches,
forty  priests,  eleven  convents,  and  a  Roman  Catho
lic  population  of  more  than  50,000.  Archbishop
O'Brien  is  an  eloquent  preacher  and  a  popular
lecturer  on  general  subjects.  He  has  written
"  Philosophy  of  the  Bible  Vindicated  "  (Charlotte-
town,  1876) :  "  Mater  Admirabilis  "  (Montreal,
1882) ;  "  After  Weary  Years,"  a  novel  (Baltimore,
1885):  "St.  Agnes,  Virgin  and  Martyr"  (Halifax,
1887);  and  "Early  Stages  of  Christianity  in  Eng
land  "  (Charlottetown,  1880).

O'BRIEN,  Fitz  James,  author,  b.  in  Limerick,
Ireland,  in  1828;  d.  in  Cumberland.  Md..  6  April.
1862.  He  was  educated  at  the  University  of  Dub
lin,  and  is  believed  to  have  been  at  one  time  a  sol
dier  in  the  British
service.  On  leav
ing  college  he  went
to  London,  and
in  the  course  of
two  years  spent
his  inheritance  of
£8,000,  meanwhile
editing  a  period
ical  in  aid  of  the
World's  fair  of
1851.  About  1852
he  came  to  the
United  States,  and
thenceforth  he  de
voted  his  atten
tion  to  literature.
While  he  was  in
college  he  had
shown  an  aptitude  ^  Y- — Q
for  writing  verse.  (A/T  • ya
and  two  of  his  v

poems — "  Loch  Ine  "  and  "  Irish  Castles  " — were
published  in  "  The  Ballads  of  Ireland  "  (1856).  His
earliest  writings  in  the  United  States  were  contrib
uted  to  the  "  Lantern,"  which  was  then  edited  by
John  Brougham.  Subsequently  he  wrote  for  the
"  Home  Journal."  the  "  Xew  York  Times,"  and  the
"American  Whig  Review."  His  first  important  lit-


550


O'BRIEN


O'BRIEN


erary  connection  was  with  "  Harper's  Magazine,"
and  beginning  in  February,  1853,  with  "The  Two
Skulls,"  he  contributed  more  than  sixty  articles  in
prose  and  verse  to  that  periodical.  He  likewise
wrote  for  the  "  New  York  Saturday  Press,"  "  Put
nam's  Magazine,"  "  Vanity  Fair,"  and  the  "  Atlan
tic  Monthly."  To  the  latter  he  sent  "  The  Diamond
Lens "  and  "  The  Wonder  Smith,"  which  are  un
surpassed  as  creations  of  the  imagination,  and  are
unique  among  short  magazine  stories.  His  pen
was  also  employed  in  writing  plays.  For  James
W.  Wallack  he"  made  "  A  Gentleman  from  Ire
land,"  which  still  keeps  the  stage,  and  he  also
wrote  and  adapted  other  pieces  for  the  theatres,
but  they  had  a  shorter  existence.  In  18(51  lie
joined  the  7th  regiment  of  the  New  York  national
guard,  hoping  to  be  sent  to  the  front,  and  he
was  in  Camp  Cameron  before  Washington  for
six  weeks.  When  his  regiment  returned  to  New
York  he  received  an  appointment  on  the  staff  of
Gen.  Frederick  W.  Lander.  He  was  severely
wounded  in  a  skirmish  on  26  Feb.,  1802,  and  lin
gered  until  April,  when  he  died.  In  New  York  he
at  once  associated  with  the  brilliant  set  of  Bohemians
of  that  day,  among  whom  he  was  ranked  as  the
most  able.  At  the  weekly  dinners  that  were  given
by  John  Brougham,  or  at  the  nightly  suppers  at
Pfaff  s  on  Broadway,  he  was  the  soul  of  the  enter
tainment.  His  friend,  William  Winter,  collected
"  The  Poems  and  Stories  of  Fitz  James  O'Brien,''
to  which  are  added  personal  recollections  of  this
gifted  writer  by  those  of  his  old  associates  that
survived  him  (Boston,  1881).

O'BRIEN,  Hugh,  journalist,  b.  in  Ireland,  13
July,  1827.  He  was  brought  to  the  United  States
when  he  was  five  years  of  age,  received  a  common-
school  education  in  Boston,  Mass.,  was  apprenticed
to  a  printer  at  the  age  of  twelve,  and  became  fore
man  of  an  office  when  he  was  only  fifteen  years  old.
Several  years  later  he  founded  the  "  Shipping  and
Commercial  List,"  of  which  he  was  long  the  editor.
He  was  an  alderman  of  Boston  in  18?5-'83,  and  for
four  years  chairman  of  the  board.  In  December,
1884,  he  was  elected  mayor  for  the  following  year.
He  carried  out  various  reforms,  and  was  re-elected
at  the  two  sxicceeding  elections.

O'BRIEN,  Jeremiah,  patriot,  b.  in  Scarborough,
Me.,  in  1740 ;  d.  in  Machias,  Me.,  5  Oct..  1818.  Ilis
father,  Morris,  a  native  of  Cork,  Ireland,  settled  in
Scarborough,  was  a  volunteer  in  the  expedition
against  Louisburg,  and  removed  in  1765  to  Ma-
chias,  where  he  was  engaged  with  his  six  sons  in
the  lumber  business  when  the  Revolutionary  war  be
gan.  When  the  news  came  of  the  collision  at  Lex
ington  the  people  of  Maehias  erected  a  liberty-
pole.  A  few  days  afterward  a  British  armed
schooner,  the  "  Margaretta,"  entered  the  harbor,
convoying  two  sloops  that  were  to  be  freighted
with  lumber  for  the  British  defensive  works  in
Boston.  Capt.  Moore,  of  the  "  Margaretta,"  ordered
the  pole  to  be  taken  down,  threatening  to  fire  on
the  town  if  it  were  not  done.  The  citizens  con
certed  a  plan  to  seize  the  British  officers  while  they
were  at  meeting  on  Sunday,  but  they  saw  the  band
approaching,  and,  hastening  on  board  their  vessel,
dropped  down  the  river.  A  company  of  sixty  vol
unteers,  which  included  the  O'Brien  brothers,  gave
chase  on  the  following  morning  in  one  of  the  lum
ber  sloops.  Jeremiah  O'Brien  was  chosen  captain.
While  the  "  Margaretta  "  lay  becalmed  in  the  bay,
the  sloop  was  towed  up  by  boats,  the  English  com
mander  allowing  her  to  come  alongside,  although
he  had  sixteen  swivel-guns  and  four-pounders.
Some  of  the  Americans  had  muskets,  but  only
three  rounds  of  ammunition ;  some  were  armed


merely  with  pitchforks  ;  yet  after  a  sharp  hand-to-
hand  combat  they  were  victorious,  having  mortally
wounded  the  English  captain  and  killed  the  helms
man  in  the  first  fire.  Their  loss  was  four  men
killed  and  nine  wounded,  and  that  of  the  enemy
ten  killed  and  ten  wounded.  This  was  the  first
sea-fight  of  the  Revolution.  The  armament  of  the
"  Margaretta  "  was  transferred  to  the  sloop,  which
was  rechristened  the  "  Maehias  Liberty."  O'Brien
took  command,  and  captured  the  "Diligence,"  a
British  coast-survey  vessel,  and  her  tender,  which
had  been  sent  out  from  Halifax  to  retake  the
"Margaretta."  The  "Liberty,"  with  Jeremiah
O'Brien  as  captain  and  his  brother  William  as
lieutenant,  and  the  "  Diligence,"  on  which  his
brother  John  was  lieutenant,  were  commissioned
by  the  provincial  government,  and  ordered  to  in
tercept  supplies  for  the  British  troops.  Capt.
O'Brien  cruised  on  the  coast  for  a  year  and  a  half,
taking  several  prizes.  He  then  assumed  command
of  a  privateer  called  the  "Hannibal,"  that  his
brother  John  and  others  had  built  at  Newburyport,
but  shortly  afterward,  while  cruising  off  New  York,
his  vessel  was  chased  by  two  frigates  and  captured.
He  was  confined  for  six  months  in  the  "Jersey"
guard-ship,  and  then  sent  to  England  and  detained
in  Mill  prison,  from  which,  after  a  few  months,  he
succeeded  in  escaping.  He  resided  for  some  time
at  Brunswick,  Me.,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death
was  collector  of  the  port  of  Maehias.  Ilis  daughter
was  the  mother  of  John  P.  Hale.  Ilis  brother,
JOHNT,  while  in  command  of  a  privateer  called  the
"  Ilibernia,"  captured  an  English  armed  vessel,  the
"  General  Pattison,"  having  on  board  a  number  of
officers  of  the  British  army  who  were  returning
from  New  York  to  England.

O'BRIEN,  John,  Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Loughboro,  Canada,  in  182!) ;  d.  in  Quebec,  1  Aug.,
1870.  He  studied  philosophy  and  theology  in  the
seminary  of  Quebec,  and  after  his  ordination  was
made  president  of  Regiopolis  college.  He  was
afterward  sent  to  Brockville,  where  he  built  the
church  of  St.  Francis  Xavier,  and  was  appointed
its  pastor.  He  was  made  coadjutor  to  Bishop
Horan,  of  Kingston,  18  April,  1875.

O'BRIEN,  Lucius  Richard,  Canadian  artist,
b.  at  Shanty  Bay,  Lake  Simcoe,  15  Aug.,  1832.  He
was  educated  at  Upper  Canada  college,  in  1847
entered  an  architect's  office,  and  subsequently
studied  and  practised  as  a  civil  engineer.  From
early  years  Mr.  O'Brien  displayed  a  love  for  art.
In  1872  he  took  an  active  part  in  founding  the  art-
school  of  the  Ontario  society  of  artists,  and  he  was
vice-president  of  this  society  in  1874-'80.  When
the  Royal  Canadian  academy  of  arts  was  founded
he  was  appointed  its  president  by  the  Marquis  of
Lome,  and  he  has  since  held  this  office  by  elec
tion.  In  1880  Mr.  O'Brien  was  appointed  art  editor
of  "  Picturesque  Canada  "  (2  vols.,  Toronto,  1884),
to  which  he  contributed  a  large  number  of  draw
ings.  His  pictures  have  been  of  landscape  or
marine  subjects  exclusively,  and  of  late  years  he
has  painted  altogether  in  water-colors.  His  prin
cipal  works  are  two  pictures  of  Quebec,  painted  for
the  Queen  (1881) ;  a  view  of  "  Cape  Diamond,"
Quebec,  painted  for  the  Marquis  of  Lome  as  a
wedding  present  for  Prince  Leopold  in  1882  ;  "  Cape
Trinity  "  ;  "  September  on  the  Saguenay,"  owned
by  the  Marquis  of  Lansdowne  ;  "  The  Outlet  of
Lake  St.  John  "  ;  "A  Portage  on  the  Peribonea,"
owned  by  the  Canadian  club  of  New  York ;  "  Under
the  Cliffs  of  Devon  after  a  Storm  "  ;  and  "  Foot
prints  of  an  Avalanche,"  exhibited  in  May,  1887,
at  the  Royal  academy,  London.  He  has  also
painted  views  in  the  Rocky  mountains.


O'BRIEN


OCAMPO


551


O'BRIEN.  Richard,  seaman,  h.  in  Maine  in
1758 ;  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C.,  14  Feb.,  1824.  He
embraced  a  seafaring  life,  became  a  skilful  naviga
tor,  and  during  the  Revolution  engaged  in  priva
teering,  and  was  lieutenant  of  the  brig  "  Jefferson  "
in  1781.  After  the  war  he  entered  the  regular
naval  service  of  the  United  States,  but  in  1785  was
captured,  and  for  a  long  time  was  held  in  servitude
by  the  dey  of  Algiers.  For  seven  years  he  carried
a  ball  and  chain,  but  an  act  of  kindness  to  his
master's  daughter  secured  his  deliverance  from  the
harsher  forms  of  slavery.  He  performed  various
useful  offices  for  the  dey,  conformed  outwardly  to
the  Mohammedan  religion,  and  was  treated  with
increasing  leniency  and  respect.  He  wrote  to
Thomas  Jefferson,  then  secretary  of  state,  who  se
cured  his  emancipation,  and  in  1797  appointed  him
a  diplomatic  agent  of  the  United  States.  He  as
sisted  Com.  Edward  Preble  in  his  negotiations
with  Tripoli,  then  returned  to  the  United  States  in
1804,  made  Philadelphia  his  residence,  and  followed
the  sea  till  1810,  when  he  settled  on  a  farm  near
Carlisle,  Pa.,  and  afterward  was  a  member  of  the
legislature. — His  grandson,  John  Paul  Jones,
soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1817;  d.  in  In-
dianola,  Tex.,  31  March,  1850,  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1836,  and  attached
to  the  2d  artillery.  He  served  in  1886-'8  in  the
Florida  war,  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant  on  7
July,  1838,  took  part  in  the  military  occupation  of
Texas  and  in  the  march  through  Chihuahua,  served
during  the  Mexican  war  in  the  quartermaster's  de
partment  with  the  rank  of  captain,  was  brevetted
major  for  gallantry  at  Buena  Vista,  where  he  was
wounded,  and  was  made  captain  by  regular  promo
tion  on  10  May,  1849,  He  was  the  author  of  a  trea
tise  on  "American  Military  Laws  and  the  Practice
of  Courts-Martial,  with  Suggestions  for  their  Im
provement "  (New  York,  1856).

O'BRIEN,  William  Shoiiey,  capitalist,  b.  in
Abbeyleix,  Ireland,  in  1825  ;  d.  in  San  Rafael,  Cal.,
2  May,  1878.  He  emigrated  early  in  life  to  New
York  city,  where  he  was  admitted  to  citizenship  in
1845,  went  to  California  in  1849,  worked  for  some
time  in  the  mines,  engaged  in  1851  in  the  liquor  busi
ness  in  San  Francisco,  and  subsequently  in  the  ship-
chandlery  business,  and  in  1854  entered  into  part
nership  with  James  C.  Flood,  his  former  associate
in  mining.  For  twelve  years  they  conducted  a
restaurant  and  drinking-saloon.  Acquiring  an  in
terest  in  the  silver-mines  of  Nevada,  they  devoted
themselves  from  1867  entirely  to  mining  operations.
Mr.  O'Brien  was  one  of  the  four  principal  stock
holders  of  the  mine  on  the  Comstock  ledge,  called
the  "big  bonanza,"  which  was  discovered  in  1874.
He  left  a  fortune  of  from  $15,000,000  to  $20,000,000.

O'CALLAGHAN,  Edmund  Bailey,  historian,
b.  in  Mallow,  County  Cork,  Ireland,  29  Feb.,  1797 ;
d.  in  New  York  city,  27  May,  1880.  After  com
pleting  his  collegiate  course,  he  spent  two  years  in
Paris.  In  1823  he  emigrated  to  Quebec,  and  in
1827  he  was  admitted  to  the  practice  of  medicine.
In  1834  he  was  editor  of  "  The  Vindicator,"  and  in
1836  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  assembly  of
Lower  Canada,  but  after  the  insurrection  he  re
moved  to  New  York,  and  he  was  for  many  years
employed  in  the  office  of  the  secretary  of  state  at
Albany  in  editing  the  records  of  the  state.  After
ward,  in  1870,  he  removed  to  New  York  city.  His
works  include  "  History  of  New  Netherlands "
(New  York,  1846;  2d  ed.,  2  vols.,  1848) ;  "Jesuit
Relations  "  (1847) ;  "  Documentary  History  of  New
York"  (4  vols.,  Albany,  1849-'51);  "Documents
relating  to  the  Colonial  History  of  New  York,"
procured  in  Holland,  England,  and  France  by


John  R.  Brodhead  (11  vols.,  1855-'61);  "Remon
strance  of  New  Netherland  "  (1856) ;  the  "  Orderly
Books"  of  Commissary  Wilson  (1857).  and  Gen.
John  Burgoyne  (1860) ;  "  Names  of  Persons  for
whom  Marriage  Licenses  were  issued  previous  to
1784"  (1860);  Wooley's  "Two  Years'  Journal  in
New  York  "  (I860) ;  "  Journals  of  the  Legislative
Councils  of  New  York"  (2  vols.,  1861);  "The
Origin  of  the  Legislative  Assemblies  of  the  State
of  New  York  "  (1861) ;  "  A  Calendar  to  the  Land
Papers  "  (1864) ;  "  The  Register  of  New  Nether-
land  "  (1865);  "A  Calendar  of  Historical  Manu
scripts  in  the  Office  of  the  Secretary  of  State "
(1865);  "The  Voyage  of  George  Clarke  to  Ameri
ca,"  with  notes  (1867) :  and  "  Voyages  of  the  Sla
vers  '  St.  John  '  and  '  Arms  '  "  (186'7).

OCAMPO,  Gonzalo  de  (o-cam'-po),  Peruvian
archbishop,  b.  in  Madrid,  Spain,  about  1572 :  d.  in
Recuay,  Peru,  19  Dee.,  1626.  He  was  graduated  in
theology  and  law  in  the  University  of  Salamanca,
went  to  Rome,  and  during  seven  years  served  as  a
private  chamberlain  of  Pope  Clement  VIII.  Re
turning  to  Spain,  he  was  canon  of  Seville,  and
founded  there  the  College  of  Concepcion,  on  which
he  expended  100,000  ducats.  He  obtained  the
bishopric  of  Guadix,  of  which  he  never  took  pos
session,  and  soon  afterward  was  promoted  arch
bishop  of  Lima,  13  July,  1623,  entering  that  city
on  20  April,  1625.  He  introduced  many  reforms
among  the  clergy,  took  measures  for  the  welfare
of  the  convents,  and  on  19  Oct.,  1625,  inaugurated
the  new  cathedral  of  Lima  (see  illustration),  whith


er  he  transported,  by  order  of  the  king,  the  remains
of  Pizarro.  Mendoza,  and  other  viceroys.  On  20
Feb.,  1626,  he  wrote  a  circular  recommending  the
teaching  of  the  Indians,  and  circulating  in  the  in
terior  about  6,000  copies  of  the  same  in  the  Spanish
and  Quichua  languages.  On  27  May,  1626,  he
began  the  visitation  of  his  archbishopric  and  con
verted  several  tribes.  During  the  visit  he  died  in
Recuay,  probably  poisoned  by  a  cacique  whom  he
had  forced  to  separate  from  a  woman  with  whom
he  lived.  His  remains  were  removed  to  Lima  on
16  July,  1627.  He  wrote,  according  to  Gonzales
Davila,  "  Del  Gobierno  espiritualy  temporal  del
Peru."  of  which  the  manuscript  is  in  the  archiepis-
copal  archives  in  Lima.

OCAMPO,  Melchor,  Mexican  statesman,  b.  in
Valladolid  (now  Morelia)  about  1815;  d.  in  Tepeji,
3  June,  1861.  His  primary  education  was  obtained
in  Mexico,  and  he  finished  his  studies  in  the  Semi
nary  of  Valladolid,  where  he  was  graduated  in  Jaw.
He  returned  to  Mexico  to  practise,  but  soon  gave
himself  entirely  to  the  study  of  botany,  chemistry,
and  agriculture,  in  which  he  acquired  a  reputation
both  at  home  and  abroad.  In  1843  he  was  elected
to  congress  from  his  state,  and  in  the  elections  of
1846  he  was  chosen  by  unanimous  vote  governor  of
his  native  state  of  Michoacan.  During  his  admin
istration  he  made  numerous  improvements  and  re-


552


OCCOM


O'CONNELL


established  also  the  civil  college  of  San  Nicolas
Obispo.  He  resigned,  29  March,  1849,  and  retired
to  the  country,  but  was  re-elected,  14  June,  1852,
occupying  the  state  executive  till  24  Jan.,  1853,

when  his  repeat
ed  resignation  was
accepted  by  the
legislature  with  a
unanimous  vote  of
thanks  for  his  emi
nent  services.  He
retired  to  his  coun
try-seat,  Pomoca
(anagram  of  Ocam-
po),  but,  after  the
arrivalof  Santa-  An
na  and  his  assump
tion  of  the  dictator
ship,  Ocampo  was
arrested  in  June,
1853,  transported
to  Vera  Crux,  and
imprisoned  in  the
fortress  of  San  Juan  de  Ulna  until  a  vessel  was
ready  to  take  him  as  an  exile  to  the  United  States.
When  the  revolution  of  Ayutla  had  triumphed.
Ocampo  was  appointed  by  President  Alvarez  (q.  v.)
chief  of  his  cabinet  and  secretary  of  state  in  Octo
ber,  1855,  but  resigned  very  soon,  as  he  was  op
posed  to  the  policy  of  the  secretary  of  war,  Comon-
fort.  He  occupied  a  seat  in  congress,  and  took  part
in  the  discussion  of  the  constitution  of  1857.  After
the  fall  of  Comonfort  he  was  appointed  by  Juarez
(q.  v.)  secretary  of  state  and  acting  secretary  of  war
in  January,  1858,  and  accompanied  him  to  Vera
Cruz,  where  he  continued  in  the  state  department
till  August,  1859,  taking  part  in  the  promulgation
of  the  famous  reform  laws  of  12  July,  1859.  In
January,  1800,  lie  was  again  appointed  secretary  of
state,  but  soon  he  disagreed  with  Juarez  regarding
the  decree  of  amnesty,  and,  together  with  Gonzalez
Ortega,  La  Llave,  and  Laf  uente,  he  resigned,  retir
ing  to  his  farm,  Pomoca.  He  was  singled  out  for
vengeance  by  the  reactionary  party,  and  in  the  last
days  of  May  a  party  under  command  of  Lindoro
Cajigas  appeared  at  Pomoca.  Mistaking  a  friend
of  Ocampo's  for  the  owner  of  the  estate,  they  took
him  prisoner,  and  he  remained  silent  to  save  his
friend,  when  Ocampo  appeared,  and  gave  himself
up.  He  was  taken  on  foot  as  a  captive  to  Tepeji
del  Rio,  delivered  to  Zuloaga  and  Marquez  (q.  v.),
and  shot  by  order  of  the  latter,  notwithstanding
the  entreaties  of  many  influential  persons  at  the
capital,  including  the  French  minister.

OCCOM,  Samson,  Indian  preacher,  b.  in  Mohe-
gan,  New  London  co.,  Conn.,  about  1723 ;  d.  in  New
Stockbridge,  N.  Y.,  14  July,  1792.  He  was  con
verted  to  Christianity  about  1740,  and  at  once  ex
pressed  a  desire  to  become  the  religious  teacher  of
his  tribe.  He  was  four  years  an  inmate  of  the
school  of  Rev.  Eleazar  Wheelock,  of  Lebanon,
Conn.,  and  in  1748  he  taught  in  New  London,  but
soon  went  to  Montauk,  on  Long  Island,  where  he
was  first  teacher  and  then  preacher  among  the
Indians  for  the  next  ten  years,  having  been  licensed
by  the  Windam,  Conn.,  association.  On  30  Aug.,
1759,  he  was  ordained  by  the  presbytery  of  Suffolk,
and  he  maintained  his  connection  with  the  Presby
terian  church  to  the  close  of  his  career.  In  1761
he  went  on  a  mission  to  the  Oneida  Indians  under
the  direction  of  a  society  in  Scotland  for  propagat
ing  Christian  knowledge,  and  in  1766  he  accom
panied  Rev.  Nathaniel  Whitaker  to  England  to
procure  funds  for  an  Indian  charity-school.  From
16  Feb.,  1766,  till  22  July,  1767,  he  preached  be


tween  three  and  four  hundred  sermons,  and,  being
the  first  Indian  preacher  that  had  visited  Great
Britain,  he  everywhere  drew  crowds  of  curious
listeners.  Nor  were  his  labors  without  pecuniary
result.  George  III.  subscribed  £200  and  Lord  Dart
mouth  (q.  v.)  fifty  guineas,  while  his  total  receipts
amounted  to  more  than  £10,000.  On  his  return  to
this  country  he  remained  fora  time  in  Mohegan,
but.  removed  in  1786  with  some  of  the  New  England
and  Long  Island  Indians  to  what  was  known  as
the  Brotherton  tract  in  Oneida  county,  N.  Y.  He
subsequently  resided  among  the  Stockbridge  In
dians,  where  he  received  a  tract  of  land.  His
funeral  was  attended  by  over  six  hundred  of  his
race.  He  was  the  author  of  several  hymns,  among
them  the  one  beginning  "  Awaked  by  Sinai's  awful
sound,"  and  published  a  sermon  that  he  delivered
at  the  execution  of  Moses  Paul,  an  Indian  (New
Haven,  1772).  He  also  wrote  an  account  of  the
manners  and  customs  of  the  Montauk  Indians,
which  has  been  printed  in  the  "  Collections"  of  the
Massachusetts  historical  society  (first  series,  vol.  x.).
OCHOA  Y  ACUNA,  Antoiiio.  Mexican  poet,  b.
in  Huichapam,  27  April,  1783:  d.  in  (Jneretaro.  4
Aug.,  1833.  He  studied  in  his  native  town  and
afterward  in  the  College  of  San  Ildefonso  and  the
University  of  Mexico.  He  soon  gave  proofs  of  his
love  for  poetry,  and  on  17  May,  1806,  his  first  satiri
cal  work  appeared  in  the  "  Diario  de  Mexico."
In  1811  he  was  admitted  to  the  Arcadia  Mexicana,
a  society  of  poets,  and  he  continued  to  write  under
the  name  of  "  Pastor  Antimio."  In  the  same  year
he  wrrote  a  tragedy  entitled  "  Don  Alfonso"  for  the
Mexican  theatre.  He  was  ordained  priest  in  1816,
and  in  1817  appointed  provisional  parish  priest  of
Pueblito  (Queretaro).  In  1820  he  obtained  the
parish  of  Espiritu  Santo.  He  translated  many
works  from  the  French,  Italian,  and  Latin,  and
wrote  a  comedy,  "  Amor  por  apoderado,"  which  ap
peared  in  1831  on  the  boards.  His  works,  under
the  name  of  "  Poesias  de  un  Mexicano,"  have  been
issued  in  this  country  (New  York,  1820).

OCHTERLON7Y,  Sir  David,  bart.,  British  soldier,
b.  in  Boston.  Mass.,  12  Feb.,  1758;  d.  in  Meerut,
India,  15  July,  1825.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of
David  Ochterlony,  a  New  England  loyalist,  and  was
of  Scotch  descent,  his  paternal  great-grandfather,
Alexander,  having  been  laird  of  Pit  forthy,  in  Angus-
shire.  After  completing  his  education  he  was  sent
to  India  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  and  entered  the
British  army  as  a  cadet.  He  was  promoted  lieu
tenant  in  1778,  lieutenant-colonel  in  1803,  and
deputy  adjutant-general  at  the  battle  of  Delhi,  im
mediately  after  which  he  was  sent  as  envoy  to  the
court  of  Shah  Alum.  He  was  made  colonel,  1  Jan.,
1812,  and  major-general,  4  June,  1814.  For  his
i  skilful  conduct  in  the  Nepaulese  war  he  was  created
i  knight  commander  of  the  Bath  in  April,  1815,  and
baronet  in  the  following  November.  He  subse
quently  distinguished  himself  in  the  Mahratta  and
Pindarry  war  of  1817-'18.

O'CONNELL,  Eugene,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
County  Meath,  Ireland,  about  1818.  He  was  edu
cated  in  the  diocesan  college  at  Navan,  and  pursued
philosophical  and  theological  studies  in  St.  Patrick's
college,  Maynooth.  He  was  ordained  in  1842.  ap
pointed  professor  in  Navan  college,  and  subse
quently  in  the  missionary  college  of  All  Hallows.
After  some  years  he  emigrated  to  the  United  States
and  labored  as  a  missionary  in  California.  There
he  was  president  of  Santa  Inez  college,  and  after
ward  of  St.  Thomas's  theological  seminary.  He
then  returned  to  Ireland,  where  he  learned  in  1861
that  he  had  been  chosen  vicar  apostolic  of  the
newly  created  vicariate  of  Marysville.  He  was


O'COXXELL


O'CONNOR


553


consecrated  bishop  of  Flaviopolis  in  parlibus  infide-
liitm  in  the  College  of  All  Hallosvs  on  3  Feb..  and
sailed  for  the  United  States  in  March.  For  his
vicariate,  which  embraced  the  territory  of  Nevada
and  the  upper  half  of  California,  he  had  only  four
priests,  but  he  soon  increased  the  number.  Two
churches  were  built  in  Virginia  City,  and  subse
quently  others  in  Downieville,  Forest  Hill,  Grass
valley,  Mendocino,  and  Weaverville.  In  August,
1863,  he  founded  convents  of  the  Sisters  of  Xotre
Dame  in  Marysville,  and  of  the  Sisters  of  Mercy  in
Grass  Valley.  In  1868  he  was  made  bishop  of  Grass
Valley,  a  new  see  that  was  formed  out  of  his
vicariate,  but  he  resigned  in  1884.

O'CONNELL,  Jeremiah  Joseph,  clergyman,
I),  in  County  Cork,  Ireland,  21  Xov.,  1821.  "After
studying  in  Cork  he  entered  the  Seminary  of
Charleston,  S.  C..  in  1840.  He  was  ordained
priest  in  1844,  stationed  in  Savannah,  and  after
ward  transferred  to  Beaufort,  and  then  to  Co
lumbia.  S.  C.  His  mission  embraced  half  the
state.  In  1857  he  erected  St.  Mary's  college  and
obtained  a  charter  for  it.  and  it  flourished  many
years  until  it  was  destroyed  in  the  burning  of  Co
lumbia  in  1865.  He  lectured  throughout  the  state
during  his  pastorate  of  twenty-three  years,  and
received  more  than  300  converts  into  his  church,
acting  at  the  same  time  as  president  of  St.  Mary's
college.  In  1858  he  began  to  organize  missions  in
the  interior  of  the  state,  beginning  with  Anderson,
where  he  built  a  church  and  parsonage  and  opened
a  school.  He  established  a  temperance  society  and
wrought  a  change  for  the  better  in  the  habits  of
the  rougher  elements  among  his  people.  In  1871
his  health  failed,  and  he  was  transferred  to  the
missions  in  western  Xorth  Carolina.  In  1872  he
purchased  a  large  estate  between  Charlotte  and
Dallas  and  conveyed  it  to  Bishop  (now  Cardinal)
Gibbons,  for  the  establishment  of  a  religious  and
educational  institution ;  and  he  was  instrumental
in  founding  the  Benedictine  monastery  and  College
of  St.  Mary  of  Help.  Father  O'Connell  is  a  member
of  the  Benedictine  order.  He  is  the  author  ot
"  Catholicity  in  the  Carolinas  and  Georgia,  Leaves
of  its  History  "  (Xew  York,  1878).

O'CONNOR,  John,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  in  January,  1824;  d.  in  Cobourg,
Ont.,  3  Xov.,  1887.  His  parents  came  from  Ireland
to  the  United  States  in  1823  and  resided  in  Boston
till  1828.  when  they  removed  to  Maidstone,  Essex,
Ont.  Their  son  received  his  early  education  there,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1854.
He  was  also  a  member  of  the  Michigan  bar,  and
was  appointed  a  queen's  counsel  in  1873.  He  was
reeve  of  the  town  of  Windsor,  warden  of  Essex  for
three  years,  and  for  twelve  years  chairman  of  the  |
board  of  education  of  Windsor.  He  was  an  un
successful  candidate  for  the  legislative  assembly  of
Canada  in  1861,  but  was  elected  and  sat  for  a
short  period  in  "1863.  He  was  sent  from  Essex  to
the  Dominion  parliament  in  1867  and  1872,  and
was  elected  for  Russell  at  the  general  election  in
1878.  Mr.  O'Connor  was  president  of  the  council
in  Sir  John  A.  Macdonald's  administration  from
2  July,  1872,  till  4  March.  1873.  minister  of  inland
revenue  from  4  March  till  1  July,  1873.  and  post
master-general  from  the  latter  date  until  the  res
ignation  of  the  government  on  5  Xov.,  1873.  He
was  again  appointed  president  of  the  council,  17
Oct.,  1878.  which  portfolio  he  held  till  his  resigna
tion,  15  Jan.,  1880,  when  he  became  postmaster-
general.  He  was  appointed  secretary  of  state.  8
Xov.,  1880.  postmaster-general  again,  20  May,  1881,
and  resigned  in  May,  1882.  He  became  a  commis
sioner  to  revise  the  statutes  of  Canada,  13  Xov.,


1883,  judge  of  the  high  court  of  justice  of  Ontario,
11  Sept.,  1884,  and  a  commissioner  for  revising  the
statutes  of  that  province  in  1885.

O'CONNOR,  Michael,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  near
Cork,  Ireland,  27  Sept.,  1810;  d.  in  Woodstock,
Md.,  18  Oct.,  1872.  He  received  his  preparatory
education  in  Queenstown,  was  sent  in  1824  to  an
ecclesiastical  semi
nary  in  France,  and
finished  his  theo
logical  course  in  the
College  of  the  prop
aganda,  Rome.  He
won  his  doctor's  cap
in  a  public  disputa
tion  that  was  long
remembered  for  its
brilliancy,  and  Car
dinal  Wiseman,who
was  then  in  Rome,
predicted  a  great
career  for  him.  He
was  ordained  priest
on  1  June,  1833,  and
appointed  professor
of  sacred  scripture
in  the  Irish  college,
of  which  he  was
subsequently  vice-rector.  In  1834  he  returned  to
Ireland  and  was  made  pastor  of  Fermoy.  He  was
invited  by  Bishop  Kenrick  to  Philadelphia  in  1839
and  appointed  professor  in  the  ecclesiastical  semi
nary  of  St.  Charles  Boromeo,  of  which  he  was  made
president  soon  afterward.  While  he  discharged
the  duties  of  this  office  he  attended  the  missions  of
X^orristown  and  West  Chester,  Pa.,  and  built  the
church  of  St.  Francis  Xavier  in  Fairmount.  In
1841  he  was  transferred  to  Pittsburg  and  made
vicar-general  of  the  western  part  of  the  diocese  of
Philadelphia.  He  established  schools  and  reading-
rooms,  organized  the  Catholic  institute  in  the  parish
of  St.  Paul,  of  which  he  was  pastor,  and  built  several
churches.  He  had  long  desired  to  become  a  mem
ber  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  but  as  a  student  of  the
Propaganda  he  could  not  take  such  a  step  without
the  consent  of  the  pope.  He  set  out  for  Rome  in
1843  to  get  the  required  permission.  Meanwhile
the  diocese  of  Pittsburg  had  been  created,  his
name  had  been  sent  forward,  and  when  he  knelt
before  Gregory  XVI.  he  was  forbidden  to  rise  un
til  he  consented  to  become  bishop  of  the  new  see,
the  pope  at  the  same  time  saying :  "  You  shall  be
bishop  first  and  Jesuit  after."  He  was  consecrated
by  Cardinal  Fransoni  on  15  Aug.,  went  to  Ireland,
and  returned  to  Pittsburg  in  December,  bringing
with  him  some  candidates  for  the  priesthood  and
Sisters  of  Mercy.  His  diocese  had  a  Roman  Catho
lic  population  of  25,000  and  fourteen  priests  with
only  two  religious  institutions.  He  held  his  first
diocesan  synod  in  1844,  and  the  same  year  opened
a  church  for  colored  Roman  Catholics,  established
a  boys'  academy  and  a  seminary  for  young  ladies
under  the  care  of  the  Sisters  of  Mercy,  founded
two  temperance  societies,  began  to  publish  the
"  Catholic."  and  founded  St.  Michael's  seminary
for  the  education  of  candidates  for  the  ministry.
In  1846  he  made  his  first  episcopal  visitation  and
introduced  the  order  of  St.  Benedict  for  the  first
time  into  the  United  States.  In  1852  he  again
visited  Europe  and  persuaded  a  colony  of  Passion-
ists  to  return  with  him,  who  opened  their  first
house  in  the  United  States  in  Pittsburg.  In  1853
he  published  a  series  of  letters  to  the  governor  of
Pennsylvania  on  the  common-school  system.  The
same  year  the  see  of  Pittsburg  was  divided  and


554


O'CONNOR


O'CONOR


the  diocese  of  Erie  was  formed  from  it.  Bishop
O'Connor  was  transferred  to  the  new  diocese  at  his
own  request,  but  on  the  petition  of  the  clergy  and
people  of  Pittsburg  he  was  sent  back  by  the  pope,
lie  went  to  Rome  in  1854  to  take  part  in  defining
the  dogma  of  the  immaculate  conception,  and  it
was  said  that  certain  alterations  in  the  wording  of
the  decree  were  due  to  his  advice.  In  1853  he  fin
ished  the  Pittsburg  cathedral,  which  is  the  largest
in  the  United  States  with  two  exceptions.  Bishop
O'Connor  was  very  successful  in  financial  invest
ments.  One  piece  of  property  that  lie  bought  at
$16,000  was  afterward  assessed  for  $102,000.  In
1860  he  was  permitted  to  resign  his  see,  the  num
ber  of  priests  in  which  had  then  increased  to
eighty-six  and  the  churches  to  seventy-seven.  He
entered  a  Jesuit  monastery  in  Germany,  and  by  a
special  dispensation  was  allowed  to  take  the  usual
vows  in  two  years.  He  then  returned  to  the
United  States  and  was  appointed  professor  of  the
ology  in  Woodstock  college,  Md.  He  was  after
ward  socius  to  the  provincial  of  the  Jesuits,  and
preached  and  lectured  in  most  of  the  great  cities
throughout  the  United  States.  He  took  much  in
terest  in  the  colored  people,  and,  owing  to  his  ex
ertions,  St.  Xavier's  church  was  opened  for  them  in
Baltimore.  He  was  an  accomplished  linguist. — His
brother,  James,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Queenstown,  Ire
land,  10  Sept.,  1823.  emigrated  to  the  United  States
in  1838  and  entered  the  Seminary  of  St.  Charles
Borromeo,  Philadelphia.  He  was  sent  to  the  Prop
aganda,  Rome,  to  study  philosophy  and  theology,
and  completed  his  course  in  1845,  when  he  was
ordained  priest.  He  then  returned  to  this  country,
and  was  assigned  to  missionary  duty  in  the  diocese
of  Pittsburg.  He  was  made  president  of  St.  Mi
chael's  seminary,  Glen  wood,  in  1857,  and  this  institu
tion  made  such  progress  during  his  administration
that  he  was  obliged  to  build  extensive  additions  in
1862.  He  was  transferred  to  the  seminary  at  Over-
brook  in  1863,  where,  while  acting  as  director,  he
filled  the  chairs  of  philosophy,  moral  theology,  and
ecclesiastical  history.  He  made  a  tour  of  Europe,
and  on  his  return  was  appointed  pastor  of  St.  Domi
nic's  church  at  Holmesburg,  Pa.  He  was  nomi
nated  vicar-apostolic  of  Nebraska,  and  consecrated
bishop  of  Dibona  in  partibus  infidelium  on  20  Aug.,
1876.  He  introduced  the  Jesuits  and  Franciscans
into  the  vicariate,  and  opened  Creighton  college  in
1879.  In  1885  the  vicariate  was  erected  into  a
regular  see.  It  contained  in  1887  about  eighty-
seven  priests,  thirteen  chapels,  and  various  religious
and  educational  institutions.

O'CONNOR,  Sir  Richard,  sailor,  b.  in  Marble-
hill,  County  Cork,  Ireland,  in  1782;  d.  in  London,
England,  10  Jan.,  1855.  He  entered  the  English
navy  in  1798,  and  in  1813  he  was  sent  to  Canada  as
director  of  the  military  establishments  on  the  great
lakes.  He  took  part  in  the  capture  of  Oswego  on
6  May,  1814,  under  Admiral  Yeo,  who  gave  him
command  of  the  gun-boats.  He  was  recalled  to
England  in  1815,  rose  through  all  the  ranks  of  the
service,  and  was  made  rear-admiral  in  1850.

O'CONNOR,  William  Douglas,  author,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  2  Jan.,  1833.  He  spent  his  early
years  in  Boston  studios  engaged  in  the  study  o*f
painting.  Forced  to  abandon  his  purpose,  he
turned  to  humble  employments  for  a  livelihood,  and
before  the  age  of  twenty  became  associate  editor
of  the  Boston  "  Commonwealth,"  a  famous  Free-
soil  daily.  In  1854-'60  he  was  an  editor  of  the
Philadelphia  "  Saturday  Evening  Post,"  in  1861  be
came  corresponding  clerk  of  the  light-house  board
in  Washington,  in  1873  chief  clerk,  in  1874  libra
rian  of  the  treasury  department,  and  in  1878


assistant  general  superintendent  of  the  life-saving
service,  of  the  annual  reports  of  which  he  is  the
author,  lie  has  published  "  Harrington,"  a  pow
erful  romance  (Boston,  1860);  "The  Good  Gray
Poet,"  an  impassioned  pamphlet  in  vindication  of
Walt  Whitman,  marked  as  much  by  its  familiarity
with  the  world's  highest  literature  as  by  its  courage
of  opinion  (New  York,  1866) ;  "  The  Ghost,"  a  story
(1867);  and  tales  and  poems  in  periodicals.  In  1882
he  attracted  public  attention  by  a  series  of  articles
in  the  New  York  "  Tribune,"  exposing  and  denounc
ing  in  the  interests  of  literary  freedom,  an  attempt
of  certain  legal  authorities  in  Boston  to  suppress
Whitman's  "  Leaves  of  Grass."  A  year  later,  on
the  occasion  of  the  republication  of  his  "  Good
Gray  Poet "  in  Dr.  R.  M.  Bucke's  monograph  en
titled  "Walt  Whitman"  (Philadelphia,  1883),  he
contributed  a  long  letter  of  preface.  lie  has  been
a  defender  and  expounder  of  Delia  Bacon's  general
theory  of  the  authorship  of  the  Shakespeare  drama,
and  has  published  "  Hamlet's  Note-Book  "  (Boston,
1886),  a  discussion  of  the  main  points  at  issue,  in
volving  a  striking  contrast  between  Shakespeare
and  Bacon  personally,  and  taking  the  extreme
Baconian  ground.  His  publications  have  been
mainly  impromptu  and  occasional.  Among  his
most  notable  poems  are  "To  Athos"  and  "To
Fanny";  of  his  short  tales,  "What  Cheer?"  and
"  The  Carpenter."

O'CONOR,  or  O'CONNOR,  Thomas,  journalist,
b.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  1  Sept.,  1770;  d.  in  New  York
city,  9  Feb.,  1855.  He  came  to  this  country  in
1801,  and  was  shortly  afterward  associated  with
William  Kernan.  father  of  Francis  Kernan  (q.  i\),
and  others,  in  establishing  a  settlement  on  a  tract
of  40,000  acres  in  Steuben  county,  N.  Y.  He
eventually  abandoned  the  enterprise,  returned  to
New  York  city,  and  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  there.
He  devoted  himself  largely  to  literary  pursuits,
contributing  to  the  journals,  writing  and  publish
ing  books,  and  editing  various  periodicals,  includ
ing  the  "  Military  Monitor,"  established  in  1812,  the
"Shamrock,"  and  the  "Globe,"  founded  in  1819.
He  also  published  several  pamphlets  on  Irish  or
Roman  Catholic  questions,  and  volumes  entitled
"Selections  from  Several  Literary  Works"  (New
York,  1821),  and  "The  Inquisition  examined  by
an  Impartial  Observer"  (1825). — His  son,  Charles,
lawyer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  22  Jan.,  1804 ;  d.
in  Nantucket,  Mass.,  12  May,  1884,  modified  the
spelling  of  the  family  name  to  conform  to  the  an
cient  usage.  At  the
age  of  sixteen  he  be
gan  to  study  law,  and
in  1824,  before  he  had
attained  the  statu
tory  age  of  twenty-
one  years,  he  was  ad
mitted  to  practice.
From  this  period  till
within  a  few  years  of
his  death  his  life  was
devoted  to  the  pur
suit  of  his  profession.
The  Forrest  divorce
case,  which,  contend
ing  against  John  Van
Buren  and  other
eminent  counsel,  he
brought  toa  successful
issue,  securing  for  his
client,  Mrs.  Forrest,

a  liberal  alimony,  brought  him  Tnorc  than  ever  into
national  reputation.  Two  silver  vases  were  present
ed  to  him  in  its  commemoration.  One  was  the  gift  of


O'CONOR


OCONOSTOTA


555


thirty  ladies  of  New  York :  the  other  was  presented
by  sixty  members  of  the  bar.  These  he  bequeathed
to  the  Law  institute  of  New  York  city,  and  they  are
now  preserved  in  the  library  of  the  institute  in  the
post-office  building.  In  the  same  library  are  pre
served  the  bound  records  of  his  cases  and  opinions
— a  unique  collection  that  was  made  by  himself,
and  also  bequeathed  in  his  will  to  the  institute.
These  fill  over  100  volumes.  Others  of  his  cele
brated  private  cases  were  the  Slave  Jack  case  in
1835,  the  Lispenard  will  case  in  1843,  the  Lem-
mon  slave  case  in  1856,  the  Parrish  will  case  in
1863,  and  the  Jumel  suit  in  1871,  involving  the-
title  to  $(5,000,000  in  real  estate.  In  1848  he  be
came  a  member  of  the  "  Directory  of  the  Friends
of  Ireland,"  a  society  that  was  organized  in  antici
pation  of  a  rising  in  Ireland,  and  he  presided  at
some  of  the  meetings  in  the  same  year.  In  this
year  he  was  also  a  candidate  on  the  Democratic
ticket  for  lieutenant-governor  of  New  York,  but
was  defeated,  although  he  received  several  thou
sand  more  votes  than  the  other  candidates  of  his
party.  When  the  civil  war  was  impending  he  was
extremely  anxious  to  avert  it.  During  the  contest
and  after  it  he  felt  that,  in  the  motives  and  con
duct  of  the  war,  a  departure  had  been  made  from
the  original  principles  of  the  confederation  of
states.  He  sympathized  throughout  with  the
southern  states,  and  at  the  conclusion  of  the  war
became  senior  counsel  for  Jefferson  Davis  when
he  was  indicted  for  treason.  He  also  appeared
upon  Mr.  Davis's  bond  when  the  latter  was  admit
ted  to  bail.  The  suits  against  William  M.  Tweed,
which  were  begun  in  1871  and  which  eventually
destroyed  the  ring  that  was  then  at  the  height  of
its  power  in  New  York  city,  were  largely  his  work.
In  the  original  cases  he  was  associated  with  Will
iam  M.  Evarts,  James  Emott,  and  Wheeler  H.
Peckham.  These  suits  were  brought  in  the  attor
ney-general's  office,  a  special  bi'anch  of  which  was
established  for  the  purpose,  and  named  by  him  the
bureau  of  municipal  correction.  In  1875  the  court
of  appeals  decided  that  the  cases  should  have  been
brought  by  the  city.  Mr.  O'Conor  immediately
drafted  the  Civil  remedies  act,  which  was  enacted
at  the  next  session  of  the  legislature,  and  under
which  new  suits  were  at  once  begun.  Disheart
ened  with  the  issue  of  the  first  cases,  he  published
an  account  of  them,  entitled  "  Peculation  Triumph
ant,  being  the  Record  of  a  Five  Years'  Campaign
against  Official  Malversation,  A.  D.  1871-1875  ''
(New  York,  1875).  He  declined  any  compensation
for  his  services  in  these  cases.  In  face  of  his  abso
lute  refusal,  he  was  nominated  at  the  Louisville
convention  for  president,  in  1872,  by  the  branch  of
the  Democratic  party  that  opposed  the  election
of  Horace  Greeley.  His  electoral  ticket  received
21.559  votes  in  the  succeeding  November.  In  1869
he  was  elected  president  of  the  Law  institute  of
New  York.  In  the  electoral  contest  of  1876  he
appeared  as  advocate  for  the  claims  of  Samuel  J.
Tilden  before  the  commission.  He  erected  a  house
at  Nantucket,  Mass.,  in  1881,  with  a  fire-proof  li
brary  adjoining  it,  and  resided  there  until  his  death.
In  1854  Mr.  O'Conor  married  Mrs.  McCracken,
formerly  Miss  Cornelia  Livingston.  She  died  on
12  May,  1874,  just  ten  years  before  her  husband.
His  portrait  in  oil,  by  Benjamin  F.  Reinhardt,
hangs  in  the  rooms  of  the  Bar  association  of  New
York.  On  16  April,  1867,  his  bust  was  presented
to  the  supreme  court  of  the  state  of  New  York,
and  now  stands  in  the  court-room  in  this  city.  He
would  not  permit  its  public  display  during  his  life
time.  See  memorial  presented  before  the  New  York
law  institute  by  James  C.  Carter.


OCONOSTOTA,  head  king  or  archimagus  of  the
Cherokees.  The  exact  dates  of  his  birth  and  death
are  unknown,  but  he  had  attained  to  the  age  of
manhood  in  1730,  and  was  living  as  late  as  1809.
He  was  a  man  of  herculean  frame,  undaunted
courage,  and  great  physical  prowess,  and  while  yet
a  very  young  man  was  one  of  the  six  delegates
that,  in  1730,  visited  George  II.  at  "  his  great
house  across  the  water."  About  1738  he  was  elect
ed  head  king  of  his  nation,  and  exercised  almost
despotic  sway  over  the  Cherokees  and  their  allies,
the  Creeks.  He  sided  with  the  English  in  the  war
with  France,  but  afterward,  exasperated  by  an  at
tack  on  a  party  of  his  men  by  settlers,  who  accused
them  of  horse-stealing,  he  invested,  with  10,000  al
lied  Creeks  and  Cherokees,  Fort  Prince  George  and
Fort  London,  in  the  heart  of  the  Cherokee  country.
At  the  same  time  he  made  a  general  attack  upon
the  back  settlements  of  the  Carolinas.  By  strata
gem  he  lured  into  his  power  and  massacred  the
commander  of  Fort  Prince  George,  and  he  soon  re
duced  Fort  London  to  the  alternative  of  surrender
or  starvation.  Being  allowed  to  retain  their  arms
and  promised  safe  conduct  to  Virginia,  the  garrison
of  two  hundred  surrendered,  but  was  treacherously
attacked  at  the  close  of  the  first  day's  march,  and,
according  to  the  generally  received  account,  all
but  Capt.  John  Stuart,  Isaac  Thomas,  a  scout,
and  a  soldier  named  Jack,  were  killed.  Oconos
tota  then  directed  Stuart  to  work  the  captured
guns,  with  which  he  proposed  to  reduce  Fort
Prince  George,  and,  on  his  refusal,  threatened  to
burn  him  at  the  stake.  Stuart's  life  was  saved  by
the  vice-king,  Atta-culla-culla  (9.  v.),  who  conducted
him  in  safety  to  Virginia.  The  English  then  de
stroyed  the  Cherokee  towns,  and  reduced  the  na
tion  to  the  last  extremities.  Peace  was  finally
granted  them  only  on  the  intercession  of  Atta-
culla-culla.  Oconostota  was  ever  afterward  the
faithful  ally  of  the  English.  In  1770  a  handful
of  pioneers,  under  James  Robertson  (q.  v.),  crossed
the  Alleghanies  and  settled  upon  the  Cherokee
territory  at  Watauga.  The  Cherokees  received
them  kindly,  and  Oconostota  granted  them  an
eight  years'  lease  of  the  lands  that  they  occupied,
but  when,  in  March,  1775,  they  demanded  an  abso
lute  cession  of  the  territory,  he  opposed  it  in  an
eloquent  speech  in  which  he  predicted  the  fate  of
his  nation.  He  was  overruled  in  the  great  council
of  the  tribe,  the  cession  of  the  Watauga  lands  was
made,  and  also  of  the  Cherokee  claim  to  Kentucky.
When  he  had  signed  the  treaties  he  turned  to  Dan
iel  Boone,  who  had  been  active  in  the  negotiations,
and  said  to  him :  "  Young  man,  we  have  sold  you
a  fine  territory,  but  I  fear  you  will  have  some  diffi
culty  in  getting  it  settled."  In  a  little  more  than
a  month  the  battles  of  Lexington  and  Concord
were  fought.  John  Stuart,  who  had  been  appoint
ed  British  superintendent  of  the  southern  Indians,
at  once  conceived  a  gigantic  scheme  for  crushing
the  southern  colonies  by  a  combined  front  and  rear
attack.  A  British  land  and  naval  force  was  to  de
scend  upon  the  seaboard,  while  Oconostota,  at  the
head  of  20,000  combined  Choctaws,  Chickasaws,
Creeks,  and  Cherokees,  should  attack  the  back  set
tlements.  A  year  of  time  and  millions  of  money
were  expended  in  the  preparation,  and  in  July,  1776,
the  execution  of  the  plan  was  attempted.  Sir
Peter  Parker  descended  upon  Charleston,  but  was
beaten  off,  and  a  like  fate  befell  the  scattered  rear
attacks,  Oconostota  himself  being  driven  back  by
John  Sevier  with  only  forty  men.  A  five  years'
struggle  followed,  during  which  Sevier,  with  at
first  only  200  men  and  with  never  more  than  1,000,
inflicted'  defeat  after  defeat  upon  the  old  king  and


556


ODELL


ODENIIEIMER


his  10,000  warriors.  At  last  the  nation  dethroned
Oconostota.  and  elected  in  his  place  the  peace-lov
ing  Rayetayah.  This  broke  the  spirit  of  the  old
monarch,  and  he  sought  oblivion  in  drink,  which
soon  robbed  him  of  his  manhood.  For  nearly
thirty  more  tears  he  is  known  to  have  wandered
about,  a  homeless,  weak,  besotted,  and  despised
old  man,  begging  a  measure  of  meal  or  a  gallon  of
whiskey  from  the  "  white  brother  "  he  so  intensely
hated,  and  he  did  not  sink  into  the  grave  until  he
had  seen  that  his  own  evil  policy  had  brought
about  the  entire  subjugation  of  his  country.  The
last  recorded  account  of  him  is  in  the  letters  of
Return  J.  Meigs,  IT.  S.  agent  among  the  Cherokees.
He  writes  in  1809  that  his  study  of  the  classics
was  often  interrupted  by  the  intrusion  into  his
tent  of  the  "  greasy  old  Oconostota,"  who  would
wail  for  hours  over  his  departed  greatness.

ODELL,  Jacob,  soldier,  b.  in  Greenburg,  N.  Y.,
25  July,  175(5:  d.  in  Yonkers,  N.  Y.,  in  184G.  He
was  a  brigadier-general  in  the  Continental  army
during  the  war  of  the  Revolution,  and  afterward  a
member  of  the  New  York  state  assembly,  represent
ing  Westchester  county  in  1812-'13,  and  a  member
of  the  presidential  electoral  college  in  1820  and
1828. — His  cousin,  John,  b.  in  Greenburg,  25  Oct.,
1756 ;  d.  26  Oct.,  1835,  held  a  colonel's  commission
from  the  Continental  congress. — Jackson,  son  of
Col.  John,  b.  in  Greenburg,  3  May,  1792;  d.  18
July,  1849,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1814,
and  was  an  officer  in  the  war  of  1812,  with  a
major's  commission,  on  the  staff  of  Maj.-Gen.
Pierre  Van  Cortlandt. — His  cousin,  Moses  Fowler,
b.  in  Tarrytown,  N.  Y.,  24  Feb.,  1818 ;  d.  in  Brook
lyn,  N.  Y.,  13  June,  1866,  was  a  member  of  congress
in  l861-'5,  having  been  elected  as  a  Fusion  Demo
crat  and  then  as  a  War  Democrat  from  the  district
of  Brooklyn,  and  in  1865  was  appointed  naval  of
ficer  of  the  port  of  New  York.

ODELL,  Jonathan,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
ark,  N.  J.,  25  Sept.,  1737;  d.  in  Fredcricton,  New
Brunswick,  25  Nov.,  1818.  He  was  the  son  of  John
Odell  and  Temperance,  daughter  of  Rev.  Jona
than  Dickinson,  first  president  of  Princeton  col
lege.  The  first  of  the  family  in  this  country  was
William  Odell,  who  was  at  Concord,  Mass.,  as
early  as  1639,  and  afterward  removed  to  Fairfield,
Conn.  Jonathan  Odell  was  graduated  at  the  Col
lege  of  New  Jersey,  then  at  Newark,  in  the  class  of
1754,  studied  medicine,  and  served  as  surgeon  in
the  British  army.  He  subsequently  resigned  and
went  to  England,  where  he  prepared  for  the  min
istry  and  was  ordained  deacon,  21  Dec.,  1766,  in
the  Chapel  royal  of  St.  James  palace.  In  the  fol
lowing  year  he  was  advanced  to  priest's  orders.
Returning  to  this  country  in  1767,  he  became  rector
of  St.  Ann's  (now  St.  Mary's)  church  in  Burlington,
N.  J.  During  the  Revolution,  Dr  Odell  became
conspicuous  through  his  devotion  to  the  royal
cause,  and  was  frequently  in  conflict  with  the
American  forces.  When  he  was  pursued  he  often
sought  safety  in  a  secret  chamber  in  the  house  of
Margaret  Morris,  a  Quakeress,  who  lived  in  the
homestead  of  Gov.  William  Franklin,  which  she
had  purchased  from  him  on  his  removal  to  Perth
Amboy.  About  this  time  Jonathan  Odell  became
joint  author  of  a  publication  called  "  Loyal  Verses
of  Stansbury  and  Odell,"  which  obtained"  consider
able  popularity  among  adherents  of  the  crown.
His  ode  on  the  king's  birthday,  4  June,  1776,  be
ginning  "  O'er  Britannia's  happy  land,"  is  said  to
have  suggested  the  words  of  "  Hail,  Columbia."  In
1782  Dr.  Odell  delivered  an  address  at  the  presen
tation  of  standards  to  the  king's  American  dra
goons — an  imposing  ceremony,  at  which  many  dis


tinguished  officers  of  the  English  army  and  navy
were  present,  including  Prince  William  Henry  (af
terward  William  IV.),  who  was  then  a  midshipman
in  the  fleet  of  Admiral  Digby.  After  the  evacua
tion  of  New  York  city  by  Sir  Guy  Carleton  in
1783,  Dr.  Odell  returned  to  England,  but  he  after
ward  revisited  this  country  and  received  a  scat  in
the  executive  council  of  the  province  of  New
Brunswick,  where  for  more  than  thirty  years  he
filled  the  offices  of  secretary,  registrar  of  records,
and  clerk  of  the  council. — His  only  son.  William
Franklin,  b.  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  19  Oct.,  1774;
d.  in  Frederic-ton,  N.  B.,  25  Dec.,  1844,  succeeded
his  father  as  provincial  secretary  of  New  Bruns
wick  in  1812,  which  portfolio  he  held  till  his  death.
He  was  employed  under  the  British  commissioners
in  1817-'18  in  charge  of  the  survey  and  location  of
the  boundary  between  New  Brunswick  and  the
United  States  under  the  treaty  of  Ghent. — Will
iam  Franklin's  son,  William  Hunter,  b.  in  New
Brunswick,  26  Nov.,  1811,  was  educated  at  King's
college,  Fredericton,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1832.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1838  and  ap
pointed  clerk  of  the  supreme  court  of  New  Bruns
wick,  which  office  he  resigned  in  the  same  year  on
being  appointed  deputy  provincial  secretary,  regis
trar,  and  clerk  of  the  executive  council.  lie  was  a
judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in  1847,  and  a
member  of  the  legislative  council  of  New  Bruns
wick  by  royal  warrant  in  1850,  where  he  sat  till  the
union.  He  was  a  member  of  the  executive  council
of  New  Brunswick  and  postmaster-general  from
1865  until  the  resignation  of  the  government  in
1866.  In  May,  1867,  he  was  called  to  the  Domin
ion  senate  by  royal  proclamation.  He  is  Conserva
tive  in  his  politics.

ODENHEIMER,  William  Henry,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  11  Aug.,  18*17;  d.  in  Bur
lington.  N.  J.,  14  Aug.,  1879.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1835  and  at
the  General  theological  seminary,  New  York  city,
in  1838.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  made  deacon,
and  in  1841  he  was  ordained  priest.  In  1840  he  was
appointed  assistant  rector  of  St.  Peter's  church,
Philadelphia,  and  when  the  rector,  William  H.  De
Lancey,  was  elected  bishop  of  western  New  York
in  1839,  Mr.  Odenheimer  was  appointed  to  be
his  successor.  During  his  rectorship  he  became
intimate  with  Bishop  Doane,  of  New  Jersey,  and
when  the  latter  was  on  his  death-bed  he  requested
his  friend  to  preach  his  funeral  sermon.  In  1859
Mr.  Odenheimer  was  elected  to  succeed  Bishop
Doane  in  the  diocese  of  New  Jersey.  His  duties
were  performed  at  times  amid  great  physical  suffer
ing,  as  about  1869  he  broke  one  of  his  knee-caps,
and  three  years  afterward,  while  he  was  attending
a  confirmation  at  South  Amboy,  N.  J.,  he  fract
ured  the  other.  This  interfered  greatly  with  his
work,  but  he  always  insisted  on  preaching  standing
and  on  climbing  the  pulpit-stairs  alone.  During
the  first  fifteen  years  of  his  episcopate  he  con
firmed  nearly  16,000  persons,  and  it  is  estimated
that  the  number  reached  20,000  before  his  death.
He  resided  in  Burlington  until  1874,  when  the
state  of  New  Jersey  was  divided  into  two  dioceses.
It  being  considered  that  the  parishes  of  northern
New  Jersey  were  more  accessible  than  those  of  the
southern  part  of  the  state,  he  chose  that  see  and
changed  his  residence  to  Newark.  About  this  time
he  visited  England  for  his  health.  Although  he
was  never  perfectly  well  and  had  the  care  of  a
large  diocese,  Bishop  Odenheimer  found  time  to
write  frequently  for  the  press,  and  published  many
!  valuable  works.  Among  them  are  "The  Origin
and  Compilation  of  the  Prayer-Book  ''  and  "  The


ODIN


O'DOXXEL


557


Devout  Churchman's  Companion "  (Xew  York,
1841);  "The  True  Catholic  no  Romanist  "  (1842) ;
"  Thoughts  on  Immersion  "  (1843) :  "  The  Young
Churchman  Catechised"  (1844);  "Bishop  White's
Opinions  "  (Philadelphia,  1846) ;  "  Essay  on  Canon
Law "  (New  York,  1847) :  "  The  Clergyman's  As
sistant  in  Reading  the  Liturgy"  (Philadelphia,
1847) ;  "  The  Private  Prayer-Book  "  (1851) ;  "  Jeru
salem  and  its  Vicinity,"  being  the  result  of  a  visit
there  in  1851  (1855) ;  and  "  F.  Ringelburgius  on
Study."  He  was  also  joint  editor  of  "  Songs  of  the
Spirit :  Hymns  of  Praise  and  Prayer  to  God  the
Holy  Ghost"  (Xew  York,  1871).

ODIN,  John  Mary,  archbishop,  b.  in  Ambierle,
department  of  the  Loire,  France.  25  Feb.,  1801 ;  d.
there,  25  May,  1870.  He  became  a  member  of  the
congregation  of  the  Lazarists.  and  in  1822,  although
he  was  not  yet  a  priest,  was  sent  to  labor  on  a  mis
sion  in  Missouri.  He  taught  and  studied  in  the
Seminary  of  the  Barrens  near  St.  Louis,  was  raised
to  the  priesthood  in  1824,  and  the  same  year  set
out  on  a  missionary  tour  through  Texas  and  Ar
kansas.  After  his  return  he  remained  at  the  Bar
rens,  filling  at  the  same  time  the  functions  of  supe
rior  of  the  seminary  and  director  of  the  Lorentine
nuns,  while  discharging  the  duties  of  missionary
in  a  wide  area.  He  attended  the  second  council  of
Baltimore  in  1833  as  theologian  to  Bishop  Rosati,
and  went  in  the  same  year  to  Europe  to  solicit  as
sistance  for  the  Lazarist  missions  and  to  attend  a
general  assembly  of  the  order  in  Paris  as  deputy
from  the  United  States.  The  assembly  decreed  the
suppression  of  the  Seminary  of  the  Barrens,  but,
through  the  interposition  of  Father  Odin,  the  insti
tution  was  saved.  He  was  stationed  there  after  his
return  till  1836,  when  he  was  appointed  pastor  of
Cape  Girardeau.  He  returned  to  the  Lazarist
seminary  in  the  following  year  and  held  various
offices  and  professorships  in  it  until  1840.  when  he
was  appointed  vice-prefect  of  Texas.  He  went  to
San  Antonio,  and  afterward  to  Houston,  obtained
from  the  legislature  the  restoration  of  its  ecclesias
tical  property  to  the  Roman  Catholic  church,  and
also  extensive  grants  of  land  for  educational  pur
poses.  He  was  also  an  energetic  promoter  of  emi
gration.  In  1841  he  was  summoned  to  the  Bar
rens  to  take  council  with  his  superiors  on  the  best
mode  of  advancing  religion  in  Texas.  When  he
reached  Xew  Orleans,  on  his  way,  he  was  in  rags,
having  given  nearly  all  his  effects  to  poor  people.
He  was  supplied  with  the  necessary  clothing  by
Bishop  Blanc,  who  also  handed  him  the  bulls  that
had  just  come  from  Rome  appointing  him  bishop
of  Detroit.  But  his  superiors  ordered  him  to
return  to  his  mission,  as  it  was  more  easy  to  find  a
competent  person  for  the  vacant  see  than  for  the
Texan  mission.  Soon  after  his  return  Texas  was
created  a  vicariate  in  favor  of  Father  Odin,  who
was  consecrated  vicar-apostolic  in  Xew  Orleans  on
6  March.  1842.  He  had  only  four  priests  to  minis
ter  to  a  population  of  more  than  200.000,  but  he
repaired  the  old  church  of 'San  Antonio  and  several
others,  built  new  ones  at  various  places,  and  estab
lished  several  schools  with  the  help  of  the  govern
ment.  But  his  resources  became  exhausted,  and  in
1845  he  sailed  for  Europe,  where  he  obtained  assist
ance.  In  1847  he  established  in  Gal  veston  a  com
munity  of  Ursuline  nuns,  who  opened  an  academy
and  formed  the  first  religious  community  in  Texas.
The  vicariate  was  erected  into  the  bishopric  of
Galveston  the  same  year.  Bishop  Odin  made  Gal-
veston  his  official  residence.  He  founded  various
convents  and  schools,  went  a  second  time  to  Europe
in  1852.  and  returned  the  same  year  with  six  priests
and  sixteen  ecclesiastical  students,  whom  he  or


dained  soon  afterward.  In  Xovember,  1854.  he
began  to  build  the  College  of  the  Immaculate  Con
ception,  which  he  placed  under  the  charge  of  the
Oblate  Fathers.  He  obtained  a  charter  for  it  as  a
university  in  1857.  A  marked  feature  in  the  ad
ministration  of  Bishop  Odin  was  his  annual  visita
tions.  His  course  often  lay  through  the  country
of  the  Comanches  and  other  hostile  tribes,  and
sometimes  no  intelligence  of  his  movements  was
received  for  months.  He  travelled  usually  on
horseback,  over  bad  roads,  and  frequently  with
hardly  food  enough  to  support  life.  In  the  visita
tion  of  1858  he  travelled  2,000  miles,  confirmed
nearly  4,000  persons,  preached  in  French,  Spanish,
and  English,  and  visited  every  town  of  any  impor
tance  on  the  Rio  Grande  and  in  the  interior  of  the
republic.  The  Roman  Catholic  church  in  Texas
I  is  to  a  great  extent  his  creation.  When  he  left
|  it  there  were  in  it  eighty-two  priests  and  fifty
churches.  In  1861  he  was  appointed  archbishop  of
Xew  Orleans.  During  his  administration  there
the  number  of  churches  and  priests  nearly  doubled,
and  many  other  religious  institutions  were  founded.
He  set  out  for  Rome  in  1869,  but  was  obliged  to
leave  on  account  of  his  health.

ODIORXE.  Thomas,  poet,  b.  in  Exeter,  X.  H.,
26  April,  1769;  d.  in  Maiden,  Mass.,  18  May.  1851.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1791.  and  sold
books  in  Exeter  until  1800.  After  engaging  in
business  in  Boston  until  1811,  he  removed  to  Mai
den,  Mass.,  where  he  became  an  iron-manufacturer.
In  1792  he  published  "  The  Progress  of  Refine
ment,"  a  poem,  and  "  Fame,  and  Miscellanies."

O'DOXXEL,  James  Louis,  colonial  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Knocklofty.  County  Tipperary.  Ireland,  in
1737;  d.  in  Waterford,  Ireland,  11  April.  1811.  He
entered  the  Franciscan  order,  was  sent  to  Bohemia,
and  on  the  completion  of  his  theological  studies
was  ordained  priest  in  Prague  in  1770.  He  was
chaplain  to  several  noble  families  till  1775,  when
he  returned  to  Ireland,  was  appointed  prior  of  the
Franciscans  of  Waterford.  and  in  1779  became  pro
vincial  of  the  order  in  Ireland.  In  1784  he  was
sent  to  Xewfoundland.  with  the  rank  of  prefect-
apostolic,  for  the  purpose  of  organizing  the  Roman
Catholic  church  in  that  island.  He  was  at  first
hampered  in  his  mission  by  the  local  authorities,
but  his  services  in  1799  during  a  mutiny  gained
their  favor.  His  influence  afterward,  even  in  secu
lar  affairs,  placed  him  almost  on  an  equality  with
the  governor.  At  this  time  the  Duke  of  Clarence,
afterward  William  IV.,  was  attached  as  a  midship-
1  man  to  the  Xewfoundland  station.  His  sensuality
had  already  made  him  unpopular  at  St.  John's,
]  and  when  he  flung  a  weapon  at  Dr.  O'Donnel.  who
happened  to  be  passing  a  billiard-room  in  which
the  prince  was.  it  aroused  the  indignation  of  the
whole  population.  The  missile  inflicted  only  a
slight  wound,  and.  although  Dr.  O'Donnel  used
every  exertion  to  quiet  the  popular  feeling,  the
young  prince  was  exposed  to  great  danger.  The
arrival  of  his  commander  with  a  guard  of  marines
probably  saved  his  life.  He  was  arrested  and  con
veyed  on  board  his  vessel,  which  at  once  left  the
harbor.  In  1796  Dr.  O'Donnel  was  appointed  vicar-
apostolic  of  Xewfoundland.  and  he  was  consecrated
bishop  of  Thyatira  in  partibuson  21  Sept.  in  Quebec.
He  then  returned  to  Xewfoundland.  and  made  the
I  first  episcopal  visitation  of  the  island  since  the  Eng-
j  lish  had  obtained  possession  of  it.  In  1801  he  pub
lished  a  body  of  diocesan  statutes,  adapted  to  the
j  condition  of  his  church  in  Xewfoundland.  and  di-
I  vided  the  diocese  into  missions.  Besides  the  cares
|  of  the  bishopric,  the  want  of  clergymen  obliged
,  him  to  discharge  the  duties  of  a  missionary  priest,


558


O'DONNELL


O'DONOVAN


and  the  severe  labors  of  the  mission  soon  under
mined  his  health.  He  resigned  his  see  in  1807,  and
announced  his  intention  of  returning  to  his  native
country.  A  public  meeting  was  held,  attended  by
the  representative  men  of  the  island  without  dis
tinction  of  creed,  and  he  was  presented  with  a
valuable  testimonial.  A  petition  was  also  sent  to
the  English  government,  requesting  that  a  liberal
pension  be  granted  to  him,  in  recognition  of  his
loyalty  and  his  services  to  the  island.  Partly  owing
to  his  dread  of  French  revolutionary  principles,  Dr.
O'Donnel  always  preached  unlimited  loyalty  to  the
crown,  and  on  several  occasions  he  had  been  more
useful  to  the  English  government  than  a  garrison.
He  was  rewarded  with  a  pension  of  £50  per  annum.
Dr.  O'Donnel  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  in
Waterford.  He  has  been  frequently  called  the
"Apostle  of  Newfoundland."

O'DONNELL,  Daniel  Kane,  journalist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1838;  d.  there,  8  Sept.,  1871.
He  was  educated  at  Girard  college,  and  after  a
brief  experience  in  a  printing-office  became  the
editor  of  a  Philadelphia  literary  journal,  to  which
he  contributed  many  poems  and  criticisms.  In
1803  he  joined  the  editorial  staff  of  the  "  Press  "  in
the  same  city,  acting  successively  as  news-editor,
leader-writer*  and  night-editor.  His  criticism  on
William  II.  Fry's  opera  of  "  Notre  Dame,"  written
about  this  time,  attracted  general  attention.  In
1864  he  accompanied  Gen.  William  T.  ShermanV
army  as  chief  correspondent  of  the  "  Press."  Din
ing  the  campaign  he  was  made  assistant  superin
tendent  of  education  in  Charleston,  S.  C.  In  18(50
he  came  to  New  York  city  and  became  connected
with  the  "  Tribune."  The  following  year  he  was
made  musical  critic  and  leader-writer.  In  the
spring  of  1867,  as  he  was  already  suffering  from
consumption,  he  was  sent  to  Mexico  to  recruit  his
health  and  describe  the  reconstruction  of  that
country.  From  Mexico  he  went,  in  1808,  to  Cuba,
to  report  the  progress  of  the  revolutionary  move
ment  there.  Returning  in  1809,  he  resumed  his
duties  in  the  "  Tribune  "  office,  but  devoted  him
self  chiefly  to  the  foreign  department.  During  the
course  of  that  year  he  resigned  and  returned  to
Philadelphia,  where,  after  serving  a  year  as  literary
editor  of  the  "  Standard,"  he  employed  his  remain
ing  strength  in  preparing  a  volume  on  Mexico,
which  was  never  published,  and  in  writing  for  the
magazines.  He  published  a  volume  of  poems  en
titled  "  The  Song  of  Iron  and  the  Song  of  Slaves,
with  Other  Poems"  (Philadelphia,  1863),  and  sub
sequently  printed  in  the  New  York  "  Independent,"
"The  Fish-Market,"  "The  Cobbler's  Hour,"  "St.
Cecilia,"  and  "  Birds  in  the  Square."  These  and
his  other  poetic  writings  display  great  facility  in
versification  and  a  rare  talent  for  rendering  home
ly  subjects  attractive.

O'DONOHOE,  John,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in
Tuam.  Gal  way,  Ireland,  18  April,  1824.  He  was  edu
cated  at  St.  Jarleth's  college  in  his  native  place,  went
to  Toronto  in  1839,  and  engaged  in  commercial
pursuits  for  several  years.  He  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1869,  and  was  crown  at
torney  of  the  county  of  York  and  the  city  of  To
ronto  from  1872  till  January,  1874,  when  he  re
signed.  He  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  East
Peterboro,  for  the  Ontario  assembly,  in  1871,  and
for  East  Toronto,  for  the  Dominion  parliament,  in
1872.  He  was  first  elected  to  the  Dominion  parlia
ment  for  East  Toronto  in  1874,  was  unseated  on
petition,  26  Nov.,  1874,  again  unsuccessful  for  that
constituency,  and  was  called  to  the  senate,  10  June,
1882.  He  was  elected  president  of  the  Ontario
Catholic  league  on  3  April,  1871,  and  is  a  Liberal.


0'DONO.ir,  Juan  (o-don-o-hoo'),  last  viceroy  of
Mexico,  b.  in  Spain  in  the  last  half  of  the  18th
century ;  d.  in  Mexico,  8  Oct.,  1821.  He  was  de
scended  from  an  Irish  family  that  had  been  estab
lished  in  Spain  for
nearly  a  century.
He  entered  the  mili
tary  service,  and,
during  the  invasion
of  Spain  by  Napo
leon  in  1808,  the
provisional  govern
ment  of  Cadiz  ap
pointed  him  minis
ter  of  war.  In  this
post  he  displayed
great  activity,  but
at  the  restoration
of  Ferdinand  VII.
and  the  abrogation
of  the  constitution
in  1814,  O'Donoju
suffered  for  his  ad
herence  to  the-  Con
stitutional  party,
was  accused  of  con
spiring  against  the
king,  and  imprisoned,  but,  as  nothing  serious  could
be  proved,  he  was  released  and  appointed  adjutant
to  the  king  in  1820.  In  1821,  after  the  deposition  of
the  viceroy  Apodaca,  O'Donoju,  whose  liberal  ideas
were  well  known,  was  appointed  viceroy  of  Mexico,
and  on  3  Aug.  arrived  in  Vera  Cruz,  which  he  found
closely  surrounded  by  the  Independents.  He  issued
a  liberal  proclamation,  offering  to  give  the  country
full  self-government,  and  through  Santa-Anna,
commanding  the  immediate  independent  forces,
entered  into  communications  with  Iturbide,  and
an  interview  was  arranged  to  take  place  in  Cor
dova.  He  left  Vera  Cruz  on  19  Aug.,  met  Itur
bide  on  the  23d,  and  on  the  next  day  the  treaty  of
Cordova  was  signed,  recognizing  the  independence
of  Mexico  under  the  immediate  rule  of  Ferdinand
VII.  or  a  member  of  his  family.  In  case  of  their
refusing  the  crown,  the  Mexicans  were  to  elect  their
ruler,  and  the  government  was  to  be  administered
meanwhile  by  a  junta,  of  which  O'Donoju  and  Itur
bide  were  to  be  members.  Gen.  Novella,  provision
ally  in  charge  of  the  viceroyalty,  refused  to  recog
nize  this  agreement  or  O'Donoju's  authority,  but
after  an  interview  with  the  latter  on  13  Sept.,
acknowledged  him  as  chief  and  proclaimed  him
viceroy  on  the  15th.  On  20  Sept.,  O'Donoju
made  his  entry  into  the  capital,  on  the  next  day
the  independent  army  under  Iturbide  entered  amid
great  festivities,  and  on  the  28th  the  act  of  inde
pendence  was  signed,  O'Donoju  entering  on  his
function  as  a  member  of  the  governing  junta.  He
fell  sick  soon  afterward,  and  died  of  pleurisy,  or,
as  some  writers  assert,  of  poison.

O'DONOVAN,  William  Rudolf,  sculptor,  b.  in
Preston  county,  Va..  28  March,  1844.  He  is  self-
taught  in  his  profession.  After  fighting  in  the
Confederate  army  during  the  civil  war,  he  went  to
New  York,  where  he  opened  a  studio,  and  was
elected  an  associate  of  the  National  academy  in
1878.  He  has  been  very  successful  in  portraiture,
and  among  others  has  executed  portrait-busts  and
bas-reliefs  of  John  A.  Kennedy  (1870);  William
Page  (1877);  R.  Swain  Gifford  (1879);  Arthur
Quartley,  Bayard  Taylor  (for  the  memorial  tablet
in  Cornell  university),  Winslow  Homer,  Erminnie  A.
Smith,  and  Edmund  C.  Stedman.  His  larger  works
include  the  Tarrytown  monument  to  the  captors  of
Maj.  Andre,  a  statue  of  Washington  for  the  gov-


OERSTED


O'GABAN Y GUERRA


559


eminent  of  Venezuela,  two  figures  for  the  soldier's
monument  at  Lawrence,  Mass.,  two  bas-reliefs  for
the  monument  in  Herkimer  county,  X.  Y.,  com
memorating  the  battle  of  Oriskany  (see  HERKIMER,
NICHOLAS)  (1883),  and  a  statue  of  Washington  for
the  monument  at  Xewburg  (1886-'7).  Gen.  Wash
ington  is  a  favorite  subject  with  this  sculptor,  and
he  has  published  a  series  of  papers  on  his  portraits.

OERSTED,  Anders  Saiidoe  (urr'-sted),  Danish
naturalist,  b.  in  Rudkjoebing  (Langeland),  21  June.
1810;  d.  in  Copenhagen,  3  Sept.,  1872.  He  was
brought  up  in  the  house  of  his  uncle,  Hans  Chris
tian  Oersted,  the  famous  chemist,  became  in  1837
professor  of  natural  history  in  Copenhagen,  was
given  a  gold  medal  and  a  fellowship  in  1844  by  the
university,  and  in  the  following  year  went  to  study
the  geography  of  Central  America,  visiting  most
of  the  West  Indies,  Central  America,  and  in  par
ticular  the  Republic  of  Nicaragua  in  1845-'8.
Among  his  works  are  "  Planterigets  natur  histo
ric  "  (Copenhagen,  1839) ;  "  Groenlandiae  annulata
dorsibrarichiata."  published  in  vol.  x.  of  the  "  An
nals  of  the  Copenhagen  Academy  of  Sciences";
"  L'amerique  centrale,  rccherches  sur  sa  flore  et  sa
geographic  physique "  (1864) ;  and  several  papers
in  magazines  in  Europe  and  America.

OERTEL,  Johannes  Adam,  artist,  b.  in  Fiirth,
near  Nuremberg,  Bavaria,  3  Nov.,  1823.  He  studied
art  in  Nuremberg  and  Munich,  but  devoted  him
self  chiefly  to  engraving  until  1848,  when  he  came
to  the  United  States  and  taught  for  a  time  in
Newark,  N.  J.  In  1857  he  removed  to  Madison,
N.  J.,  where  he  painted  the  •'  Lament  of  the  Fallen
Spirits'"  and  "Redemption."  About  this  time  he
was  invited  to  assist  in  preparing  new  decorations
for  the  National  capitol.  In  1861  he  transferred
his  studio  to  Westerly,  R.  I.,  where  he  painted
"  Father  Time  and  his  Family "  and  "  The  Final
Harvest "  (1862) ;  "  The  Dispensation  of  the  Promise
and  the  Law,"  containing  150  figures  (1863) :
"Walk  to  Emmaus."  "The  Walk  to  Gethsemane,"
'Easter  Morning,"  "Magdalen  at  the  Sepulchre,"
"  The  Rock  of  Ages,"  and  others  (1868).  The  last-
named  picture  was  reproduced  by  chromo-lithogra-
phy.  and  sold  extensively  both  in  this  country  and
in  England.  During  the  civil  war  Mr.  Oertel  ac
companied  the  Army  of  Virginia  under  Gen.  Burn-
side.  His  "  Virginia  Turnpike "  and  other  land
scapes  were  the  fruit  of  his  military  experience.
Besides  his  paintings  he  has  produced  several
carved-wood  altar-pieces,  among  them  an  elaborate
altar  and  reredos  for  the  Church  of  the  Incarna
tion,  Washington,  D.  C.  While  residing  at  Wester
ly  he  prepared  himself  for  orders  in  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church,  and  he  was  made  deacon  in  1865,
and  subsequently  presbyter.  He  has  since  confined
himself  almost  entirely  to  the  domain  of  Christian
art,  and  painted  pictures  that  he  presented  to
churches  in  Glen  Cove,  N.  Y.,  New  York  city,
Washington,  D.  C.,  North  Carolina,  and  elsewhere.
After  having  charge  of  two  parishes  in  the  latter
state  and  spending  a  year  in  Florida,  Mr.  Oertel
was  invited  to  fill  the  chair  of  Christian  art  at  the
University  of  the  South,  Sewanee,  Tenn.,  which  he
now  (1888)  occupies.

O'FALLON,  John,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Louis
ville.  Ky.,  23  Nov.,  1791 :  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  18
Dec.,  1865.  His  father.  Dr.  James  O'Fallon,  emi
grated  to  Wilmington.  N.  C..  in  1774,  and  sejved  in
the  Revolutionary  army.  The  son  fought  under
Gen.  William  II.  Harrison  at  the  battle  of  Tippe-
canoe,  where  he  was  severely  wounded,  and  also
in  the  war  of  1812.  He  subsequently  became  a
merchant  in  St.  Louis,  and  accumulated  a  large
fortune,  which  he  distributed  liberally  among  va-


I  rious  educational  and  charitable  institutions. He

I  endowed  the  O'Fallon  polytechnic  institute,  now
the  scientific  department  of  St.  Louis  university,
with  property  that  was  valued  at  $100.000:  gave
liberally  to  Washington  university ;  built  a  dispen
sary  and  medical  college,  and  spent  in  all  more
tha'n  §1.000.000  for  benevolent  purposes.

O'FAKRELL,  Michael  Joseph,  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Limerick,  Ireland,  2  Dec.,  1832. He  began

i  his  studies  in  All-Hallows  college  for  foreign  mis
sions,  Drumcondra,  in  1848,  afterward  entered  the

:  Seminary  of  St.  Sulpice,  Paris,  and  on  finishing  his
course  returned  to  Ireland,  where  he  was  ordained
priest  on  18  Aug.,  1855.  Becoming  a  member  of
the  Sulpitian  order,  he  entered  the  novitiate  in
Paris,  and  was  subsequently  professor  of  dogmatic

'  theology  in  the  college  of  the  order  in  that  city.

I  He  afterward  emigrated  to  Canada,  and  was  ap
pointed  professor  in  its  seminary  at  Montreal.  He

1  then  came  to  the  United  States,  and  was  affiliated
to  the  archdiocese  of  New  York  and  placed  in
charge  of  St.  Patrick's  church.  He  was  transferred
to  St.  Peter's  in  1869,  and  became  pastor  at  Ron-
dout  in  1872.  He  then  returned  as  pastor  to  St.
Peter's,  where  he  gave  special  attention  to  educa
tion,  and  founded  a  school  that  became  one  of  the
finest  in  the  city.  When  the  diocese  of  Trenton
was  formed  out  of  that  of  Newark  in  1881,  he  was
nominated  to  the  new  see,  and  consecrated  bishop
in  the  cathedral  of  New  York  by  Cardinal  McClos-
key.  He  made  Trenton  his  residence,  and  at  once
began  the  erection  of  new  churches  and  educa
tional  and  charitable  institutions.  Bishop  O'Far-
rell  is  popular  as  a  lecturer  among  his  co-religion
ists.  The  number  of  churches  in  his  diocese  is
eighty-four,  and  it  includes  four  convents,  one
seminary,  seven  academies,  an  orphan  asylum,  and
twenty-four  parochial  schools.

OFFICER,  Morris,  missionary,  b.  in  Holmes
county,  Ohio,  21  July,  1823 ;  d.  in  Topeka.  Kansas.
1  Nov.,  1874.  He  was  educated  at  Wittenberg  col
lege  and  theological  seminary,  Ohio,  and  ordained
a  clergyman  of  the  Lutheran  church  in  1851.  In
1852  he  went  as  a  missionary  to  Africa,  under  the
auspices  of  the  American  missionary  society.  On
his  return  to  the  United  States  he  was  engaged
in  1855-'60  in  arousing  an  interest  in  missions
among  the  churches  of  his  denomination.  He  was
then  sent  out  by  the  Lutheran  missionary  society
to  establish  the  Muhlenberg  station  on  St.  Paul
river,  Liberia.  After  he  had  accomplished  this  he
engaged  in  home  mission  work  during  the  rest  of
his  life,  residing  from  1861  till  1871  at  Lancaster,  Pa.,
and  Mansfield,  York,  and  Fredericksburg,  Ohio.  He
is  the  author  of  "A  Plea  fora  Lutheran  Mission  in
Africa  "•  (1855) ;  "  Western  Africa  a  Mission  Field  "
(1856) ;  and  "  African  Bible  Pictures,  or  Scripture
Scenes  and  Customs  in  Africa  "(Philadelphia.  1859).
OFFICER,  Thomas  S.,  miniature-painter,  b.
in  Carlisle,  Pa. ;  d.  in  California  in  January.  1860.
He  became  a  miniature-painter,  practised  that  art
in  New  Orleans,  went  to  Philadelphia,  and  thence
to  New  York  city,  where  he  gained  a  high  reputa-

|  tion,  returned  to  New  Orleans  about  1847,  and
after  the  Mexican  war  went  to  Mexico,  where  he
was  successful.  He  also  resided  for  some  time  in
Australia,  and  passed  his  last  years  in  California.
His  works  are  remarkable  for  crisp,  fresh  color,
artistic  delicacy,  and  individuality  of  treatment.

O'GABAN  Y  GUERRA.  Juan  Bernardo  (o-
gah-ban').  Cuban  clergyman,  b.  in  Santiago.  Cuba,
in  1782  ;  d.  there  in  1838.  He  studied  in  the  Uni
versity  of  Havana,  and  was  ordained  priest  in  1805.
He  was  sent  to  Europe  in  1807  to  study  the  educa-^
tional  svstem  of  Pestalozzi,  and  returned  to  his


560


OGDEN


OGDEN


native  country  after  two  years'  residence  on  that
continent.  The  results  of  his  studies  were  made
known  to  the  public  in  a  well-written  and  extensive
report.  In  1810  he  was  sent  by  Santiago  as  a  repre
sentative  to  the  Spanish  cortes  at  Cadi/.  He  was
elected  secretary  and  afterward  chairman  of  that
bodv,  and"  was  one  of  the  signers  of  the  famous
liberal  constitution  of  1812,  which  established  in
Spain  the  representative  form  of  government.  He
returned  to  Cuba  in  1815.  after  the  restoration  of
absolutism  by  Ferdinand  VII.  In  1820  he  was
made  canon  "of  the  Havana  cathedral,  and  in  the
same  year  chosen  as  a  representative  for  Cuba  to
the  coYtes,  after  the  revolution  that  restored  the
Liberal  party  to  power,  but  he  could  not  occupy
his  seat,  as  his  election  had  been  annulled  by  the
government  on  technicalities.  In  Madrid  he  pub
lished  an  extensive  "  Memoir  on  the  Condition  of
African  Slaves  in  the  West  Indies."  He  declined
the  dignity  of  archbishop  of  Santiago,  and  on  his
return  to  Cuba  was  imprisoned  on  account  of  his
liberal  ideas,  but  he  was  soon  set  at  liberty,  and
dedicated  all  his  energy  to  the  improvement  of
methods  of  education  and  the  extension  of  public
instruction  in  the  island.  He  wrote  many  pam
phlets  on  these  matters.

OGDEN,  David,  jurist,  b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,
about  1707;  d.  in  Whitestone,  X.  Y.,  in  June,  1800.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1728,  and  then
studied  law  in  Newark,  becoming  perhaps  the  first
thoroughly  educated  lawyer  in  the  province.  His
ability  and  social  position  soon  gained  for  him  a
lucrative  practice,  and  he  stood  confessedly  at  the
head  of  the  bar  in  New  Jersey,  also  frequently
conducting  important  cases  in  New  York.  In
April,  1751,  he  was  made  a  member  of  the  royal
council  for  the  province,  and,  after  serving  as  a
judge  of  the  superior  court,  he  was  appointed  in
1772  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  and  held  that
office  until  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  the  Revo
lution.  His  sympathy  with  the  mother  country
obliged  him  in  January,  1777,  to  go  to  England,
where  he  became  in  1779  an  efficient  member  of
the  board  of  refugees,  composed  of  delegates  from
the  several  colonies,  arid  drew  up  an  outline  of  a
plan  for  their  government  in  the  event  of  their
submission  to  Great  Britain.  He  went  again  to
England  in  1783  as  agent  for  the  New  Jersey  loyal
ists  in  prosecuting  their  claims  for  compensation,
and  secured  an  allowance  for  his  own  estates,  which
were  valued  at  $100,000.  In  1789  he  returned  to
the  United  States  and  settled  in  Whitestone,  N.  Y.,
where  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  days.  At  his
death  he  had  been  for  three  years  the  oldest  living
graduate  of  Yale.  Judge  Ogden  had  the  reputa
tion  of  being  "  one  of  the  giants  of  the  law  in
New  Jersey." — His  brother,  Jacob,  physician,  b.
in  Newark,  N.  J.,  in  1721;  d.  in  Jamaica,  L.  I.,  3
Sept.,  1780,  was  educated  at  Yale,  but  not  gradu
ated.  He  studied  medicine,  and  followed  his  pro
fession  with  success  in  Jamaica,  L.  L.  for  nearly
forty  years.  Dr.  Ogden  was  an  able  supporter  of
the  practice  of  inoculation  for  the  small-pox.  The
first  introduction  of  the  mercurial  treatment  for
inflammatory  disorders  in  the  United  States  is
credited  to  him  by  Dr.  John  W.  Francis.  He  pub
lished  letters  to  Hugh  Gaine  on  the  "  Malignant
Sore-Throat  Distemper,"  28  Oct.,  1769,  and  14
Sept.,  1774.— David's  son,  Abraliam,  lawyer,  b.  in
Morristown,  N.  J.,  30  Dec.,  1743;  d.  in'Newark,
N.  J.,  in  1798,  studied  law,  became  a  member  of  the
New  Jersey  bar,  and  as  a  jury  lawyer  is  said  to
have  been  unrivalled.  In  his  office  at  Morristown,
N.  J.,  some  of  the  most  celebrated  lawyers  of  that
state  acquired  their  early  legal  training,  among


whom  were  Richard  Stockton,  Gabriel  Ford,  and
Josiah  Ogden  Hoffman.  He  was  deemed  of  doubt
ful  politics,  and  as  such  was  denounced  to  Gen.
Washington,  who.  in  order  to  avert  from  him  any
suspicion,  made  his  home  the  headquarters  of  the
army  while  in  Morristown.  In  a  fencing-bout  with
Thomas  Ludlow  Ogden,  one  of  the  sons  of  his
host,  the  button  of  the  latter' s  foil  dropped  off,
and  Washington  was  scratched  in  the  wrist,  thus
receiving  what  is  believed  to  have  been  his  only
wound.  Mr.  Ogden  was  a  member  of  the  legisla
ture  in  1790,  and  from  the  adoption  of  the  present
state  constitution  until  his  death  was  district
attorney  for  New  Jersey.  Washington  appointed
him  a  commissioner  to  obtain  the  extinguishment
of  a  title  that  the  Iroquois  nation  of  Indians  had  to
a  portion  of  the  northern  part  of  New  York.  This
brought  to  him  a  local  knowledge  of  St.  Lawrence
county,  and  resulted  in  the  purchase  of  a  large
tract  by  himself  and  others,  and  in  the  founding
of  the  present  city  of  Ogdensburg.  —  Abraham's
son.  Thomas  Ludlow,  lawyer,  b.  in  Morristown,
N.  J.,  12  Dec.,  1773:  d.  in  New  York  city,  17  Dec.,
1844,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1791.  and  then
studied  under  his  father,  completing  his  legal  edu
cation  in  the  office  of  Richard  Hanson.  In  1790
he  was  admitted  to  the  New  York  bar,  and  later  he
was  associated  with  Alexander  Hamilton,  having
charge  of  the  hitter's  law  business  during  his  oc
cupations  elsewhere.  Subsequently  Mr.  Ogden
was  legal  adviser  of  many  important  corporations,
notably  the  Holland  land  company  when  it  held
3.000,000  acres  of  land  in  the  western  part  of  New
York;  also  one  of  the  trustees  of  the  Indian  reser
vation  lands  and  sole  trustee  of  Sackett's  Harbor.
He  was  law  officer  of  the  corporation  of  Trinity
church,  for  thirty-five  years  clerk  and  member  of
its  vestry,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  senior
warden.  Mr.  Ogden  was  an  early  patron  of  the
General  theological  seminary  and  one  of  the  origi
nal  trustees  under  the  act  of  incorporation,  also
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
society  for  promoting  religion  and  learning  in  the
state  of  New  York,  of  which  at  the  time  of  his
death  he  was  vice-president.  From  1817  till  his
death  he  was  trustee  of  Columbia  college.

OGDEN,  Frederick  Nash,  soldier,  b.  in  Baton
Rouge,  La.,  25  Jan.,  1837;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,
25  May,  1886.  He  entered  mercantile  life  as  a  boy,
and  continued  so  engaged  until  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war,  when  he  volunteered  as  a  private
in  the  Confederate  army,  and  was  elected  color-
bearer.  In  this  capsicity  he  served  through  the
peninsular  campaign  and  then  returned  to  New
Orleans,  when  he  was  made  major  of  heavy  artil
lery.  After  the  surrender  of  the  forts  at  New
Orleans  he  was  in  command  of  the  8th  Louisiana
battalion,  and  served  in  charge  of  a  battery  at
Vicksburg.  where  he  was  taken  prisoner.  On  being
exchanged,  he  was  placed  on  Gen.  Leonidas  Folk's
staff,  but  later  entered  the  cavalry  as  lieutenant-
colonel,  and  was  surrendered  at  the  close  of  the
war  with  Gen.  Nathan  B.  Forrest's  command  in
northern  Alabama.  He  then  returned  to  New  Or
leans  and  re-entered  commercial  life.  In  1808  he
organized  and  became  president  of  the  Crescent
City  Democratic  club,  the  largest  and  most  power
ful  political  organization  in  New  Orleans,  and  sub
sequently  he  organized  the  Crescent  City  white
league,  which  took  an  active  part  in  the  contests
for  the  state  government  in  1873-'4.  He  also
commanded  the  local  forces  as  major-general  of
militia.  Gen.  Ogden  was  president  of  the  Red
Cross  association  of  Louisiana  and  vice-president
of  the  Howard  association  during  the  yellow-fever


OGDEX


OGDEX


561


epidemic  of  1878,  when  he  closed  his  place  of
business  and  devoted  his  time  to  the  sick  and  suf
fering.  In  1884  he  was  chief  superintendent  of  the
World's  fair  that  was  held  in  New  Orleans.  He
refused  a  nomination  for  the  governorship.

OUDEN,  John  Cosens,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
Jersey  about  1740 ;  d.  in  Chestertown.  Md.,  in  1800.
He  obtained  orders  in  the  Church  of  England,  and
his  chief  work  was  of  a  missionary  character.  He
was  rector  of  the  Episcopal  church  in  Portsmouth,
N.  H..  in  1786-'93,  and  supplied  five  towns  with  reg
ular  services  and  ten  or  twelve  others  occasionally.
Bishop  White,  in  his  "  Memoirs  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  Church,"  speaks  of  him  in  connection
with  action  that  was  taken  in  Vermont  for  obtain
ing  consecration  for  Dr.  Samuel  Peters.  Mr.  Ogden
published  several  occasional  sermons,  letters,  ad
dresses,  etc.,  also  "  An  Excursion  into  Bethlehem
and  Xazareth  in  Pennsylvania,  in  the  Year  1799,
with  a  Succinct  History  of  the  Society  of  the
United  Brethren,  commonly  called  Moravians"
(Philadelphia,  1800;  2d  ed.,  1805).

OCiDEX.  Robert,  patriot,  b.  in  Elizabethtown,
X.  J.,  16  Oct.,  1716:  d.  in  Sparta,  X.  J.,  1  Jan.,
1787.  He  was  a  member  of  the  king's  council  for
Xew  Jersey,  and  in  1751  became  a  member  of  the
legislature,  to  which  he  was  rechosen  on  each  suc
ceeding  election,  becoming  in  1763  speaker  of  the
house.  In  1765  he  was  sent  as  a  delegate  to  the
Continental  congress  that  convened  in  Xew  York
QII  25  Oct.  of  that  year,  when  a  "  Declaration  of
Rights  and  Grievances"  was  drawn  up,  with  an
address  to  the  king  and  a  petition  to  each  house
of  parliament.  These  proceedings  were  approved
and  signed  by  all  of  the  members  except  Timothy
Haggles  and  Mr.  Ogden,  who  maintained  that  the
proceedings  were  to  be  submitted  to  the  several
provincial  assemblies,  and.  if  sanctioned,  to  be  for
warded  by  them  as  their  own  acts.  The  conduct  of
Mr.  Ogden  gave  offence  to  the  people  of  Xew  Jer
sey,  he  was  burned  in  effigy,  and  in  consequence
of  this  he  resigned  his  membership  in  the  assem
bly.  In  1776  he  was  chairman  of  the  Elizabeth-
town  committee  of  safety. — Robert's  son,  Mat
thias,  soldier,  b.  in  Elizabethtown,  X.  J..  22  Oct.,
1754;  d.  there,  31  March,  1791,  joined  the  array
under  Washington  at  Cambridge,  and  accompa
nied  Benedict  Arnold  in  his  march  through  the
Kennebunk  woods  in  the  winter  of  1775,  participat
ing  in  the  attack  on  Quebec,  where  he  was  wound
ed.  He  was  made  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  1st
battalion  of  the  first  establishment  on  7  March,
1776.  and  subsequently  colonel  of  the  1st  regiment
of  the  Xew  Jersey  continental  line,  which  he  com
manded  until  the  close  of  the  war.  Col.  Ogden
was  taken  prisoner  at  Elizabethtown  in  Xovember,
1780.  and  originated  and  commanded  the  unsuc
cessful  attempt  to  capture  Prince  William  Henry
(subsequently  William  IV.),  in  March,  1782.  He
was  granted  leave  of  absence  by  congress  to  visit
Europe  in  1783,  and  while  in  France  received  the
honor  of  "  le  droit  du  tabouret  "  from  Louis  XVI.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  received  the  brevet  of
brigadier-general,  to  date  from  20  Sept.,  1783.  He
was  a  member  of  the  legislative  council  in  1785.
and  in  1789  a  presidential  elector. — Matthias's
son.  Francis  Barber,  inventor,  b.  in  Boonton,
X.  J.,  3  March.  1783 ;  d.  in  Bristol,  England,  4  I
July,  1857,  served  under  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson  as  |
aide-de-camp  at  the  battle  of  Xew  Orleans,  on  8
Jan.,  1815.  Mr.  Ogden  devoted  attention  to  me-  |
chanical  science,  and  is  credited  with  having  first
applied  the  important  principles  of  the  expansive
power  of  steam  and  the  employment  of  right  an
gular  cranks  in  marine  engines.  In  1813  he  re-
VOL.  iv. — 36


ceived  a  patent  for  low-pressure  condensing  en
gines  with  two  cylinders,  the  steam  working  ex
pansively  and  the  cranks  being  adjusted  at  right
angles,  and  in  1817  the  first  engine  ever  construct
ed  on  this  principle  was  built  by  him  in  Leeds,
Yorkshire.  He  submitted  his  plan  at  Soho  to
James  Watt,  who  declared  at  once  that  it  would
make  "a  beautiful  engine"  and  that  the  combina
tion  was  certainly  original.  The  first  screw  pro
peller  that  was  introduced  into  practical  use  and
carried  into  successful  operation  was  brought  out
by  John  Ericsson  on  Thames  river  in  May.  1837.  and
w'as  called  the  '•  Francis  B.  Ogden."  The  first  pro
peller  in  the  waters  of  the  United  States  was  the
"Robert  F.  Stockton."  an  iron  boat,  which  was
built  at  Liverpool  under  the  superintendence  of
Mr.  Ogden.  He  was  U.  S.  consul  at  Liverpool  in
1829-'40,  and  at  Bristol  in  1840-'57.— Matthias's
brother,  Aaron,  soldier,  b.  in  Elizabethtown,  X.  J.,
3  Dec.,  1756:  d.  in  Jersey  City.  19  April,  1839,  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1773.  and  then  taught,
also  taking  an  active  part  in  the  early  struggles  of
the  patriots.  In  the
winter  of  1775-'6  he
was  one  of  the  party
that  boarded  and  cap
tured  off  Sandy  Hook
the  "  Blue  Mountain
Valley."  a  British  ves
sel  laden  with  muni
tions  of  war  and  bound
for  Boston,  and  suc
cessfully  carried  her
into  Elizabethport.  He
was  made  paymaster
of  the  1st  battalion  on
8  Dec.,  1775,  held  a
similar  office  in  the
second  establishment,
and  was  then  captain
of  the  1st  Xew  Jersey
regiment  commanded

by  his  brother,  Matthias  Ogden.  Capt.  Ogden  was
present  at  the  battle  of  the  Brandywine.  and  was
brigade-major  in  part  of  the  advanced  corps  of  Gen.
Charles  Lee  at  Monmouth.  serving  also  as  an  assist
ant  aide-de-camp  to  Lord  Sterling  on  that  field.  In
1779  he  accompanied  Gen.  William  Maxwell  as  aide
in  the  expedition  of  Gen.  John  Sullivan  against
the  Indians,  and  took  part  in  1780  in  the  battle  of
Springfield.  X.  J.,  where  his  horse  was  shot  under
him.  On  the  resignation  of  Gen.  Maxwell,  Ogden
was  appointed  to  a  captaincy  of  light  infantry
under  Lafayette,  and  was  serving  in  that  capacity
when  he  was  called  on  to  perform  a  delicate  service.
Washington  placed  in  his  hands  a  packet  of  papers
directed  to  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  containing  an  offi
cial  account  of  the  trial  of  Andre,  the  decision  of
the  board  of  inquiry,  and  the  letter  written  by
Andre  to  his  general,  and  ordered  him  to  go  to
Lafayette  for  further  instructions,  after  he  should
arrange  his  escort  of  men  that  were  known  for
their  tried  fidelity.  Lafayette,  who  was  stationed
nearest  to  the  British  lines,  instructed  Ogden  to
travel  so  slowly  that  when  he  should  reach  Paulus
Hook  (now  Jersey  City)  it  might  be  so  late  that
he  would  be  asked  to  stay  all  night.  He  was  then
to  communicate  to  the  commandant  of  the  post,
as  if  incidentally,  the  idea  of  an  exchange  of  Andre
for  Benedict  Arnold.  As  was  anticipated,  Ogden
was  invited  to  spend  the  night,  and  in  the  course
of  the  evening  Andre  became  the  subject  of  con
versation.  In  reply  to  the  question,  "  Is  there  no
way  to  spare  Andre's  life?"  Ogden  assured  the
commandant  that  if  Sir  Henry  Clinton  would  give


562


OGDEN


OGfi


up  Arnold,  Andre  might  be  saved.  This  state
ment  was  promptly  communicated  to  Sir  Henry,
but  honor  would  not  allow  the  surrender.  Ogden
afterward  accompanied  Lafayette  in  his  campaign
in  Virginia  daring  1781,  and  at  the  siege  of  York-
town,  with  his  company,  gallantly  stormed  the  left
redoubt  of  the  enemy,  for  which  he  was  "  honored
with  the  peculiar  approbation  of  Washington."
After  the  war  he  studied  law.  followed  that  pro
fession  with  success,  and  was  chosen  a  presidential
elector  in  1796.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant-
colonel  commandant  of  the  llth  U.  S.  infantry
on  8  Jan.,  1799,  and  was  made,  on  26  Feb.,  1800,
deputy  quartermaster-general  of  the  U.  S.  army,
which*  place  he  held  until  the  provisional  army
was  disbanded  on  15  June,  1800.  Col.  Ogden  was
made  U.  S.  senator  on  28  Feb.,  1801,  to  succeed
James  Sehureman,  who  had  resigned,  and  he  held
that  office  for  two  years.  He  was  chosen  by  the
legislature,  on  29  Oct.,  1812,  to  succeed  Joseph
Bloomfield  as  governor  of  New  Jersey.  During
the  war  of  1812  he  was  commander-in-chief  of  the
New  Jersey  militia,  and  was  appointed  major-gen
eral  of  the  U.  S.  army,  but  declined  that  honor,
preferring  the  state  command.  In  1806  he  was  ap
pointed  by  the  legislature  of  New  Jersey  one  of
the  commissioners  to  meet  like  officials  on  the  part
of  New  York  to  settle  questions  of  boundaries  and
jurisdiction  between  the  states.  Col.  Ogden  was  a
trustee  of  Princeton  in  1803-'12  and  in  1817-'39,
and  that  college  conferred  on  him  in  1816  the  de
gree  of  LL.  D.  He  was  president  of  the  State  so
ciety  of  the  Cincinnati  from  1824,  and  president-
general  of  the  organization  from  1829  till  his  death.
— Aaron's  son,  Elias  Bailey  Dayton,  jurist,  b.  in
Elizabethtown,  22  May,  1799;  d.  there,  24  Feb.,
1865,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1819,  and
then  studied  law.  He  was  made  prosecutor  of  the
pleas  for  Essex  county  in  1828,  and  for  Passaic
county  in  1838,  becoming  in  1848  associate  justice
of  the  supreme  court  of"  New  Jersey.  In  1844  he
was  a  member  of  the  State  constitutional  conven
tion,  and  he  was  admitted  to  the  Society  of  the
Cincinnati  on  4  July,  1861.

OCiDEN,  Uzal,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,
about  1744 ;  d.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  4  Nov.,  1822.  He
studied  theology  in  Elizabethtown,  and  then,  going
abroad,  received  at  the  same  time  both  deacon's
and  priest's  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church  on  21  Sept.,  1773,  from  the  bishop  of  Lon
don.  For  some  years  after  the  beginning  of  his
ministry  he  labored  as  a  missionary  in  Sussex
county,  N.  J.,  but  after  April,  1779,  he  preached
occasionally  in  Trinity  church,  Newark,  of  which
parish  he  was  rector  'from  1788  till  1805.  Mean
while  he  was  in  1784-'9  one  of  the  assistant  minis
ters  of  Trinity  church  in  New  York  city,  and  con
nected  with  St.  John's  in  Elizabethtown,  also
preaching  at  least  once  each  Sunday  in  a  chapel
at  what  is  now  Belleville,  N.  J.  In"  1798  he  was
elected  bishop  of  New  Jersey,  but  consecration  was
refused  by  the  general  convention  in  June,  1799,
owing  to  difficulties  that  existed  between  him  and
his  parish.  These  culminated  in  1804,  and  his
suspension  was  authorized  if  he  persisted  in  his  re
fusal  to  resign.  In  1805  he  became  a  Presbyterian,
but,  although  he  continued  active  in  missionary
work,  he  never  thereafter  held  a  charge.  The  de
gree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Princeton
in  1798.  He  published  numerous  letters,  addresses,
sermons,  and  "  Antidote  to  Deism  "  (2  vpls.,  1795),
being  an  ample  refutation  of  all  the  objections  of
Thomas  Paine  against  the  Christian  religion,  as
contained  in  a  pamphlet  entitled  "The  Age  of
Reason,"  addressed  to  the  citizens  of  these  states.


OGDEN,  Wesley,  jurist,  b.  in  Brock-port,  N.  Y.,
16  Dec.,  1818.  He  was  educated  in  public  schools
and  at  Genesee  Wesleyan  seminary,  Lima,  N.  Y.,
after  which  he  studied  in  Ohio,  where  in  1845  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar.  In  1849  he  emigrated  to
Texas  and  began  the  practice  of  his  profession  in
Lavaca.  where  he  continued  until  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war.  He  then  left  the  state,  and  from
1863  until  the  close  of  the  war  resided  in  New  Or
leans,  after  which  be  settled  in  San  Antonio,  Tex.
During  18(>5-'7  he  held  the  office  of  district  attor
ney,  and  then  was  district  judge  until  1870,  when
he  became  a  judge  of  the  state  supreme  court.

OGDEN,  William  Butler,  first  mayor  of  Chi
cago,  b.  in  Walton,  N.  Y.,  15  June,  1805 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  3  Aug.,  1877.  He  was  intended  for  the
law,  but  the  death  of  his  father  in  1821  compelled
him  to  take  charge  of  the  lattcr's  business  affairs.
In  1834  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature,  where  he
advocated  the  construction  of  the  Eric  railway.
Becoming  convinced  of  the  early  development  of
western  property,  he  removed  to  Chicago  in  1835,
where  he  established  a  land  and  trust  agency  that
still  exists.  He  soon  became  closely  identified  with
the  growth  of  the  various  enterprises  that  centre
around  Chicago,  and  on  its  incorporation  as  a  city
in  1837  became  its  first  mayor.  Mr.  Ogden  was
active  in  the  initial  movement  that  led  to  the  con
struction  of  the  Chicago  and  Galena  railroad,  and,
among  others,  pledged  his  private  fortune  for  its
completion  as  far  as  Elgin,  111.,  becoming,  in  1847,
its  president.  In  1853  lie  visited  Europe,  and  made
a  special  study  of  the  canals  of  Holland,  which  con
vinced  him  of  the  importance  of  enlarging  and
deepening  the  Illinois  and  Michigan  canal,  so  as  to
make  it  navigable  for  steamboats  plying  between
Chicago  and  New  Orleans.  He  was  also  an  earnest
advocate  of  the  construction  of  a  ship-canal  across
the  southern  portion  of  the  Michigan  peninsula.  In
1855  he  became  president  of  the  Chicago.  St.  Paul,
and  Fond  du  Lac  railway  company,  and  in  1S64  lie
effected  the  consolidation  of  that  road  with  the
Chicago  and  Galena  railroad,  out  of  which  grew
the  Chicago  and  Northwestern  railroad  company,
of  which  he  was  made  president.  Mr.  Ogden  pre
sided  over  the  National  Pacific  railroad  conven
tion  at  Philadelphia  in  1850.  and  on  the  formation
of  the  Union  Pacific  railroad  company  was  elected
its  first  president.  He  was  a  firm  believer  in  the
final  success  of  the  Northern  Pacific  railway,  and
was  largely  concerned  with  its  inception.  Various
other  interests  of  public  importance  were  con
trolled  by  him,  notably  the  great  lumbering  estab
lishments  at  Peshtigo,  Wis.,  and  at  the  time  of  his
death  he  was  considered  the  owner  of  the  largest
plant  of  that  kind  in  the  world.  His  charities  were
extensive,  and  nearly  all  of  the  institutions  of  the
northwest,  including  the  Rush  medical  college,  of
which  he  was  president,  the  Theological  seminary
of  the  northwest,  the  Chicago  historical  society,  the
Academy  of  sciences,  the  Astronomical  society,  the
University  of  Chicago,  and  the  Chicago  woman's
home,  were  recipients  of  his  bounty.  Shortly  after
his  death  a  chapel  was  erected  to  his  memory  in
p]lrnira  by  his  widow.  Mrs.  Ogden  also  presented
in  1885  a  chime  of  ten  bells  to  Trinity  cathedral  in
Omaha,  Neb.,  in  her  husband's  memory,  and  has
also  erected  in  Elmira,  N.  Y..  the  Arnot-Ogden
memorial  hospital  in  honor  of  her  own  family  and
that  of_her  husband.

OGE,  Jacques  Vincent  (o-zhay),  Haytian  in
surgent,  b.  in  Dondon  in  1750;  d.  in  Port  an
Prince.  26  Feb.,  1791.  He  was  a  mulatto,  descended
from  a  rich  family,  and  received  his  education  in
Paris,  entering  afterward  the  service  of  one  of  the


OGEROX  DE  LA BOUERE


OGILVIE


563


German  electors.  At  the  beginning  of  the  French
revolution  he  returned  to  his  native  country,  and
was  elected  in  1791  a  deputy  to  the  constituent
assembly.  He  became  a  prominent  member  of  the
club  "  Les  amis  des  noirs  "  in  Paris,  and  interested
several  statesmen  in  the  cause  of  the  colored  popu
lation  of  the  French  possessions.  But.  in  spite  of
their  efforts,  a  motion  for  the  enfranchisement  of
the  negroes  was  referred  to  the  colonial  committee
of  the  assembly,  and  Oge,  sailing  for  the  United
States,  procured  in  Xew  Orleans  a  supply  of  arms
and  ammunition,  and  landed  near  Cape  Francais.
23  Oct.,  1791.  at  the  head  of  250  men.  His  forces
were  soon  joined  by  several  hundred  negroes,  but,
instead  of  marching  immediately  on  the  cape,  he
addressed  a  communication  to  GOT.  Peynier,  de
manding  that  a  decree  of  the  constituent  assembly
that  had  partially  enfranchised  the  slaves  should
be  immediately  carried  into  effect,  and  offering  to
disarm  on  that  condition.  The  negotiations  lasted
for  several  weeks,  and  at  the  end  of  this  time  Baron
de  Saint  Vincent  marched  against  the  rebels,  who
were  routed  af  ler  desperate  actions  at  Dondon  and
at  Grande  RiviC-re.  Oge  barely  escaped  with  his  life
and  sought  refuge  in  the  Spanish  part  of  the  island.
He  was  arrested  there  on  demand  of  Peynier's  suc
cessor.  Count  de  Blanchelande.  and  delivered  to  the
French  authorities  on  condition  that  his  life  be
spared,  but  scarcely  had  Oge  arrived  in  Port  au
Prince  when  Blanchelande  broke  his  word  and  exe
cuted  his  prisoner.

OGERON  DE  LA  BOUERE,  Bertrand  Denis
<T  (o-zhay-rong),  French  colonist,  b.  in  the  castle
of  La  Bouere,  near  Angers,  in  1615 ;  d.  in  Paris  in
December,  1675.  He  served  in  the  marines,  but,
being  of  an  adventurous  character,  organized  in
1650  an  expedition  to  colonize  Guiana.  He  after
ward  abandoned  his  scheme  and  solicited  from
James  Duparquet  (q.  v.)  the  concession  of  territory
on  the  western  coast  of  Martinique.  He  had  al
ready  begun  an  establishment  there  when  Dupar-
quet  died  and  his  successor  refused  the  concession.
Ogeron  then  sailed  for  Santo  Domingo,  but  being
shipwrecked  off  Leogane,  lost  everything,  and  for
some  time  led  the  life  of  a  buccaneer.  He  returned
to  Martinique  to  prepare  a  new  expedition,  but  the
loss  of  several  convoys  compelled  him  to  return  to
France  penniless.  He  again  equipped  a  vessel  for
Santo  Domingo  in  1660,  founded  at  Port  Margot
an  establishment  that  prospered,  and  he  afterward
began  others  at  Petit  Goave  and  Leogane.  whence
he  expelled  the  Spaniards.  He  also  tried  unsuc
cessfully  to  establish  a  French  settlement  in  Ja
maica,  and  was  appointed  in  1665  by  the  West
India  company  governor  of  Torttiga,  then  occupied
by  the  buccaneers,  who  reluctantly  acknowledged
his  authority.  Ogeron  won  their  confidence  and
friendship,  and.  obtaining  female  emigrants  from
the  \Vest  India  company  in  1667,  colonized  the
western  coast  of  Santo  Domingo,  extending  from
Port  Margot  to  Port  de  Paix,  which  place  he
founded  in  1069.  He  also  proposed  to  found  an
establishment  in  South  Carolina,  but  his  plans  were
rejected  by  the  company.  When  war  began  with
Spain  in  1673  he  sent  an  expedition  under  Delisle
to  conquer  the  Spanish  part  of  the  island,  and  in
1074  founded  an  establishment  in  the  Samana
peninsula,  and  would  have  expelled  the  Spaniards
from  Santo  Domingo  had  he  been  properly  sup
ported  by  the  company,  but  the  latter  was  on  the
eve  of  dissolution,  and  never  forwarded  him  any
re-enforcements.  After  a  new  company  was  or
ganized  in  1674  he  hastened  to  France  in  1675
with  a  view  of  obtaining  supplies  and  re-enforce
ments,  but  died  there  from  the  effects  of  a  disease


j  that  he  had  contracted  in  Samana. His  nephew

j  and  lieutenant,  Louvilliers  de  Poincy,  succeeded

him  on  16  March,  1676,  as  governor  of  Tortuga,

j  but the establishments on the western part  of

;  Santo  Domingo  gradually  lost  the  prosperity  that

they  had  attained  under  D'Ogeron.

OGILBY,  John  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dub
lin,  Ireland.  30  Dec.,  1810 :  d.  in  Paris.  France,  2
;  Feb.,  1851. He  came  to  the  United  States  at  the
;  age  of  six  years,  and  was  graduated  at  Columbia
'•  in  1829. Pie  was  first  rector  of  the  College  gram
mar-school,  engaged  in  teaching  and  editing  classi
cal  works,  and  was  elected professor  of  ancient
languages  in  Rutgers  college  in  1832. This  post
;  he  held  for  eight  years. Having  resolved  to  enter
|  the  ministry,  he  made  due  preparation,  and  was
ordained  both  deacon  and  priest  by  Bishop  Onder-
donk,  of  Xew  York,  in  1838. Three  years  later  he
|  was  elected  professor  of  ecclesiastical  history  in  the
;  General  theological seminary. In  the  spring  of
'•  1842  he  made  a  visit  to  Europe  for  the  benefit  of
his  health,  and  returned  in  September  of  the  same
year. In  1843  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
'  the  University  of  Pennsylvania. He  went  abroad
again  for  rest  in  the  spring  of  1846.  and  returned
j  in  August. Three  years  later  his  health  failed.
j  He  sailed  for  Europe  in  Xovember,  1849,  spent  the
I  winter  in  the  south  of  France,  visited  his  relatives
and  friends  in  England  and  Ireland  in  1850,  and
returned  to  Paris  in  December,  where  early  in  the
next  year  he  died. His  body  was  brought  to  the
United  States  and  buried  in  Xew  Brunswick,  N.  J.
Dr.  Ogilby's  chief  publications  were  "An  Outline
of  the  Argument  against  the  Validity  of  Lay  Bap
tism  "  (Xew  York,  1842) ;  "  The  Catholic  Church
in  England  and  America,"  three  lectures  (1844) ;
with  numerous  conventional  and  other  sermons  on
special  occasions. He  had  made  considerable  prep
aration  for  a  large  work  on  "Ecclesiastical  His
tory,"  but  his  premature  death  prevented  its  com
pletion. — His  brother.  Frederick,  clergyman,  b.  in
Ireland,  27  Dec.,  1813  ;  d.  in  Xew  York  city,  25
March,  1878,  came  to  this  country  early  ia  life,  was
graduated  at  Rutgers  in  1833,  and  at  the  Xew  York
general  theological  seminary  in  1837. After  being
connected  with  Grace  church,  Xew  York  city,  as
deacon,  he  was  ordained  priest,  was  rector  of  the
church  of  the  Ascension,  Philadelphia,  and  in  1855
returned  to  Xew  York  and  was  assistant  minister
of  Trinity  church  until  his  death.

OGILVIE,  Clinton,  artist,  b.  in  Xew  York  city,
28  Dec.,  1838.  He  studied  painting  under  James  M.
Hart,  and  in  1866  went  to  Paris,  where  he  remained
about  a  year.  In  1872-'3  he  made  another  visit,
and  in  1879  he  went  abroad  for  a  four  years'  so
journ.  He  established  himself  at  Xice,  France,  for
two  seasons,  and  spent  one  winter  at  Mentone,
|  occupying  himself  in  making  out-of-door  studies.
In  1864  he  was  elected  an  associate  member  of  the
Xational  academy  of  design,  and  he  has  since  ex
hibited  there  "The  Valley  of  Schwytz.  Switzer-
;  land  "  (1870) ;  "  Lake  Coma  near  Bellagio  "  (1871) ;
I  "  Among  the  Adirondacks  "  (1874) ;  "  The  Sunny
Summer-Time " (1876) ;  "Summer  Afternoon  inthe
Adirondacks''  (1877);  "The  Mountain  Brook"
(1878) ;  "  At  Eaux  Bonnes.  France  "  (1881) ;  "  En
virons  of  Mentone"  (1883);  "  Argeles "  (1884);
"Down  by  the  River"  (1885);  "Hyeres"  (1886);
and  "  St.  Barthelemy,  near  Xice  "  (1887).

OGILVIE,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Xew  York
;  city  in  1722;  d. there, 26 Xov., 1774. He  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1748  in  the  same  class  with
Bishop  Seabury.  and  after  receiving  orders  was  ap
pointed  to  the  mission  among  the  Mohawk  Indians.
I  He  began  his  labors  at  Albany  in  March,  1749,  and


564


OGLE


OGLETIIORPE


in  June  of  the  same  year,  under  the  direction  of
the  Society  for  propagating  the  gospel,  devoted
himself  to  his  special  work.  The  Indians  were
quite  demoralized,  but  Mr.  Ugilvie  spared  no  efforts
in  their  behalf.  For  ten  years,  amid  great  dis
couragements,  he  continued  at  his  post  on  the  out
skirts  of  civilization,  and  his  labors  resulted  in
marked  improvement  of  those  under  his  care.  The
French  and  Indian  war  caused  much  difficulty  for
the  missionary  among  the  Mohawks,  whose  set
tlements  were  invaded  in  1758,  and  many  families
of  whom  were  carried  into  captivity.  Mr.  Ugilvie
was  appointed  chaplain  to  the  Royal  American
regiment,  and  was  present  in  every  campaign  dur
ing  the  war.  He  was  with  Sir  William  Johnson
in  1759,  and  the  next  year  with  Gen.  Amherst

in  his  expedition
against  Canada.
During  this  time
he  continued  his
missionary  work
among  the  In
dians  that  accom-
1>anicd  the  army,
n  1704  Mr.  Ogi'l-
vie  was  appoint
ed  an  assistant
minister  in  Trin
ity  church,  New
York,  which  post
he  held  during
theremainingten
years  of  his  life.
He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.
from  King's  (now
Columbia)  col
lege  in  1770,  and
soon  afterward
from  the  Univer
sity  of  Aberdeen.  The  accompanying  illustration
represents  old  Trinity  church,  which  in  1839  gave
way  to  the  present  beautiful  structure.

OGLE,  Samuel,  governor  of  Maryland,  b.  in
England;  d.  in  Annapolis,  Md.,  in  1731.  He  en
tered  the  British  army,  and  while  yet  a  young  man
was  commissioned  captain  in  a  cavalry  regiment.
In  1732  he  was  sent  to  this  country  by  the  proprie
tors  of  Maryland  as  governor  of  that  province.  He
subsequently  returned  to  Phigland,  and  was  further
promoted.  In  1747  he  was  again  appointed  gov
ernor,  and  he  retained  the  office  until  his  death.
He  was  also  president  of  the  Maryland  council.
He  lived  on  a  handsome  estate,  where  he  spent  all
his  leisure.  Among  its  attractions  was  a  favorite
horse  named  "  Sparks,"  which  had  been  presented
to  him  by  Lord  Baltimore.  The  latter  had  received
it  from  Prince  Frederick,  the  father  of  George  III.
— His  son,  Itciijamin.  governor  of  Maryland,  b.  in
Annapolis,  Md.,  7  Feb.,  1746;  d.  there.  6  July,
1808,  was  educated  in  England,  and  prior  to  the
Revolution  was  a  member  of  the  Maryland  council.
He  served  as  governor  from  1798  till  1801.  He  was
a  personal  friend  of  President  Washington,  and
was  frequently  consulted  by  the  latter  on  public
affairs.  Me  resided  on  a  plantation  called  "  Belair."
OGLESBY,  Richard  James,  senator,  b.  in  Old-
ham  county,  Ky.,  25  July.  1824.  He  was  left  an
orphan  at  the  age  of  eight,  removed  to  Decatur,
111.,  in  1830,  and  learned  the  carpenter's  trade,
which,  with  farming  and  rope-making,  occupied
him  until  1844.  While  making  rope,  he  invented
a  machine  that  was  a  decided  improvement  on  the
methods  before  in  use.  In  the  mean  time  he  had
studied  law  in  his  leisure  hours,  and  in  1845  was


admitted  to  the  bar,  beginning  to  practise  in  Sul
livan,  Moultrie  co..  111.  The  following  year  he
returned  to  Decatur,  and  was  commissioned  1st
lieutenant  in  the  4th  Illinois  regiment,  which
he  accompanied  to
Mexico,  and  was
present  at  the  siege
of  Vera  Cruz  and
the  battle  of  Cerro
Gordo.  He  resumed
practice  at  Deca
tur  in  1847,  pursued
a  course  of  study
at  Louisville  law-
school,  and  was
graduated  there  in
1848.  In  1849  he
went  to  California,
and  engaged  in  min
ing  until  1851.  when
he  again  returned
to  Decatur.  In  1800
he  was  elected  to
the  state  senate,
but  resigned  to  ac
cept  the  colonelcy  of  the  8th  Illinois  volunteers.
He  commanded  a  brigade  at  the  capture  of  Fort
Henry  and  Fort  Donelson,  and  was  promoted  for
gallantry  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  21  March,
1862.  He  added  to  his  reputation  at  Corinth,  where
he  was  severely  wounded,  and  disabled  from  duty
until  April,  1863.  In  the  mean  time  he  had  been
made  major-general  of  volunteers,  and  assigned  to
the  command  of  the  16th  army  corps.  This  com
mission  he  resigned  in  May,  1804,  and  in  the  fol
lowing  November  he  was  elected  governor  of  the
state  as  a  Republican  by  a  large  majority.  He
was  in  office  continuously  until  1809,  and  was  again
elected  in  1872.  lie  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  in
1873,  and  served  until  3  March,  1879.  but  declined
a  re-election.  In  November,  1884,  he  was  again
elected  governor  for  a  period  of  four  years.

OtiLETHORPE,  James  Edward,  founder  of
Georgia,  b.  in  London,  England,  21  Dec.,  1698;  d.
in  Cranham  Hall,  Essex,  30  Jan.,  1785.  The  Ogle-
thorpes  were  originally  from  Yorkshire,  but  the
branch  from  which  James  Edward  was  descended
had  been  settled  for  some  time  in  London  and  its
neighborhood.  His  father  was  Sir  Theophilus
Oglethorpe,  of  Godalming,  Surrey,  but  the  son  was
born  in  St.  Martins-
in-the-Field,  then
in  the  outskirts  of
the  metropolis.  He
studied  for  a  short
time  at  Oxford,  but
at  a  very  early  age
he  entered  the  army,
having  obtained  a
commission  in  the
Guards,  probably  in
1714.  He  was  on
the  continent  with
the  Duke  of  Marl-
borough  and  Prince
Eugene  shortly  af
terward,  and  in  the
campaign  against
the  Turks,  in  1710-
'17,  he  was  aide-de
camp  and  secretary
to  the  latter,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  siege
of  Belgrade.  In  1722  he  was  elected  to  parlia
ment  for  Hazlemere,  which  he  continued  to  repre
sent  for  thirty-two  years.  Immediately  after  en-


O'HARA


565


tering  parliament  he  gave  his  attention  to  the
wretched  condition  of  unfortunate  debtors,  who  in
large  numbers  languished  in  London  prisons,  and
projected  a  colony  for  their  permanent  relief.
Oglethorpe's  conviction  was  that  liberation  from
prison  was  no  benefit  to  the  debtor.  What  was
wanted  for  him  was  a  new  sphere,  with  new  sur
roundings  and  new  opportunities.  The  scheme
found  favor ;  all  the  more  so,  that  it  was  proposed
to  make  the  new  colony  an  asylum  as  well  for
the  afflicted  Protestants  of  Germany  and  other
parts  of  the  European  continent.  Parliament
granted  £10,000,  a  large  sum  was  raised  by  sub
scription,  and  in  June,  1732,  King  George  II.
granted  to  Oglethorpe  and  twenty  other  persons
all  that  region  of  territory  that  lies  between  Sa
vannah  and  Altamaha  rivers.  It  was  named  Geor
gia  in  honor  of  the  king.  In  January.  1733,  Ogle
thorpe  arrived  at  Charleston,  at  the  head  of  a  com
pany  of  150  persons,  comprising  about  thirty-five
families.  The  Savannah  river  was  explored,  and  a
site  for  the  new  settlement  was  selected  on  what
was  known  as  Yamacraw  bluff.  There  were  laid
the  foundations  of  what  is  the  town  of  Savannah.
In  April.  1734,  he  went  to  England,  taking  with
him  the  Yamacraw  chief,  several  members  of  his
family,  and  some  of  his  men,  and  on  1  Aug.  the
chief  had  an  interview  with  the  king  at  Kensing
ton  palace.  During  this  visit  he  sent  out  about
150  Scottish  Highlanders  as  a  protection  to  the
colonists,  who  had  been  largely  increased  by  bands
of  German  Protestants  from  Salzburg  and  its
neighborhood.  In  1735  he  returned  to  Georgia,
accompanied  by  about  300  emigrants,  among  whom,
with  others  of  less  note,  were  John  and  Charles
Wesley,  whom  Oglethorpe  had  induced  to  accept
ecclesiastical  appointments  in  the  colony.  Under
his  rule  the  colony  made  satisfactory  progress,  but
he  had  not  a  little  trouble  with  the  Spaniards,  who
were  then  in  possession  of  Florida.  Being  con
vinced  that  war  was  inevitable,  he  hastened  to
England,  raised  a  regiment  of  about  600  men,  ob
tained  a  grant  of  £20.000,  and  was  back  again  in
Georgia  before  the  close  of  1738.  In  October  of
the  following  year  war  was  declared  by  England
against  Spain,  and  the  American  colonies  were
ordered  each  to  contribute  its  quota  to  a  grand
expedition  against  the  Spanish  possessions  in  the
West  Indies.  Aided  by  supplies  and  re-enforce
ments  from  South  Carolina,  Oglethorpe,  in  obedi
ence  to  orders,  invaded  Florida,  and  made  an  un
successful  attack  on  St.  Augustine  in  the  summer
of  1 741.  In  the  following  year  the  Spaniards  made
preparations  for  the  invasion  of  Georgia,  and  the
purpose  was  not  concealed  that,  if  success  attended
them,  they  would  drive  the  English  out  of  that
colony  and  South  Carolina  as  well.  Oglethorpe
made  a  spirited  resistance,  and  compelled  the
Spaniards  to  retire.  In  1743  he  went  to  England
to  reply  to  charges  that  had  been  made  against  j
him  by  Capt.  Cook,  one  of  his  own  officers.  The  j
trial  was  by  court-martial.  Oglethorpe  was  ac-  j
quitted,  and  the  charges  were  pronounced  false  |
and  malicious.  Cook  being  dismissed  the  army  and  |
declared  incapable  of  further  serving  the  king.
Oglethorpe  did  not  return  to  Georgia,  but  he  had
the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  he  had  successful
ly  laid  the  foundations  of  a  prosperous  state.  In
1745  he  was  made  major-general,  and  sent  north
atrainst  the  forces  of  the  pretender.  Failing  to
overtake  them,  he  not  only  incurred  much  odium,
but  came  under  grave  suspicion.  He  was  again
tried  by  court-martial,  and  again  acquitted.  In
1752  he  resigned  his  charter  of  Georgia  to  the  Brit-
&h  government.  In  1754  he  retired  from  parlia


ment  to  his  seat  in  Essex,  where  he  continued  to
entertain  his  many  friends,  among  whom  were
some  of  the  most  eminent  men  of  the  day.  In
February,  1765,  he  was  put  on  half-pay,  as  a  retired
j  general.  When,  in  1775,  Gen.  Gage  returned  to
England,  the  command  in  America  was  offered  to
!  Oglethorpe,  but  he  refused  to  accept  unless  he
I  was  furnished  with  powers  of  concession  and  con
ciliation.  He  was  one  of  the  first  to  call  on  John
Adams  on  his  arrival  as  ambassador  in  England,
and  to  assure  him  of  his  regard  for  the  United
States,  and  of  his  satisfaction  and  gratitude  be
cause  the  war  was  ended.  Oglethorpe  was  a  man
of  fine  feeling,  of  excellent  taste,  and  of  culture  far
beyond  the  men  of  his  class.  He  commanded  ad
miration  from  such  men  as  Alexander  Pope,  James
Thomson,  and  Samuel  Johnson,  who  expressed  a
willingness  to  write  his  life  if  the  material  were
put  into  his  hands.  Thomson  alludes  to  his  philan
thropic  labors  in  the  poem  of  "  Winter,"  and  Pope's
couplet  in  his  praise  is  well  known.  His  own  ac
count  of  the  St.  Augustine  campaign,  published
immediately  after  the  close  of  the  struggle  (Lon
don,  1742).  is  still  a  readable  book.  Oglethorpe's
life  has  been  written  by  Thaddeus  M.  Harris.  D.  D.
(Boston,  1841):  Robert  Wright  (London,  1867);
and  William  B.  O.  Peabody  in  Sparks's  "American
Biography."  His  ''New  and  Accurate  Account  of
the  Colonies  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia"  and
his  letters  to  the  trustees  of  the  colony  and  others
are  printed  in  the  "  Collections "  of  the  Georgia
historical  society.

O'GORMAN,  James  Michael,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
in  County  Limerick,  Ireland,  in  1809 ;  d.  in  Cincin
nati,  Ohio,  4  July,  1874.  He  became  a  Trappist
monk  in  1828,  and  was  appointed  to  found  a  mon
astery  of  the  order  in  the  United  States.  He  se
lected  a  spot  about  twelve  miles  from  Dubuque,
Iowa,  and  erected  the  monastery  of  New  Milleray,  of
which  he  was  afterward  prior.  He  was  nominated
vicar-apostolic  of  Nebraska  in  1859.  and  was  conse
crated  bishop  of  Raphanea  in  partibus  infidelium  on
8  May.  Bishop  O'Gorman  displayed  great  execu
tive  ability  in  the  administration  of  his  vicariate.
He  had  only  three  priests  to  assist  him,  and  the  few
Roman  Catholics  in  the  territory  were  separated
widely  from  one  another.  Priests  were  induced  to
join  him,  and  churches  and  schools  multiplied  rap
idly.  He  established  a  hospital  and  an  asylum,
and  founded  academies,  all  of  which  were  placed
under  the  charge  of  Sisters  of  Mercy  and  Benedic
tine  nuns.  He  also  founded  Indian  missions.

O'HARA,  Charles,  British  soldier,  b.  about
1730;  d.  in  Gibraltar,  21  Feb.,  1802.  He  was  ap
pointed  lieutenant  and  captain  in  the  Coldstream
guards  in  January,  1756.  promoted  lieutenant-
colonel,  February,  1762,  colonel  of  the  2d  Foot
guards  in  August,  1777.  and  major-general,  19  Oct.,
1797.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1780  in  com
mand  of  his  regiment,  served  in  Virginia,  and  com
manded  the  vanguard  in  the  pursuit  of  Gen.  Daniel
Morgan  after  the  battle  of  Cowpens,  S.  C.,  in  1781.
He  was  severely  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Guilford,
N.  C1.,  where  he  led  the  left  wing  of  Cornwallis's
army.  He  was  afterward  included  in  the  surren
der  at  Yorktown.  He  was  again  severely  wounded
at  Toulon,  France,  in  November,  1793.  After
being  governor  of  several  colonies,  he  was  made
lieutenant-governor  of  Gibraltar  in  1795,  and  gov
ernor  in  1797.  He  was  a  brave  and  enterprising
soldier  and  a  strict  disciplinarian.

O'HARA.  Theodore,  poet,  b.  in  Danville,  Ky.,
11  Feb.,  1820;  d.  near  Guerryton.  Bullock  co..  Ala.,
6  June,  1867.  He  was  the  son  of  Kane  O'Hara,  an
Irish  political  exile,  and  was  graduated  at  St.  Jo-


506


O'HARA


O'HIGGINS


soph  academy,  Bardstown,  Ky.,  \vliere  he  entered
the  senior  class  and  acted  as  professor  of  Greek
while  he  was  completing  his  studies.  He  then  read
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  in  1845  was  ap
pointed  to  a  place  in  the  treasury  department  at
Washington.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Mexican
war  he  entered  the  army,  and  was  appointed  cap
tain  and  assistant  quartermaster  of  volunteers,  26
June,  1846.  He  was  brevetted  major,  20  Aug.,

1847,  for  gallant  conduct  in  the  battles  of  Contreras
and  Chnrubusco.  and  was  mustered  out  on  15  Oct.,

1848.  He  was  appointed  captain  in  the  2d  cavalry,
3  March,  1855,  but  resigned  on  1  Dec.,  1856. When
the  remains  of  the  Kentucky  soldiers  that  fell  at
Buena  Vista  in  February.  1847,  were  removed  to
their  native  state,  Maj.  6'Hara  wrote  for  the  oc
casion  the  poem  by  which  he  is  best  known.  "  The
Bivouac  of  the  Dead."  which  begins  with  the  stanza :

"The  muffled  drum's  sad  roll  has  beat

The  soldier's  last  tattoo,
No  more  on  life's  parade  shall  meet

That  brave  and  fallen  few.
On  Fame's  eternal  camping-ground

Their  silent  tents  are  spread  ;
And  Glory  guards,  with  solemn  round,

The  bivouac  of  the  dead."

Lines  from  this  poem  are  inscribed  over  the  en
trances  of  several  of  the  national  cemeteries.  At
the  close  of  the  war  Col.  O'Hara  returned  to  Wash
ington,  D.  C.,  where  he  practised  his  profession.
He  afterward  went  with  a  filibustering  expedition
to  Cuba,  and  commanded  a  regiment  in  the  battle
of  Cardenas,  where  he  was  wounded.  During  the
absence  of  John  Forsythe  from  the  United  States
as  minister  to  Mexico,  O'Hara  edited  the  "  Mobile
Register.''  He  was  afterward  editorially  connected
with  the  Louisville  '"Times"  and  the  Frankfort,
Ky.,  "  Yeoman."  He  was  several  times  intrusted
by  the  government  with  diplomatic  missions,  and
was  especially  active  in  the  negotiations  regarding
the  Tehuantepec  grant.  During  the  civil  war  he
joined  the  Confederate  army,  and  was  made  colo
nel  of  the  12th  Alabama  regiment.  Subsequently
he  served  on  the  staffs  of  Gen.  Albert  Sidney
Johnston  and  Gen.  John  C.  Breckinridge.  After
the  war  he  engaged  in  the  cotton  business  in  Co
lumbus,  Ga.,  but  lost  everything  by  fire,  and  retired
to  a  plantation,  where  lie  died.  After  his  "  Bivouac
of  the  Dead "  his  best-known  poem  is  "  The  Old
Pioneer."  In  accordance  with  a  resolution  of  the
Kentucky  legislature,  his  remains  were  conveyed
to  that  state  and  buried  by  the  side  of  those  whom
he  had  commemorated.  See  "  O'Hara  and  His
Elegies,"  by  George  W.  Ranck  (Baltimore,  1875).

O'HARA,  William,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  County
Deny,  Ireland,  about  1816.  His  parents  emigrated
to  the  United  States  in  1820  and  settled  in  Phila
delphia,  where  the  son  received  his  early  education.
He  afterward  entered  Georgetown  college,  but,  de
ciding  to  become  a  priest,  he  went  to  Rome  and
studied  for  eleven  years  in  the  Urban  college  of
the  Propaganda.  He  was  ordained  in  1843  and
appointed  pastor  of  St.  Patrick's  church,  Philadel
phia,  where  he  remained  till  1856.  He  was  subse
quently  professor  in  the  Seminary  of  St.  Charles
Borromeo,  and  for  some  time  acted  as  its  rector.
He  became  vicar-general  of  the  diocese  in  1860.  In
1868  the  diocese  of  Scranton  was  formed  out  of
that  of  Philadelphia,  and  Dr.  O'Hara  was  appoint
ed  its  first  bishop,  and  consecrated  on  12  July.
The  new  diocese  contained  fifty  churches,  most  of
them  of  a  very  primitive  character,  attended  by
twenty-eight  priests.  At  present  (1888)  there  are
seventy-nine  priests,  seventy-four'  churches,  forty-
six  stations,  and  twelve  convents.


O'HIGGINS,  Ambrosio,  Marquis  dc  Osorno,
viceroy  of  Peru,  b.  in  Summer  Hill,  Ireland,  about
1720 ;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,  18  March,  1801.  Very  little
is  known  about  his  youth,  but  it  is  believed  that  lie
was  the  son  of  laboring  people.  According  to  Jose  A.
Lavalle,  he  was  sent  to  Cadiz  to  his  uncle,  a  Jesuit,
and  destined  for  an  ecclesiastic  career.  Having
very  little  inclination  for  the  church,  he  went  to
South  America  and  for  some  time  was  an  itinerant
trader  in  Venezuela,  New  Granada,  and  Peru,  but,
being  persecuted  by  the  Inquisition,  he  went  to
Chili  as  an  engineer.  He  proposed  to  open  easy
communication  between  Chili  and  Mendoza  by  a
way  over  the  Andes,  and,  his  proposition  being  ac
cepted,  he  was  employed  to  superintend  the  works
about  1760.  In  1770  the  president  of  Chili  ap
pointed  him  captain  of  a  column  of  cavalry  to  resist
the  attacks  of  the  Araucanian  Indians,  whom  lie
defeated,  founding  the  fort  of  San  Carlos  in  the
south  of  the  province  of  Arauco.  which  is  still  in  ex
istence.  He  gained  the  good-will  of  the  Indians  by
his  humanity  and  benevolence,  and  recovered  the
territory  that  had  been  taken  from  the  Spaniards.
In  consequence  of  his  services  he  was  appointed,
on  7  Sept.,  1777.  by  the  viceroy  Amat.  a  colonel  in
the  army.  He  soon  rose  to  be  brigadier,  and  the
viceroy  Croix  appointed  him  inteiidant  of  Concep-
cion  in  1786.  He  founded  the  city  of  San  Ambrosio
de  Ballenar,  in  1789  was  promoted  major-general,
and  soon  afterward  became  president  of  Chili.  In
1792  he  built  the  city  of  Osorno,  which  had  been  de
stroyed  by  the  Indians,  and  was  created  a  marquis.
He  was  made  lieutenant-general  in  1794.  and  in  the
next  year  became  viceroy  of  Peru.  On  16  May,
1796,  he  delivered  the  presidency  of  Chili  to  Rezabal
y  Ugarte,  and  arrived  at  Callao  in  June,  receiving
the  government  in  Lima  on  24  July.  When  war
was  declared  between  England  and  Spain  in  1797,
O'lliggins  took  active  measures  for  the  defence  of
the  coast,  strengthening  the  fortifications  of  Callao
and  constructing  a  fort  in  Pisco.  He  projected
and  constructed  a  new  carriage-road  from  Lima  to
Callao,  and  his  principal  attention  during  his  short
administration  was  directed  to  the  improvement  of
means  of  communication.  He  died  suddenly  after
a  short  illness.  O'lliggins  is  the  only  example  of
a  man  sprung  from  the  laboring  class  that  obtained
the  rank  of  viceroy. — His  son,  Bernardo,  president
of  Chili,  b.  in  Chilian  in  1780:  d.  in  Lima  in  1846,
was  educated  in  his  native  city,  and  in  Cadiz  and
England.  At  the  time  of  the  declaration  of  inde
pendence,  18  Sept.,  1810,  he  was  prefect  in  the  isl
and  of  Laja,  where  he  organized  two  regiments,
one  formed  almost  entirely  of  his  own  dependents.
When  Gen.  Pareja  landed  in  San  Vicente  with  a
royalist  expedition,  26  March,  1813,  O'lliggins
joined  the  dictator  Jose  Miguel  Carrera  in  Concep-
cion.  Near  the  river  Roble  they  were  defeated  by
Gen.  Elorriaga,  17  Oct.,  1813.  O'lliggins  saving  the
army  from  total  rout.  After  this  battle  the  junta
of  Santiago  deposed  Carrera  from  the  general  com
mand  of  the  army  and  appointed  O'lliggins  in  his
place.  He  had  gained  some  successes  when  he
received  orders  from  the  junta  at  Santiago  to
negotiate  with  the  enemy,  and  on  3  May  the  treaty
of  Lircay  was  signed.  On  23  July,  Carrera,  by  a
military  revolution,  recovered  the  government,  but
O'lliggins  did  not  recognize  him,  and  on  26  Aug.
they  had  an  encounter,  in  which  Carrera  remained
in  possession  of  the  field,  when  they  heard  of  the
landing  of  the  expedition  of  Gen.  Mariano  Osorio
and  made  peace,  O'lliggins  asking  for  the  command
of  the  vanguard.  He  occupied  Rancagua,  and  they
agreed  that  Carrera  should  attack  the  enemy  in  the
i  ear,  but,  after  sustaining  several  assaults,  O'H  iggins


OIOUHATOX


OJEDA


567


saw  Carrera  retreat  on  1  Oct.,  and,  notwithstanding
a  heroic  defence,  had  to  cut  his  way  through  the
enemy's  lines  on  2  Oct.,  his  force  of  1.900  being  re
duced  to  300.  O'Higgins  then  went  to  Buenos  Ayres,
where  he  resided  till  the  Argentine  government  ap
pointed  him  commander  of  the  second  division  of
the  expedition  that  left  Mendoza.  21  Jan.,  1817.  It
met  the  enemy  in  Chacabuco  on  12  Feb.,  gaining
the  battle  mainly  by  the  courage  of  O'Higgins.  The
Spaniards  abandoned  Santiago,  and  on  10  Feb.
O'Higgins  was  appointed  director  of  Chili.  After
a  siege  of  four  months  he  stormed  Talcahuano,  but
he  was  defeated  by  Gen.  Ordonez  on  6  Dec.,  1817.
On  18  Jan.,  1818,  the  second  expedition  under
Osorio  landed  in  Talcahuano.  and  O'Higgins  retired
to  the  north,  joining  San  Martin.  On  19  March
they  were  surprised  at  C'ancha  Kayada  and  defeated,
notwithstanding  OTIiggins's  desperate  resistance.
On  23  March  O'Higgins  arrived  in  Santiago,  where,
resuming  his  authority,  he  prepared  for  the  defence
of  the  country,  and  on  4  April  the  independent
army  totally  defeated  the  Spaniards  at  Maipo.  In
August,  18i8,  a  convoy  was  on  its  way  from  Spain
to  the  aid  of  Osorio,  but  O'Higgins  organized  a
naval  force  under  Manuel  Blanco  Encalada  (q.  r.)
and  ended  the  naval  power  of  Spain  in  the  Pacific.
After  the  establishment  of  independence.  O'Higgins
completed  the  formation  of  a  navy  under  Cochrane.
During  his  government,  O'Higgins.  under  the  title
of  supreme  director,  did  much  for  the  advancement
of  his  country,  but  his  minister,  Rodriguez  Aldea,
by  his  continual  intrigues,  caused  a  revolution  in
the  southern  provinces  in  December,  1822,  under
Ramon  Freire.  He  dismissed  Aldea  on  7  Jan.,
1823,  but  the  discontent  continued,  and  on  28  Jan.
he  was  forced  to  resign.  Believing  that  his  absence
would  contribute  toward  healing  dissensions,  he
left  shortly  afterward  for  Peru,  where  he  passed
the  rest  of  his  life  on  the  estate  of  Montalvan.
which  he  bought  in  the  valley  of  Cafiete.  His  re
mains  were  transported  to  Santiago  in  January,
1869,  by  order  of  the  government,  and  in  1872  an
equestrian  statue  of  him  was  erected  in  the  public
walk  of  Las  Delicias.

OIOUHATON,  Teresa,  Indian  convert,  b.  in
1627.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Chiouatenhoua,  a
Huron  chief,  the  principal  support  of  the  Mission
of  the  Conception,  who  was  slain  by  the  Iroquois
in  1640.  In  compliance  with  the  dying  wishes  of
her  father,  her  uncle.  Teondechoren,  took  her  to
the  Ursuline  convent  in  Quebec,  where  she  learned
to  speak  and  write  French,  and  acted  as  interpre
ter  lor  the  Indians  that  came  to  the  town.  When,
in  1642.  her  uncle  went  to  Quebec  to  take  her  away
in  order  to  marry  her  to  a  Huron  chief,  she  refused
to  leave  the  sisters;  but  the  influence  of  Father
Jogues  was  invoked,  and  she  finally  consented.
Having  been  provided  by  the  Ursulines  with  all
she  required  for  her  marriage,  she  set  out  with
Father  Jogues  and  her  uncle  in  August,  1642.  The
party  were  captured  by  the  Iroquois,  and  she  fell
to  the  lot  of  a  young  warrior,  who  married  her.  A
large  ransom  was  offered  for  her  release  by  the
French  governor,  but  without  effect.  She  con
tinued  a  Christian  to  the  end  of  her  life,  and  in
structed  others  in  the  faith.  She  received  the
missionary  Le  Moyne  into  her  house  in  1654.

OJEDA.  Alonso  <le  (o-hay'-dah),  Spanish  ad
venturer,  b.  in  Cuenca  in  1465;  d.  in  Hispaniola
in  1515.  He  accompanied  Columbus  in  his  second
voyage  to  the  Xew  World,  and  after  the  foundation
of  Isabela,  the  latter  sent  Ojeda  on  an  expedition  to
explore  the  interior  of  Hispaniola.  With  a  small
force  he  advanced  to  Cibao,  and  returned  after  a
successful  exploration,  during  which  he  discovered


gold-mines.  In  April.  1494,  he  commanded  an  ex
pedition  to  La  Vega  Real  against  Caonabo  (q.  v.).
cacique  of  Maguana,  who  was  besieging  the  garri
son  of  Santo  Tomas  under  Pedro  Margarit.  and,
after  relieving  the  fortress,  persuaded  the  Indians
to  return  to  their  villages.  In  order  to  subdue
them  thoroughly,  he  planned  and  successfully  ac
complished  the  bold  design  of  capturing"  the
cacique,  and  brought  him  to  Columbus.  He  after
ward  directed  the  operations  against  Caonabo's
brothers,  and  decided,  by  a  timely  movement,  the
disputed  battle  of  La  Vega,  in  March,  1495.  against
the  Indian's  allies.  On  his  return  to  Spain  in  the
following  year  he  obtained  permission  to  explore
the  continent  that  had  been  discovered  by  Colum
bus  on  his  third  vovage,  and.  arming  an  expedition,
sailed  from  Santa  Maria  on  18  May.  1499.  Ojeda  was
accompanied  by  the  former  pilot  of  Columbus.  Juan
de  la  Cosa  (q.  v.),  and  also  by  Americo  Vespucci
(q.  v.),  who  was  one  of  the  merchants  that  provided
the  expenses  of  the  expedition.  They  were  carried
by  winds  and  currents  to  the  southward,  touching
the  coast  of  America  at  latitude  5°  S..  and.  coasting
to  the  northward,  landed  in  Trinidad.  They  then
sailed  along  the  coast,  making  frequent  landings
and  having  repeated  fights  with  the  Indians,  and
finally  reached  a  country  called  Coquibacoa  by  the
natives,  which,  on  account  of  finding  there  towns
built  on  piles  in  lakes,  he  named  Venezuela,  from
a  fancied  resemblance  to  Venice.  In  the  interior
of  a  deep  inlet  he  discovered  a  city  built  in  the
same  manner,  which  he  called  San  Bartolome,  and
which  was  probably  Maracaibo.  Resuming  his
voyage,  the  navigator  proceeded  to  Cape  Vela,
when  the  bad  condition  of  his  ships  forced  him  to
steer  for  Hispaniola.  He  arrived  at  Yaquima
(Jacmel)  on  5  Sept.,  1499,  but  was  obliged  by  Rol-
dan,  a  lieutenant  of  Columbus,  to  re-embark.  He
next  tried  to  organize  a  mutiny  in  the  garrison  of
Jaragua,  but  was  foiled  by  the  arrival  of  Roldan
and  Diego  Escobar.  He  now  returned  to  Spain,
taking  with  him  several  hundred  Indians  from  the
Bahamas  and  selling  them  as  slaves  in  Cadiz,
where  he  arrived,  15  June,  1500.  Being  commis
sioned  governor  of  Coquibacoa,  he  sailed  again  for
America  in  January,  1502,  and  attempted  to  estab
lish  a  colony,  which  he  called  Santa  Cruz,  but,  on
account  of  his  despotic  measures,  he  was  imprisoned
by  his  own  crew  and  carried  in  chains  to  His
paniola  in  September,  1502.  He  was  set  at  liberty
ten  months  later  through  the  influence  of  Bishop
Fonseca  (q.  v.).  In  1508  he  sent  his  former  pilot,
Juan  de  la  Cosa,  to  Madrid  to  obtain  a  concession
for  new  conquests  on  the  main-land.  The  latter
obtained  for  Ojeda  the  title  to  the  country  from
Cape  Vela  to  the  middle  of  the  Gulf  of  Darien,
under  the  name  of  Xueva  Andalucia,  and  sailing
with  about  200  men  in  three  vessels,  rejoined  Ojeda
in  Hispaniola.  By  the  fame  of  his  former  exploits
the  latter  easily  gathered  about  100  more  adven
turers,  among  them  being  Francisco  Pizarro,  the
future  conqueror  of  Peru ;  and  Hernan  Cortes  (q.  v.)
was  prevented  only  by  a  sudden  illness  from  sail
ing  with  him.  lii  November.  1509.  he  left  His
paniola  for  Caramari  (afterward  Carthagena),  where
he  was  rescued  from  the  natives  by  the  expedition
of  his  competitor.  Diego  de  Nicuesa.  He  then
sailed  for  the  Gulf  of  Darien,  and  on  the  eastern
shore  founded  the  colony  of  San  Sebastian,  but
soon  his  fort  was  surrounded  by  the  natives,  and
when  provisions  and  ammunitions  began  to  fail,
Ojeda  sailed  for  Hispaniola  in  quest  of  his  partner,
Martin  de  Enciso  (q.  r.),  leaving  Pizarro  in  com
mand  of  San  Sebastian.  He  took  passage  on  a
vessel  belonging  to  a  trader  named  Bernardino  de


568


OJEDA


Talavera,  who  had  fled  from  Ilispaniola,  and  when
the  latter  learned  where  Ojeda  was  going,  he  se-
cured  him  as  a  prisoner.  The  vessel  was  wrecked
on  the  coast  of  Cuba,  when  the  crew,  being  attacked
by  the  Indians,  set  Ojeda  free  and  gave  him  the
command.  After  many  difficulties  he  managed  to
send  a  message  to  the  governor  of  Jamaica,  who
despatched  Panfilo  de  Narvaez  (q.  v.)  to  Ojeda's
rescue,  and  facilitated  his  return  to  Hispaniola.
Meanwhile  Enciso  had  sailed,  and  when  the  news
of  his  deposition  by  Balboa  arrived,  Ojeda  was  per
secuted  by  his  creditors,  who  had  provided  means
for  his  expedition,  and  passed  his  last  years  in
great  misery,  dying  finally  in  consequence  of  a
wound  from  a  poisoned  arrow  that  he  had  received
in  San  Sebastian. — His  son.  Alonso,  b.  either  in
Andalusia  or  Ilispaniola  about  the  end  of  the  loth
century;  d.  in  Mexico  about  1550,  served  in  Cuba
from  early  youth,  accompanied  Hernan  Cortes  to
the  conquest  of  New  Spain  in  1519,  and  was  the
first  of  the  conquerors  to  learn  the  Mexican  lan
guage.  He  was  specially  beloved  by  the  natives  of
Tlascala,  and  therefore  appointed  by  Cortes  com
mander  of  the  auxiliary  force  from  that  republic,
which  accompanied  him  on  his  expedition  against
Panfilo  de  Narvaez  (q.  v.).  For  the  siege  of  Mexico
he  carried  with  his  Indians  two  heavy  pieces  of
cannon  from  Vera  Cruz  to  Texcoco.  lie  was  also
sent  to  arrange  a  dispute  between  the  inhabitants
of  Choi ula  and  Topoyanco,  which  he  did  so  effect
ively  that  he  brought  an  auxiliary  army  of  200,000
men  from  those  two  states,  and  as  commander  of
part  of  that  army  contributed  efficaciously  to  the
siege  and  capture  of  Mexico.  lie  wrote  •'  Memorias
y  Comentarios  de  la  Conquista  de  Mexico,"  a  valu
able  manuscript  which  was  used  by  Antonio  de
Herrera  in  his  "  Decadas  "  and  Torquemada  in  his
"  Monarquia  Indiana."

OJEDA,  Diesro  de,  South  American  poet,  b.  in
Seville  in  1560;  d.  in  Huanuco,  Peru,  24  Oct.,  1619.
He  came  to  Peru  in  early  youth,  became  a  Domini
can  friar,  and  was  successively  professor  of  the
ology  in  the  convent  of  Cuzco,  and  rector  of  the  col
leges  of  Cuzco,  Lima,  and  Huanuco.  He  employed
his  leisure  in  composing  songs  for  the  choir,  and  at
the  solicitation  of  his  friends  he  sent  one  of  his
poems  to  his  old  master  of  philosophy  in  Seville,
who  published  it  under  the  title  of  "  Cristiada "
(Seville,  1611).  It  is  a  poem  in  twelve  parts  on  the
passion  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  George  Ticknor,  in  his
"History  of  Spanish  Literature,"  commends  the
author  for  its  light  versification  and  its  brightness
and  simplicity.  The  work  is  rare,  and  Nicolas
Antonio,  in  his  "Bibliotheca  Nova,"  asserts  that  a
copy  could  scarcely  be  found  in  the  18th  century.

O'KELLY,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  1735;  d.'l6
Oct.,  1826.  He  is  identified  with  the  history  of
Methodism,  but  nothing  is  known  of  his  youth  and
early  manhood.  He  is  first  heard  of  at  the  •'  Christ
mas  Conference  "  at  Baltimore  in  1784.  In  1789
the  bishops  proposed  that  a  council  of  presiding
elders  be  convened,  and  it  was  held  at  Baltimore,
1  Dec.,  1789.  O'Kelly  sat  in  this  body,  and  subse
quently,  by  strongly  opposing  certain'  of  its  meas
ures,  he  did  much  to  discredit  councils.  Notwith
standing  this,  Bishop  Asbury,  who  was  in  favor  of
them,  deemed  it  wise  to  call  a  second,  but  only
ten^elders  attended,  and  a  third  was  never  held.
O'Kelly  labored  heartily  in  favor  of  a  general  con
ference,  and  to  him  the  Methodist  church  owes
"  that  essential  and  valuable  constituent  of  its
polity."  He  wrote  letters  to  Thomas  Coke,  Wes
ley's  ambassador,  securing  his  co-operation,  and  in
consequence  brought  these  two  fathers  of  American
Methodism  to  the  verge  of  antagonism.  Seeing


that  a  crisis  had  been  reached,  which  he  could  not
prudently  ignore,  Asbury  sacrificed  his  personal
wishes  and  consented  to  the  holding  of  a  general
conference.  It  was  called  for  1  Nov.,  1792,  and
O'Kelly  introduced  a  resolution  to  modify  the
bishop's  power  of  appointment  to  the  extent  of  al
lowing  to  any  preacher  who  should  feel  dissatisfied
with  the  place  assigned  him  an  appeal  to  the
conference.  This  was  rejected  by  a  large  ma
jority,  and  O'Kelly  sent  in  his  resignation  and
withdrew.  Several  of  O'Kelly's  adherents  also  left
the  conference,  and  he  subsequently  organized  a
"  Republican  Methodist  Church."  afterward  called
the  "Christian  Church."  In  1829  it  included  sev
eral  thousands  in  its  membership,  most  of  them  in
North  Carolina  and  Virginia.  From  1782  till  1792
O'Kelly  was  stationed  almost  constantly  in  Vir
ginia,  and  presided  over  a  large  district  of  the  best
circuits  in  the  connection.  It  could,  therefore,  not
have  been  for  personal  reasons  that  he  urged  the
right  of  appeal  from  the  bishop  to  the  conference.
He  was  opposed  to  slavery,  and  denounced  it.
Throughout  southern  Virginia  and  the  adjoining
counties  of  North  Carolina  his  influence  was  very
great,  and  "he  scrupled  not  to  use  it  in  building
up  his  own  cause."

OKEMOS,  Indian  chief,  b.  before  1780;  d.  near
Lansing,  Mich.,  in  December,  1886.  He  was  a
nephew  of  Pontiac,  and  fought  in  the  campaigns
of  Arthur  St.  Clair  and  Anthony  Wayne.  In  the
war  of  1812-'15  he  was  a  war-chief,  and  at  Fort
.Meigs  received  wounds  in  the  head.  His  later  life
was  spent  near  the  village  in  Michigan  bearing  his
name  and  in  the  Indian  settlements  of  that,  state.

OLAS  ETA,  Pedro  Antonio  de  (o-lan-yay'-tah),
Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Biscay  about  1770;  d.  in
Tumusla,  Bolivia,  2  April,  1825.  He  was  the  son
of  poor  laborers,  and  emigrated  when  he  was  sev
enteen  years  old  to  South  America,  where  he
traded  for  some  time  in  the  provinces  of  Potosi,
Juijui.  and  Salta,  and,  after  acquiring  a  small  for
tune,  obtained  a  commission  in  the  local  militia  of
Potosi.  When  in  1811  the  army  of  the  Argentine
Independents  marched  against  upper  Peru,  he
offered  his  services  to  the  authorities,  and  took
part  in  the  campaign  under  Gen.  Jose  Goyeneche
as  major.  In  1818  he  served  under  Pezuela  as
colonel,  taking  part  in  the  battles  of  Villapujio  and
Ayohuma,  and  later  he  was  commander  of  a
brigade,  with  which  he  defeated  Gen.  Rondeau  at
Viluma.  29  Oct.,  1814,  and  was  promoted  brigadier.
In  November,  1816,  La  Serna  took  the  chief  com
mand,  and,  together  with  the  officers  of  the  regular
army,  began  to  annoy  the  provincial  militia  chiefs.
When,  by  a  military  revolution  in  1821,  the  former
was  appointed  general-in-chief  and  viceroy,  these
hostilities  led  nearly  to  an  open  rupture,  Olafieta,
as  commander  of  Potosi,  meeting  La  Serna's  orders
with  resistance.  But  when  Santa  Cruz,  with  the
independent  forces  from  Peru,  approached,  Olafieta
effected  a  junction  with  La  Serna,  on  14  Sept.,
1823,  and  obliged  Santa  Cruz  to  retire  to  the  coast.
He  was  then  promoted  major-general,  and  ap
pointed  president  and  commander-in-chief  of  upper
Peru.  His  opposition  to  La  Serna  and  his  ad
visers  continued,  and  when,  toward  the  end  of
the  year,  they  recognized  and  proclaimed  the  liberal
constitution  of  Spain.  Olafieta  disapproved  the
measure.  When  he  heard  later  that  Ferdinand
VII.  had  declared  the  constitution  abolished,  1  Oct.,
1823,  he  did  not  wait  for  instructions  from  Spain,
but  pronounced  in  open  rebellion  against  the  vice
roy  in  La  Paz,  15  Jan.,  1824.  occupied  Potosi,  and
on  4  Feb.  issued  a  proclamation  declaring  the  re-
establishment  of  the  absolute  authority  of  Ferdi-


OLAVIDE


OLDEXDORP


569


nand  VII.  and  the  independence  of  upper  Peru  I
from  the  viceroyalty.  On  8  Feb.  he  occupied  |
Chuquisaca,  and  there  the  patriots,  feigning  to  be
his  ardent  sympathizers,  instigated  him  to  open
hostilities  against  La  Serna.  The  latter  sent  a  |
force  to  oppose  his  progress,  but  on  9  March  an
agreement  was  made,  by  which  Olaneta  was  to  be
left  undisturbed  in  his  province,  and  to  give  a
monthly  tribute  and  some  auxiliary  troops  to  La
Serna.  But  this  agreement  was  never  kept,  and
when  the  forces  of  the  viceroy  were  concentrated
against  the  Independents,  Olaneta  left  them  with
out  help.  When  the  battles  of  Junin,  on  6  Aug.,
and  Ayaeucho,  on  9  Dec.,  were  lost  by  the  Royal
ists,  Olaneta  refused  to  accept  the  terms  of  capitu
lation,  and  gathered  his  forces  with  the  hope  of
reaching  the  south  of  Chili  and  making  there  a
last  stand  for  the  royal  cause.  While  he  was  in
Tumusla,  hearing  that  one  of  his  battalions
had  pronounced  for  independence,  he  left  the  town
to  subdue  them.  A  bloody  engagement  followed,
and  Olaneta  was  shot  by  one  of  his  own  soldiers,
dying  the  same  day  of  his  wound.  Olaneta  has
been  unjustly  accused  of  selling  himself  to  the  In
dependents,  but  this  extraordinary  man  was,  by
his  harsh  and  arbitrary  nature,  a  stanch  supporter
of  absolutism,  and  the  king  appointed  him  captain-
general  and  viceroy  of  La  Plata,  which  commission
arrived  after  his  death,  on  27  May.  1825.

OLA  VIDE,  Pablo  Antonio  "Jose  (o-lah-vee'-
deh),  Peruvian  statesman,  b.  in  Lima  in  1725:  d.
in  Baeza,  Spain,  in  1803.  He  studied  in  his  native
city,  was  graduated  in  his  seventeenth  year  as  doc
tor  of  sacred  law  in  the  University  of  San  Marcos,
and  in  1745  was  appointed  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  Lima.  In  the  earthquake  of  28  Oct.,  1746,
he  lost  his  parents,  a  sister,  and  a  great  part  of  his
fortune,  but  he  rendered  great  service  in  saving
victims  and  property  from  the  ruins.  He  assisted
with  great  zeal  in  the  restoration  of  the  city,  even
expending  part  of  the  remnant  of  his  fortune  for
that  purpose,  but  the  interest  that  he  took  in  re
building  the  theatre,  in  preference  to  the  church  of
Socorro,  offended  the  clergy,  and  they  accused  him
of  having  perverted  for  that  object  funds  that  he
held  in  trust  from  some  victims  of  the  earthquake.
Their  clamors  became  so  loud  that  at  last  King
Ferdinand  VI.  ordered  him  to  appear  in  Madrid
in  1749.  He  was  imprisoned,  and  his  trial  began,
but  on  account  of  sickness  he  was  banished  to
Leganez,  where  he  married  a  wealthy  lady,  and
with  her  fortune  probably  bribed  his  judges  not  to
take  up  the  case.  His  house  became  a  meeting-
place  of  philosophers  and  artists,  and  the  Count  de
Aranda  called'mm  to  Madrid,  commissioned  him
to  form  a  project  for  the  education  of  youth,  and
appointed  him  director  of  the  hospital  of  Seville.
Count  Aranda  afterward  took  him  as  his  secretary
on  his  mission  to  Paris,  and  on  his  return  he  re
mained  the  chief  adviser  of  that  minister.  The
decree  of  the  expulsion  of  the  Jesuits  from  the
Spanish  possessions  in  South  America  was  probably
due  to  Olavide's  influence.  In  1768  he  was  ap-
pointed  superintendent  of  the  newly  established
colonies  in  Sierra  Morena.  where  he  worked  assidu
ously,  but,  as  he  had  admitted  Protestant  colonists
from  Germany  and  Switzerland,  contrary  to  law.
and  strenuously  opposed  the  establishment  of
monastical  institutions,  the  clergy  began  soon  to
spread  accusations  of  heresy  against  him.  His
communications  with  Holbach,  D'Alambert.  Dide
rot,  and  other  philosophers  were  brought  up  against
him,  and  Charles  III.  and  his  minister,  Count
Florida-Bianco,  did  not  dare  to  interfere  when  j
Olavide  was  brought  before  the  tribunal  of  the  In


quisition.  His  trial  lasted  from  1776  till  1778,  and
on  24  Nov.  of  the  latter  year  he  was  condemned  to
eight  years'  imprisonment,  but  in  1780  he  escaped
from  the  Capuchin  convent  of  Burgos  to  France.
In  1781  he  was  to  be  extradited  by  demand  of  the
Spanish  court,  but  escaped  to  Switzerland,  and  did
not  return  to  France  till  after  the  revolution.  In
1798  he  received  permission  to  return  to  Spain,  and,
obtaining  a  pension,  lived  in  retirement  in  Baeza.
He  wrote  :  "  Hipermenestra  "  and  "  Zelmira,"  trage
dies  ;  "  El  deserter  francos,"  a  comedy ;  "  Xaneta
en  la  corte  "  and  "  El  pintor  enamorado  de  su  mo-
delo,"  operettas — all  published  in  Madrid  (1754-'6),
and  first  represented  in  a  private  theatre  in  his
house.  He  also  wrote  "  Evangelic  en  triunfo "
(Valencia,  1797 ;  translated  into  French,  Lyons,
1805);  "  Poemas  Cristianos  "  (Madrid,  1799);"  and
"  Salterio  Espanol "  (1800 ;  Lima,  1803 ;  Lyons,  1845).

OLCOTT,  Simeon,  senator,  b.  in  Connecticut,
1  Oct.,  1735 ;  d.  in  Charlestown,  X.  H..  22  Feb.,
1815.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1761,  studied
law,  and  practised  at  Charlestown.  In  1784  he
was  appointed  chief  justice  of  the  court  of  com
mon  pleas,  and  in  1790  a  judge  of  the  superior
court,  of  which  he  was  made  chief  judge  in  1795.
On  the  resignation  of  Samuel  Livermore,  he  was
elected  to  the  United  States  senate,  serving  from
7  Dec.,  1801,  till  3  March,  1805.

OLDEN.  Charles  Smith,  governor  of  New
Jersey,  b.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  19  Feb.,  1799;  d.
there,  7  April.  1876.  He  was  educated  at  Lawrence-
ville,  X.  J.,  left  school  early  to  work  in  his  father's
store,  entered  a  mercantile  house  in  Philadelphia
in  1823,  and  in  1826  went  to  Xew  Orleans,  where
he  became  a  successful  merchant,  retiring  from
business  in  1834  and  returning  to  Princeton.  As
treasurer  of  Princeton  college,  he  aided  in  extri
cating  it  from  financial  embarrassment  after  the
destruction  of  Nassau  hall  by  fire.  He  represented
his  county  in  the  state  senate  from  1844  till  1850.
In  1859  he  was  elected  by  the  Republicans  gover
nor  of  Xew  Jersey,  and  was  efficient  in  organizing
and  equipping  the  state's  quota  of  troops.  He  at
tended  the  Peace  congress  in  1861.  His  service  as
governor  ended  in  1863,  and  he  subsequently  filled
the  offices  of  judge  of  the  court  of  errors  and
appeals,  member  of  the  court  of  pardons,  riparian
commissioner,  and  presidential  elector.

OLDENDORP,  Christian  Ueorg;  Andreas
(old'-en-dorp),  German  missionary,  b.  in  Grossen-
Laffert,  near  Hildesheim.  8  March,  1721 ;  d.  in
Ebersdorf,  9  March,  1787.  He  was  the  son  of  a
clergyman,  received  his  education  in  Jena,  and,  be
ing  converted  to  the  Moravian  faith,  united  with
their  community  at  Marienborn  in  1743.  He  held
for  some  time  the  chair  of  rhetoric  in  various  col
leges,  and  in  1766  was  appointed  visitor  of  the
Moravian  establishments  in  North  and  South
America.  He  visited  successively  the  communities
in  St.  Croix,  St.  Thomas,  and  St.  John,  and  the
establishments  of  his  church  in  Pennsylvania  and
Xew  York,  which  then  numbered  thirteen.  On  his
return  to  Europe  in  1769  he  became  predicator  of
Marienborn.  and  in  1784  of  Ebersdorf,  where  he
remained  till  his  death.  He  published  several
pamphlets  in  prose  and  verse,  and  "  Geschichte  der
Mission  der  Evangelischen  Bruder  auf  den  Caraibi-
schen  Inseln,  S.  Thomas.  S.  Croix,  und  S.  Jean  "
(2  vols.,  Darby,  1777).  This  is  full  of  interesting
information,  giving  the  natural  history  of  the
countries  that  were  visited  by  the  author,  and  the
history  of  the  Moravian  establishments  that  were
founded  in  the  Danish  West  Indies  from  1732  to
1768.  A  vocabulary  of  twenty  negro  dialects,
which  is  inserted  at  the  end  of  the  work,  has  proved


570


OLDHAM


OLIER  DE VERNE UIL


invaluable  to  those  scholars  that  have  studied  the
origin  of  the  negro  nations.

OLDHAM,  John,  pilgrim,  b.  in  England,  about
1600;  d.  on  Block  island.  R.  I.,  in  July.  168(5.  He
came  to  Plymouth  in  1623,  and  attempted  in  1624
to  set  up  a  separate  manner  of  worship  and  alter
the  form  of  government,  but  was  driven  out  of
the  colony,  and  went  to  Nantasket  and  afterward
to  Cape  Ann.  He  did  not  remain  long  in  either
place,  but  engaged  in  trading  between  New  Eng
land  and  Virginia.  He  was  an  enterprising  mer
chant,  purchasing  a  grant  of  the  lands  between
the  Charles  and  Saugus  rivers,  and  carrying  on  a
large  trade  with  the  Indians.  He  went  to  England
in  1628  to  lay  a  commercial  scheme  before  the
Massachusetts  company,  but  they,  fearing  that  he
would  interest  others  in  his  opinions,  refused  to
treat  with  him,  denied  his  title  to  the  land  that  he
had  purchased,  and  forbade  his  trading  for  beaver
with  the  Indians.  He  subsequently  made  Water-
town  his  residence,  and  was  elected  a  representative
in  the  general  court  in  1632,  when  the  popular
branch  was  first  instituted.  In  1633,  with  three
companions,  he  journeyed  from  Boston  to  the  Con
necticut  river,  following  the  Indian  trails  and
lodging  in  their  cabins.  He  was  re-elected  as  rep
resentative  from  Watertown  in  1634.  Cant.  Old-
ham  traded  chiefly  with  the  Narragansett  Indians.
While  visiting  Block  island  he  was  murdered  by
some  Narragansetts  that  happened  to  be  among
the  Pequots  there.  The  Indians  seized  his  vessel
and  sailed  away,  but  they  were  overtaken  by  Capt.
John  Gallop  (ij.  r.),  and  all  were  slain  except  those
who  leaped  overboard  and  one  who  was  made  a
captive.  The  murder  of  Oldham  was  a  chief  inci
dent  in  bringing  on  the  Pequot  war.

OLDHAM,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Berkeley
county,  Va.,  about  1745 ;  d.  near  the  present  site  of
Greenville,  Ohio,  4  Nov.,  1791.  He  served  as  a
captain  in  the  Continental  army,  resigned  in  1779,
and  settled  on  the  Ohio  river.  He  was  a  leader  in
the  conflicts  with  the  Indians,  joined  Gen.  Arthur
St.  Clair's  expedition  at  the  head  of  a  regiment  of
Kentucky  militia,  and  was  killed  at  the  surprise
near  the  source  of  the  Maumee  river.

OLDMIXON,  John,  English  author,  b.  in
Bridgewater,  England,  in  1673 ;  d.  in  London,  Eng
land,  9  July,  1742.  He  is  supposed  to  have  visited
this  country.  Besides  plays,  poems,  and  historical
and  critical  writings  that  display  violent  party
spirit,  he  published  "  The  British  Empire  in  Amer
ica,  Containing  the  History  of  the  Discovery,  Set
tlement,  Progress,  and  Present  State  of  the  British
Colonies  on  the  Continent  and  Islands  of  America  "
with  maps  (2  vols.,  London,  1708).

OLDS,  Gamaliel  Smith,  educator,  b.  in  Tol-
land,  Mass.,  11  Feb.,  1777;  d.  in  Circleville,  Ohio,
13  June,  1848.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in
1801,  was  tutor  there  till  1805,  and  then  profes
sor  of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  till
1808.  After  studying  theology  for  two  years  under
Dr.  Stephen  West,  at  Stockbridge,  Mas's.,  he  went
to  Andover  seminary,  and  was  graduated  with  the
first  class  in  1810.  He  was  ordained  at  Greenfield,
Mass.,  19  Nov.,  1813,  preached  there  for  three  years,
and  then  resigned  in  order  to  accept  a  professor
ship  in  Middlebury  college,  but  did  not  do  so,  ow
ing  to  a  disagreement  with  the  officers.  He  was
professor  of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy
in  the  University  of  Vermont  from  1819  till  1821,
then  in  Amherst  college  till  1825,  and  afterward
for  several  years  in  the  University  of  Georgia.  In
1841  he  settled  in  Circleville,  Ohio,  where  he
preached  frequently  till  his  death,  which  was
caused  by  a  carriage  accident.  He  published  an


"Inaugural  Oration"  (1806);  "The  Substance  of
Several  Sermons  on  Episcopacy  and  Presbyterian
Parity  "  (1818);  and  ''Statement  of  Facts  Relative
to  the  Appointment  to  the  Office  of  Professor  of
Chemistry  in  Middlebury  College"  (1818).

O'LEARY,  Cornelius  M.,  educator,  b.  in  Ire
land  about  1840.  He  was  brought  to  the  United
States  at  an  early  age,  and  received  his  education
in  Montreal,  Canada,  at  Fordham,  N.  Y.,  and  in  the
University  of  Notre  Dame  du  Lac.  I  ml.  He  was
graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni
versity  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1864,  became
professor  of  logic  and  metaphysics,  and  lecturer  on
physiology  in  Manhattan  college,  and  afterward
filled  the  chair  of  Greek  and  Latin,  besides  lec
turing  on  various  scientific  subjects.  He  has  writ
ten  much  on  philosophical,  economical,  and  scien
tific  topics  for  the  "  International  Review,"  the
"  Catholic  Quarterly."  and  other  periodicals,  lec
tured  before  Roman  Catholic  societies,  and  read
many  papers  at  the  annual  meetings  of  the  New
York  state  university  convocation.

OLID,  Cristobal  de  (o-leed'),  Spanish  adventu
rer,  b.  in  Saragossa  in  1492  ;  d.  in  Naco,  Honduras
in  1542.  He  was  brought  up  in  the  house  of  Diego
Velasquez,  governor  of  Cuba,  and  was  sent  by  him
in  1518  to  the  relief  of  Juan  de  Grijalva,  but,  hurri
canes  having  destroyed  his  ship,  he  returned  to
Cuba,  and  in  the  following  December  joined  in
Trinidad  Hernan  Cortes,  with  whom  he  sailed  on
10  Jan.,  1519.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  con
quest  of  New  Spain,  and  maintained  Cortes's  au
thority  over  the  soldiers  at  the  time  of  the  expedi
tion  of  Panfilo  de  Narvaez.  He  was  among  the
Spaniards  that  escaped  from  Mexico  in  the  "  Noche
triste,"  1  July,  1520,  and  fought  gallantly  in  the
battle  of  Otumba  on  8  July.  During  the  siege  of
Mexico  he  had  a  quarrel  with  Pedro  de  Alvarado,
and  refused  to  assist  him  in  the  attack  on  the
causeway  of  the  city,  thus  defeating  the  Spanish.
He  then  retired  to  Coyohuacan,  but  through  the
entreaties  of  Cortes  returned  to  assist  him  in  the
siege  of  Mexico.  In  1523  Cortes  sent  him  to  con
quer  Honduras,  but,  having  entered  the  harbor  of
Havana  in  quest  of  supplies  and  horses,  he  resolved,
by  the  suggestion  of  Velasquez,  to  proclaim  his  in
dependence.  Landing  at  Puerto  Caballos,  he  con
quered  Honduras  after  a  short  campaign,  and
founded,  on  3  May,  1524,  the  establishment  of  Tri-
unfo  de  la  Cruz.  Cortes,  being  informed  of  his
defection,  sent  Francisco  Las  Casas  against  him
with  two  vessels.  Olid  was  defeated,  but  a  storm
destroyed  Las  Casas's  vessels,  and  a  part  of  the
latter's  soldiers  enlisted  with  the  former.  But  Las
Casas  finally  captured  Olid  by  surprise,  and  had
him  beheaded  at  Naco,  according  to  the  version  of
Bernal  Diaz  del  Castillo,  one  of  Olid's  companions,
in  his  "  Historia  verdadera  de  la  conquista  de  la
Nueva  Espafia,"  but  Herrcra,  in  his  "  Novus  orbis,"
asserts  that  Gil  Gonzalez  de  Avila,  who  with  an
other  expedition  experienced  the  same  fate  as  Las
Casas,  excited,  together  with  the  latter,  a  rebellion
among  the  soldiers,  and  they  murdered  Olid.

OLIER  DE  VERNEUIL,  Jean  Jacques,
French  clergyman,  b.  in  Paris,  20  Sept.,  1608;  d.
there,  2  April,  1657.  He  was  the  second  son  of
Jacques  Olier,  one  of  the  secretaries  to  the  king's
council,  and  in  his  youth  was  given  the  abbey  of
Pibrac,  in  Auvergne.  Here  he  sheltered  Vincent
de  Paul,  and,  at  the  latter's  suggestion,  he  engaged
in  missionary  work  in  Auvergne.  In  1640  he  re
fused  the  bishopric  of  Chalons-sur-Saone,  but  two
years  later  he  accepted  the  appointment  of  vicar
of  the  Saint  Sulpice  parish  in  Paris,  which  he
thoroughly  reformed,  founding  in  1645  the  famous


OLIN


OLIN


571


Saint  Snlpice  seminary  for  the  training  of  theo
logical  students.  In  1055  he  drew  the  plan  and
laid  the  foundation  of  the  present  magnificent
church  of  Saint  Sulpice.  In  1(5:56  he  obtained
from  Richelieu  permission  to  found  with  five  asso
ciates  the  Company  of  Montreal  for  the  coloniza
tion  of  that  island,  which  he  purchased  in  1040  for
20,000  livres,  or  about  $40,000.  Toward  the  close
of  that  year  he  sent  to  New  Prance  an  expedition
of  eight  priests  and  ninety  laborers  and  mechan
ics  ;  but  they  found  the  island  deserted,  and  several,
complaining  that  they  had  been  deceived  as  to  the
condition  of  the  country,  returned  immediately  to
France.  Olier  continued  to  the  end  of  his  life  to
give  attention  to  the  missions  of  Canada,  and
yearly  sent  parties  of  priests  and  laborers.  He  ob
tained  large  sums  from  the  merchants  of  Paris,
which  he  spent  in  clearing  land  around  Montreal,
building  churches,  schools,  convents,  hospitals,  and
seminaries,  some  of  which  still  exist.  Several  ac
counts  of  Olier's  life  have  been  published.  The
most  recent  and  complete  is  by  the  Abbe  Faillon,
''  La  vie  et  les  ceuvres  de  Jean  Jaco£ues  Olier  de
Verneuil,  cure  de  la  paroisse  de  Saint  Sulpice,
1643-1053"  (Paris,  1855).  Olier  published  several
works  upon  religious  subjects,  including  "  Le
catht'chisme  du  chretien  pour  la  vie  interieure  "
(1045).  His  letters,  which  contain  a  narrative  of
the  establishments  that  were  founded  in  Canada
by  the  missionaries  of  the  Congregation  of  Saint
Sulpice,  were  afterward  collected  in  a  volume  and
published  under  the  title  "  Lettres  et  correspon-
dance  du  Pere  Olier  de  Verneuil  sur  les  etablisse-
ments  de  la  foi  dans  la  Nouvelle  France  "  (1074).

OLIN,  Gideon,  member  of  congress,  b.  in  Rhode
Island  about  1750;  d.  in  Shaftesbury,  Vt.,  6  Aug.,

1833.  He  settled  in  Shaftesbury,  took  an  active
part  in  the  movement  to  secure  an  independent
state  government,  and  after  the  admission  of  Ver
mont  to  the  Union  was  elected  to  the  legislature
and  chosen  speaker  of  the  house  of  representatives.
Subsequently  he  was  judge  of  the  county  court,
and  was  elected  to  congress  for  two  successive
terms,  serving  from  17  Oct.,  1803,  till  3  March,
1807. — His  son,  Abram Baldwin, jurist,  b.  in
Shaftesbury,  Vt.,  in  1808 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,
7  July,  1879,  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1835,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Troy,
X.  Y.,  in  1838,  and  for  three  years  was  recorder  of
that  city. He  practised  in  Troy  until  he  was  elect
ed  as  a  Republican  to  congress,  and  took  his  seat,
7  Dec.,  1857. He  was  twice  re-elected,  serving  till
3  March,  1803. In  that  year  he  was  appointed  a
judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  District  of  Co
lumbia. He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Williams  in  1805. — Gideon's  nephew,  Henry,  jurist,
b.  in  Rhode  Island  in  1707;  d.  in  Salisbury,  Vt.,  in
1837, was brought up in Addison county  as  a
farmer. He  was  sent  to  the  legislature  in  1799,
and  was  a  member  of  the  house  of  repi'esentatives,
except  for  four  years,  until  1835,  and  of  the  Consti
tutional  conventions  of  1814.  1833,  and  1838. He
was  associate  judge  of  the  Addison  county  court  in
1801-'6,  and  chief  judge  in  1807,  and  from  1810  till

1834.  He,  was  elected  to  congress  to  fill  a  vacan
cy,  sitting  from  13  Dec.,  1834,  till  3  March,  1825.
In  1827-'9  he  was lieutenant-governor. — Henry's
son,  Stephen,  clergyman,  b.  in  Leicester,  Vt.,  2
March,  1797 ;  d.  in  Middletown,  Conn.,  16  Aug.,
1851,  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in  1820. He
taught  for  three  years  in  Abbeville  district,  S.  C.,
and became while there a Methodist preacher,
joined  the  South  Carolina  conference  in  January,
1824,  and  was  stationed  at  Charleston. He  became
known  at  once  as  one  of  the  most  powerful  and


fervent  preachers  in  the  denomination,  but  after
six  months  of  laborious  service  his  health  failed.
The  "  Wesleyan  Journal  "  was  established  for  him
in  Charleston  in  October,  1825,  but  he  was  not  able
to  assume  the  edito
rial  management.  He
was  ordained  as  dea
con  on  13  Jan.,  1826,
at  Milledgeville,  Ga.,
and  on  1  Jan.,  1827,
became  professor  of
belles-lettres  in  the
University  of  Geor
gia,  and  while  there
preached  frequently
and  took  part  in  re
vivals,  being  ordained
as  elder  on  20  Nov.,
1828.  In  March,  1834,
he  was  inaugurated  as
president  of  Randolph
Macon  college,  a  Met  h-
odist  institution  that
had  been  recently  es
tablished  in  Mecklen
burg  county,  Va.,  where  he  took  charge  of  the  de
partment  of  mental  and  moral  science,  belles-lettres,
and  political  philosophy.  In  1832  he  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Middlebury  college,  and  in
1834  from  the  University  of  Alabama  and  Wesley
an  university.  In  the  spring  of  1837  he  was  forced
by  infirm  health  to  take  leave  of  the  college,  which
had  prospered  greatly  under  his  management.  He
spent  a  year  in  Paris,  afterward  some  time  in  Italy,
and  then  travelled  through  Europe,  Egypt,  and
the  Holy  Land,  returning  to  the  United  States  in
1840.  He  had  been  elected  president  of  Wesleyan
university  in  1839,  but  resigned  in  favor  of  Rev.
Dr.  Nathan  Bangs,  who  in  1842  retired  in  his
favor.  He  introduced  a  stringent  course  of  disci
pline,  restored  a  religious  tone  to  the  college,  and
secured  endowments.  Dr.  Olin  took  an  active  part
in  the  debates  of  the  general  conference  of  1844,
supporting  the  resolution  that  called  upon  his
friend,  Bishop  James  0.  Andrew,  to  desist  from
the  exercise  of  his  office  while  he  was  connected
with  slavery.  He  was  strongly  censured  for  this
action  by  many  southerners,  who  recalled  the  fact
that  he  had  once  stood  in  the  same  position  as
Bishop  Andrew,  for  his  first  wife  was  an  owner  of
slaves.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Yale  in  1845.  He  published  "  Travels  in  Egypt,
Arabia  Petrasa,  and  the  Holy  Land  "  (New  York,
1843).  His  two  only  baccalaureate  sermons  at
Middletown  were  published  soon  after  they  were
delivered  (1846  and  1851),  and  afterward  in  a  sin
gle  volume  entitled  "  Youthful  Piety  "  (1853).  His
sermons,  sketches,  lectures,  and  addresses  were
printed  under  the  title  of  "  The  Works  of  Stephen
Olin  "  (1853).  A  book  of  travel  entitled  "  Greece
and  the  Golden  Horn  "  was  issued  posthumously,
with  'an  introduction  by  Rev.  John  McClintock
(1854),  and  later  a  work  called  "  College  Life,  its
Theory  and  Practice"  (1867).  See  "Life  and  Let
ters  of  Stephen  Olin"  (New  York,  1853).— Ste
phen's  wife,  Julia  Matilda,  author,  b.  in  New
York  city,  14  Dee.,  1814;  d.  there,  1  May,  1879,
was  a  daughter  of  Judge  James  Lynch,  of  New
York,  and  married  Dr.  Olin  in  October,  1843.  She
had  been  a  communicant  of  the  Protestant  Episco
pal  church  from  her  youth,  but  united  with  the
Methodist  church  after  her  marriage,  and  thence
forth  took  an  active  interest  in  missionary  and
Sunday-school  work.  Mrs.  Olin  founded  Hillside
chapel  in  1855,  near  her  summer  home  at  Rhine-


572


OLINDA


OLIVARES


beck,  N.  Y.,  was  secretary  of  the  New  York  fe
male  Bible  society  from  1854,  and  from  its  origin
in  1809  was  president  of  the  New  York  branch  of
the  Woman's  foreign  missionary  society.  She  con
tributed  to  the  "  Methodist  Quarterly  Review  "  and
other  denominational  publications,  edited  Dr.
Olin's  "  Works  "  and  his  "  Greece  and  the  Golden
Horn,"  the  proceeds  of  which  were  given  for  a
prize  fund  in  Wesleyan  university,  and  wrote  his
"  Life."  She  published  for  the  benefit  of  the  chapel
at  Rhinebeck  a  book  of  poetical  selections  called
"  Hillside  Flowers,"  and  was  the  author  of  "  Words
of  the  Wise"  (New  York,  1851);  "A  String  of
Pearls  "(1855),  containing  scripture  texts  and  illus
trations;  Sunday-school  stories  entitled  "Four
Days  in  July  "  (1855) ;  "A  Winter  at  Woodlawn"
(1856);  "  What  Norman  Saw  in  the  West"  (1859) ;
and  "  Hawk  Hollow  Stories"  (1863);  and  books  for
Sunday-school  instruction  entitled  "Curious  and
Useful' Questions  on  the  Bible"  (1849,  1851.  1861);
a  volume  of  biographical  sketches  of  eminent  Chris
tian  women  entitled  "  The  Perfect  Light,  or  Seven
Hues  of  Christian  Character "  (1865);  "Questions
on  Lessons'';  and  "Questions  on  the  Natural  His
tory  of  the  Bible  "  (1865).

OLINDA,  Pedro  de  Aranjo  Lima  (o-leen-
dah).  Marquis  of,  Brazilian  statesman,  b.  in  Antas,
province  of  Pernambuco,  23  Dec.,  1793:  d.  in  Rio
Janeiro,  7  June,  1870.  In  1813  he  went  to  Coim-
bra  to  complete  his  studies,  and  in  1819  he  was
graduated  there  as  doctor  of  canonical  law.  He
returned  to  Brazil  in  1820,  and  was  appointed
"  ouvidor "  of  Paracatu,  but  he  had  scarcely  been
installed  when  he  was  elected,  in  1821,  deputy  to
the  constituent  cortes  of  Lisbon,  where,  together
with  the  other  Brazilian  deputies,  he  signed  the
constitution,  but  vainly  tried  to  obtain  recognition
for  the  claims  of  equality  of  the  American  prov
inces.  After  the  declaration  of  Brazilian  independ
ence  in  1822  he  returned  to  his  country,  and  was
elected  deputy  to  the  constituent  assembly  that
met  in  Rio  Janeiro  on  3  May,  1823.  After  the  dis
solution  of  that  assembly  he  occupied  for  a  few
days  the  ministry  of  state,  and  was  elected  deputy
to  the  general  assembly  for  Pernambuco,  in  which
body  he  served  till  1837,  several  times  occupying
the  presidential  chair.  During  that  time  he  formed
part  of  the  so:called  ministry  of  forty  days,  from
3  Aug.  to  13  Sept.,  1832,  as 'secretary  for  justice
and  foreign  relations.  On  5  Sept.,  1837,  he  was
elected  senator,  but  on  the  18th  of  the  same
month  he  was  called  by  the  regent,  Diego  Antonio
Feijo,  to  take  the  portfolio  of  state,  and  next  day,
on  Feijo's  resignation,  he  was,  according  to  the  con
stitution,  declared  provisional  regent.  During  his
regency  there  was  a  republican  uprising  in  Bahia
and  Maranhiio,  but  he  suppressed  it  by  energetic
measures.  When,  in  1840,  the  Liberal  party  pro
posed  the  declaration  of  the  emperor's  majority,
before  the  age  that  was  authorized  by  the  constitu
tion,  Lima  was  induced  by  the  chiefs  of  the  Con
servative  party  to  oppose  the  motion  vigorously,
and  when  the  majority  of  the  chambers  declared
for  the  proposition,  he  dissolved  the  legislative
bodies  by  a  decree  of  22  July.  This  brought  about
a  popular  reaction,  the  result  of  which  was  that
the  Marquis  of  Olinda  was  deposed,  and  Pedro
II.,  being  proclaimed  of  age,  assumed  the  govern
ment.  From  29  Sept.,  1848,  till  8  Oct.,  1849,  Lima
occupied  the  portfolio  of  foreign  affairs  and  the
presidency  of  the  council  of  ministers.  He  was
again  called  twice  to  organize  a  cabinet,  on  4  May,
1857,  at  the  death  of  the  Marquis  of  Parana,  and
on  30  May,  1862,  and  in  the  latter  he  took  the  port
folio  of  state,  but  he  soon  retired  to  private  life.


OLIPHANT,  Laurence,  English  author,  b.  in
1829.  After  receiving  his  education  in  England,
he  took  part  in  the  Italian  revolution,  went  to  Cey
lon,  where  his  father  was  chief  justice,  there  met
Jung  Bahadoor.  the  Nepaulese  ambassador,  accom
panied  him  to  Katmandu,  and  on  his  return  pub
lished  a  narrative  of  the  journey  (London,  1852).
He  prepared  himself  for  the  bar  at  the  University
of  Edinburgh,  then  travelled  in  Russia  in  1852,  pub
lishing  an  account  of  the  tour  (1853),  and  soon  af
terward  became  private  secretary  to  Lord  Elgin,
governor- general  of  Canada.  He  was  made  civil
secretary  and  superintendent  of  Indian  affairs,  and
secured  an  important  compact  with  the  Indians.
He  accompanied  Lord  Elgin  to  Washington,  assist
ed  in  the  negotiation  of  the  reciprocity  of  trade
and  fisheries  treaty  of  5  June,  1854,  travelled
through  the  southern  states,  where  he  made  many
friends,  and  at  the  instance  of  Pierre  Soule  joined
an  expedition  tore-enforce  William  Walker  in  Nica
ragua,  but  was  arrested  at  the  mouth  of  the  San
Juan  river  by  the  English  and  taken  on  board  their
fleet,  the  commander  of  which  was  his  cousin.  He
returned  to  Europe,  published  an  anonymous
pamphlet  recommending  a  campaign  against  Rus
sia  in  the  Trans-Caucasus,  and  accompanied  Omer
Pasha's  army  as  a  correspondent,  describing  the
operations  in  a  volume  entitled  "  The  Trans-Cau
casian  Campaign  of  Omer  Pasha"  (1856).  lu  1857
he  went  with  Lord  Elgin,  as  his  private  secretary,
to  China,  and  on  his  return  published  a  narrative
of  the  mission  (London,  1860).  He  was  charge
d'affaires  in  Japan  in  1861,  and  while  there  was  at
tacked  and  severely  wounded  by  persons  that  were
hostile  to  the  Europeans.  He  was  a  member  of
parliament  in  1865-'8,  but  resigned  in  order  to
join  the  spiritualistic  society  called  the  Brother
hood  of  the  New  Life,  at  Portland,  Chautauqiiaco..
N.  Y.  He  was  a  member  of  that  community  for
many  years,  and  after  the  departure  of  Thomas  L.
Harris  he  was  its  leader  and  the  proprietor  of  its
lands.  In  1873-'5  he  was  the  American  manager
of  the  interests  of  the  direct  cable  company.  He
afterward  returned  to  England  and  interested  him
self  in  planting  Hebrew  colonies  in  Palestine.
Among  his  published  works  are  "  Minnesota,  or
the  Far  West,"  a  narrative  of  his  travels  in  Canada
and  the  United  States  (London,  1855) ;  "  Patriots
and  Filibusters,  or  Incidents  of  Political  and  Ex
ploratory  Travel  "  (1861) ;  "The  Land  of  Gilead  "
(1881) ;  and  "  Episodes  in  a  Life  of  Adventure,  or
Moss  from  a  Rolling  Stone"  (1886).  He  is  the  re
puted  author  of  "  The  Tender  Recollections  of
Irene  Macgillicuddy,"  a  satire  on  American  society,
originally  published  in  "  Blackwood's  Magazine,"
and  afterward  in  book-form  (New  York,  1878).

OLIVA,  Anello  (o-lee'-vah),  Italian  missionary,
b.  in  Naples,  Italy,  in  1593 ;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,  in
1642.  He  was  sent  to  Peru,  where  he  labored
successfully  for  the  conversion  of  the  Indians,  and
was  also  rector  of  several  Jesuit  colleges.  His
works  are  "  Catalogo  de  algunos  varones  ilustres
in  santidad  en  la  provincia  del  Peru  de  la  com-
pafiia  de  Jesus  "  (Seville,  1632)  and  "  Libro  Primero
y  introduccion  a  las  vidas  de  los  varones  ilustres
de  la  compania  de  Jesus  de  la  Provincia  del  Peru  "
(Naples).  The  latter  is  the  first  volume  of  a  work,
the  manuscript  of  which  was  sent  to  Spain.

OLIVARES,  Miguel  de  (o-lee-vah'-res),  Chili
an  author,  b.  in  Chilian  in  1675  ;  d.  in  Imola,  Italy,
about  1768.  He  entered  the  Jesuit  society,  be
came  a  missionary,  and  as  such  began  about  1701
to  travel  through  the  territories  of  Quillota,  Pol-
paico,  Tiltil,  Limache,  and  others.  From  1712  till
1720  he  directed  the  missions  of  Nahuelhuapi  and


OLIVE


OLIVER


573


Calubco,  and  in  1730  he  was  in  Concepcion  during
the  earthquake  of  July,  which  destroyed  that  city.
His  frequent  voyages  gave  him  an  opportunity  to
study  the  archives  of  the  company  of  Jesus,  and
about  1736,  in  Santiago,  he  began  to  compile  his
history.  From  1740  till  1758  he  served  in  the  mis
sions  of  Araucania,  where  he  learned  the  language
of  the  Indians.  He  intended  to  write  a  complete
history  of  Chili,  when  a  decree  of  Charles  III.  ex
iled  the  Jesuits,  and.  notwithstanding  his  advanced
age,  Olivares  had  to  leave  the  country.  In  Lima,
by  order  of  the  viceroy,  Manuel  de  Amat,  he  was
robbed  of  his  manuscripts,  and  the  viceroy's  secre
tary,  Jose  Perfecto  Salas.  obtained  the  second  part
of- the  "Historia  militar,  civil  y  sagrada  de  lo  acae-
cido  en  la  conquista  y  paciflcacion  del  Reino  de
Chile."  From  Imola  he  tried  to  recover  his  manu
scripts,  and  the  king  himself  ordered  the  president
of  Chili  to  send  them  to  Spain,  which  was  done  by
Ambrosio  O'lliggins  (q.  i'.),  but  Olivares  died  before
their  arrival  in  Madrid.  A  complete  edition  of  the
work  and  a  '•  Historia  de  la  Compania  de  Jesus  en
Chile  1593-1736,"  with  notes  by  the  Chilian  his
torian  Barros  Arana,  appeared  in  Santiago  in  1870.

OLIVE,  Charles,  surnamed  1'  (o-leeve),  French
buccaneer,  b.  in  Dieppe  about  1630 ;  d.  in  Santo
Domingo  in  1673.  He  came  in  his  youth  to  Tor-
tuga  as  an  "engage,"  and  after  serving  three  years
in  that  capacity  was  received  among  the  bucca
neers.  He  took  part  in  the  expedition  against
Panama  under  Henry  Morgan  in  1671,  and  com
manded  several  others  in  association  with  various
chiefs,  but  was  captured  by  Spanish  soldiers  in  the
interior  of  Santo  Domingo,  and  carried  to  the  capi
tal.  During  their  confinement  in  the  dungeon  he
and  his  companions  contracted  yellow  fever.  The
day  set  for  their  execution  having  arrived,  they
were  carried  to  a  place  outside  the  city  to  be  be
headed,  and  released  at  the  last  moment  by  the
sudden  attack  of  some  fellow-buccaneers ;  but  the
latter,  on  being  told  by  them  of  their  frightful
disease,  fled  in  terror.  The  captives  soon  died  in
chains  on  the  place  of  execution,  as  nobody  dared
to  touch  them,  and  the  epidemic,  spreading,  de
vastated  the  city.  The  memory  of  this  event  lived
long  in  the  colonies,  and  painters  have  reproduced
it  on  canvas.  Novelists  also  have  taken  it  as  a
theme,  among  them  Emmanuel  Gonzales  in  his
"  Brethren  of  the  Coast."  L'Olive  was  said  by
some  to  be  the  son  of  a  nobleman,  either  the  Count
de  Casse-Brissac  or  the  Marquis  de  Rochefort,  who
are  believed  to  have  joined  the  buccaneers — one
thi'ough  disappointment  in  love,  and  the  other  to
escape  capital  punishment  for  a  crime.

OLIVE1RA,  Candido  Baptista  de  (o-lee-vay  -
e-rah),  Brazilian  statesman,  b.  in  Porto  Alegre,  15
Feb..  1801 ;  d.  at  sea,  26  May,  1865.  He  studied  in
the  Seminary  of  Rio  Janeiro  in  1817-'20,  but,  not
feeling  inclined  to  enter  the  priesthood,  went  in
the  latter  year  to  Coimbra,  where  he  was  graduated
in  mathematics  in  1824.  He  then  went  to  Lisbon,
and  in  1825  to  Paris  to  attend  the  polytechnic
school,  where  he  gained  the  friendship  of  Arago.
On  his  return  to  Rio  Janeiro  in  1827  he  was  ap
pointed  teacher  at  the  military  academy,  and  be
came  shortly  afterward  professor  of  mechanics.  In
1830  he  was  elected  deputy  to  the  general  assembly,
and  in  1831  he  was  appointed  inspector-general  of
the  national  treasury.  He  reformed  that  depart
ment  and  its  dependencies,  introducing  the  use  of
stereometry,  till  then  unknown  in  the  custom
house,  a  new  formula  for  measuring  vessels  for  the
payment  of  anchorage  dues,  and  systematized
weights  and  measures.  In  1836  he  was  appointed
minister  resident  in  Turin,  but  remained  only  a


few  months,  and  in  1837  returned  to  his  place  as
inspector  of  the  treasury.  In  April,  1839,  he  was
called  to  take  the  portfolio  of  the  treasury  and
foreign  relations,  and  in  1840  and  1843  he  was  sent
on  diplomatic  missions  to  St.  Petersburg  and  Vien
na.  In  1844  he  was  recalled,  and  resumed  his  place
in  the  military  academy,  and  from  22  May,  1847,
to  March,  1848,  he  was  secretary  of  the  navy,
where  he  introduced  many  reforms  and  organized
the  corps  of  marines.  During  1848-'9  he  was  com
missioned  to  execute  a  topographical  exploration
of  the  southern  frontier  of  the  empire,  and  in  1851
he  was  appointed  director  of  the  Botanical  garden
of  Rio  Janeiro,  and  was  elected  vice-president  of
the  Historical  and  geographical  society  of  Brazil.
He  afterward  sailed  for  Europe  in  quest  of  health,
and  died  on  board  the  French  mail-steamer  before
arriving  in  Bahia.  He  wrote  "  Systema  Financial
do  Brazil"  (St.  Petersburg,  1842)."

OLIVEIRA,  Manoel  Antonio  Vital  de,  Bra
zilian  naval  officer,  b.  in  Recife,  28  Sept.,  1829 ;
d.  in  Paraguay,  2  Feb..  1867.  He  entered  the
naval  school  at  the  age  of  fourteen,  soon  afterward
became  midshipman,  and  as  sub-lieutenant  on  board
the  "Don  Affonso"  took  part  in  the  fight  of  2
Feb.,  1849,  at  Recife,  which  had  been  attacked  by
insurgents.  In  1854  he  was  promoted  lieutenant,
and  drew  a  chart  of  the  coast  of  Brazil  between
Petimbu  and  Sao  Bento,  accompanying  it  with  a
report.  He  also  made  a  plan  of  the  Shallows  das
Rosas,  near  the  island  of  Fernando  de  Noronha,
and  of  the  two  lakes  in  the  province  of  Alagoas,
which  he  surveyed  to  establish  steam  navigation.
He  published  in  1862  five  hydrographic  charts
from  Mossoro  river,  in  the  province  of  Rio  Grande
do  Xorte,  to  Sao  Francisco  river,  and  he  also  ex
amined  many  other  points  on  the  south  coast.
After  this  he  began  to  prepare  a  general  chart  of
the  coast  of  Brazil,  and  for  upward  of  two  years
he  continued  this  work,  which,  unfortunately,  he
did  not  finish.  In  1866  he  was  sent  to  France  to
bring  out  the  iron-clad  "  Nemesis,"  which  he  ac
complished  under  very  difficult  circumstances.  He
joined  the  Brazilian  fleet,  which,  on  2  Feb.,  1867,
attacked  the  fortress  of  Curupaity  and  penetrated
into  Lake  Piris.  Oliveira  led  one  division  in  the
"  Silvado,"  and  while  standing  on  the  bridge  was
killed  by  a  cannon-ball.

OLIVEIRA,  Manoel  Botelho  de,  Brazilian
poet,  b.  in  Bahia  in  1636;  d.  in  1711.  Little  is
known  of  his  life  except,  that  he  was  a  nobleman
of  the  royal  household,  and  graduated  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Coimbra.  In  1705  a  quarto  volume  of
340  pages  was  published  in  Lisbon  containing  the
poetical  works  of  Oliveira,  with  the  title  "  Musica
do  Parnaso,  divide  em  quatro  coros  de  rimas  por-
tuguezas,  castelhanas,  italianas  e  latinas,  con  seu
descante  comico  reduzido  em  duas  comedias."
This  is  a  rare  work  and  but  little  known,  and  if
it  has  no  great  poetical  merit,  it  has  that  of  being
recommended  by  the  Academy  of  Lisbon,  which
declared  the  language  of  the  part  written  in  Portu
guese  to  be  classical.

OLIVER,  Andrew,  lieutenant-governor  of  Mas
sachusetts,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  28  March,  1706;
d.  there,  3  March,  1774.  His  father,  Daniel,  a
member  of  the  council,  was  a  son  of  Peter,  an
eminent  merchant,  and  grandson  of  Thomas,  an
elder  of  the  church,  who  arrived  in  Boston  in  1631.
The  son  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1724.  He
was  chosen  a  member  of  the  general  court,  and  af
terward  of  the  council.  In' 1748  he  was  sent  with
his  brother-in-law,  Gov.  Thomas  Hutchinson,  as  a
commissioner  to  the  Albany  congress  that  met  to
conclude  peace  with  the  heads  of  the  Six  Nations


574


OLIVER


OLIVER


and  arrange  a  rectification  of  the  frontier.  In  1756
he  was  appointed  secretary  of  the  province.  When
the  British  parliament  passed  the  stamp-act  he
made  himself  odious  to  the  patriotic  party  by  ac
cepting  the  office  of  dis
tributer  of  stamps.  He
was  re-elected  a  council
lor  by  a  bare  majority.
On  14  Aug.,  1765.  he  was
hanged  in  effigy  between
figures  of  Lord  Bute  and
George  Grenville,  on  the
large  elm  called  the  "  lib
erty  tree."  In  the  even
ing  the  multitude,  with
cries  of  "  Liberty,  prop
erty,  and  no  stamps!"
demolished  the  structure
that  was  building  for  a
stamp  -  office.  His  life
was  in  danger,  and  the
next  morning  he  signed
a  public  pledge  that  he
would  not  act  as  stamp-officer.  A  few  months
later  there  was  a  rumor  that  he  intended  to  en
force  the  stamp-act,  and  on  the  day  of  the  open
ing  of  parliament  the  Sons  of  Liberty  compelled
him  to  march  to  the  tree  and  there  renew  his
promise  in  a  speech,  and  take  oath  before  a  jus
tice  of  the  peace,  Richard  Dana,  that  he  would
never,  directly  or  indirectly,  take  measures  for  the
collection  of  the  stamp  duty.  In  1770  he  was  ap
pointed  lieutenant-governor.  His  letters,  with
those  of  Hutchinson  and  others,  recommending  the
despatch  of  troops  to  this  country,  and  the  crimi
nal  prosecution  of  Samuel  Adams  and  other  pa
triots,  were  shown  to  Benjamin  Franklin  (q.  v.)  in
England,  as  expressions  from  Americans  of  weight
and  station.  Party  feeling  ran  so  high  at  the  time
of  his  death  that  Hutchinson  says:  "A  large  mob
attended  upon  his  interment  and  hurrahed  at  the
entombing  of  his  body,  and  that  night  there  was
an  exhibition  at  a  public  window  of  a  coffin,  and
insignia  of  infamy." — His  brother,  Peter,  jurist,
b.  in  Boston,  Mass..  26  March,  1713  ;  d.  in  Bir
mingham,  England,  13  Oct.,  1791,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1730.  He  filled  various  offices  in
Plymouth  county  while  residing  on  his  estate  in
Middleborough.  Although  he  was  not  a  lawyer
by  profession,  he  was  made  a  justice  of  the  su
preme  court  on  14  Sept.,  1756,  and  in  1771  be
came  chief  justice.  He  was  also  one  of  the  man
damus  councillors.  Oliver  was  the  only  judge  that
refused,  in  March,  1774.  to  accept  the  pay  that  had
been  voted  by  the  legislature  in  lieu  of  a  fixed  sal
ary  of  £400  from  the  crown.  He  was  consequently
impeached  by  the  house,  and  suspended  from  his
functions  pending  the  issue  of  the  trial.  He  at
tempted  to  hold  court  under  the  protection  of  the
military,  but  the  jurors  refused  to  serve,  and  gave
as  their  reasons  that  the  chief  justice  stood  im
peached,  and  that  three  of  the  judges  had  accepted
seats  in  the  unconstitutional  new  council.  He  open
ly  sided  with  the  royalists,  defending  their  views
with  dialectic  skill  in  a  paper  called  the  "Censor."
When  the  British  troops  evacuated  Boston  he  de
parted  with  them,  and  afterward  went  to  England,
where  he  received  a  pension  from  the  treasury.  He-
was  a  writer  of  talent,  both  in  prose  and  verse,  and
fond  of  antiquarian  studies.  When  he  left  this
country  he  took  with  him  a  copy  of  the  manuscript
history  of  William  Hubbard,  and  records  and  pa
pers  that  he  had  collected  relating  to  the  settlement
of  Plymouth  colony.  The  University  of  Oxford
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  A  poem  in  Eng-


lish  blank  verse,  the  twenty-ninth  in  "  Pietas  et
Gratulatio"  (Boston.  1761).  is  ascribed  to  him  or  to
Thomas  Oliver,  lie  published  a  "Speech  on  the
Death  of  Isaac  Lathrop"  (Boston,  1750));  "Poem
on  the  Death  of  Secretary  Willard  "  (1757):  and
"Scriptural  Lexicon"  (Birmingham,  1784-'5). —
Andrew's  son.  Andrew,  jurist,  b.  in  Boston.  Mass.,
13  Nov.,  1731  ;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  in  the  beginning
of  December,  171)!),  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1749,  and  devoted  himself  to  scientific  and  literary
studies.  He  represented  Salem  in  the  general
court  in  1706,  and  before  the  Revolution  was  judge
of  the  Essex  county  court  of  common  pleas.  He
was  the  only  one  of  those  members  of  the  family
that  adhered  to  the  royalist  cause  to  remain  in  the
country  after  the  war  of  independence.  He  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  American  academy  of
arts  and  sciences,  and  a  member  of  the  American
philosophical  society,  to  the  transactions  of  which
he  contributed  papers  on  "  Lightning,"  "  Thunder
storms,"  and  "  Water-Spouts,"  and  an  account  of
a  "  Disease  Among  the  Indians"  (1764).  He  pub
lished  also  an  "  Essay  on  Comets,"  in  which  he
maintained  that  they  were  habitable  worlds  (Salem,
1772). — Another  son,  William  Sandford,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  in  1748;  d.  in  St.  John,  New  Bruns
wick,  in  1813,  went  with  the  British  army  to  Hali
fax  in  1776,  settled  at  Parr  Town  (now  St.  John),
was  appointed  in  1785  the  first  sheriff  of  St.  John,
and  held  that  office  till  1792.  and  for  the  second
!  time  from  1797  till  his  death,  at  which  time  he  was
!  also  treasurer  of  the  county. — Peter's  son.  Peter,
i  physician,  b.  in  Middleborough,  Mass.,  in  1741  ;  d.
i  ni  "Shrewsbury,  England,  30  July,  1822,  was  gradu-
j  ated  at  Harvard  in  1761.  He  signed  the  address
|  to  Gen.  Gage,  and  was  banished  in  1778.  In  1814
the  Massachusetts  historical  society  requested  per
mission  to  transcribe  from  his  father's  perfect
manuscript  copy  of  Hubbard's  "History  of  New
England"  the  portions  missing  in  the  American
manuscript,  but  he  refused,  and  the  work  was  pub
lished  in  a  mutilated  form  (Boston.  1815).  (See
HrBBARD,  THOMAS.)  His  wife  was  Sallie,  the
eldest  daughter  of  Gov.  Thomas  Hutchinson. — The
second  Andrew's  grandson,  Daniel,  b.  in  Marble-
head,  Mass.,  9  Sept.,  1787;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
1  June,  1842,  was  the  son  of  Rev.  Thomas  Fitch
Oliver.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1806,
and  at  the  medical  department  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1810.  He  practised  for  many  vears
at  Salem,  Mass.,  lectured  on  chemistry  at  Dart
mouth  in  1815-'6,  and  in  1820  removed  to  Han
over,  N.  II.,  having  been  appointed  professor  of  the
theory  and  practice  of  medicine,  and  of  materia
medica  and  therapeutics.  In  1827-'8  he  lectured
on  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine  at  Bow-
doin.  In  1828  he  took  the  chair  also  of  intellectual
philosophy  at  Dartmouth.  He  resigned  his  pro
fessorships  in  that  college  in  1837,  and  in  1841-'2
was  a  professor  in  the  medical  college  at  Cincin
nati,  Ohio.  Dr.  Oliver  was  a  man  of  varied  erudi
tion,  familiar  with  French  and  German,  as  well  as
the  classical  languages.  He  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Hobarf  in  1838.  His  only  important
publication  was  "  First  Lines  of  Physiology  "  (Bos
ton,  1835). — Daniel's  brother.  Benjamin  Lj'iide,
author,  b.  in  Marblehead,  Mass.,  in  1788;  d.  in
1843,  was  a  lawyer  and  was  also  a  noted  chess-play
er.  His  works  are  "  Hints  on  the  Pursuit  of  Hap
piness"  (Boston,  1818);  "The  Rights  of  an  Ameri-
j  can  Citizen  "  (1832) ;  "  Law  Summary  "  (2d  ed.,
I  Ilallowell,  1833) ;  "  Practical  Conveyancing."  edited
j  by  Peter  Oliver  (1838 ;  4th  ed.,  1845) :  "  Forms  of
Practice,  or  American  Precedents  in  Personal  and
i  Real  Actions  "  (1841 ;  4th  ed.,  Portland,  1874) ;  and


OLIVER


OLIVER


575


"  Forms  in  Chancery,  Admiralty,  and  Common
Law"  (184'2).— Daniel's  son.  Fitch  Edward,  phy
sician,  b.  in  Cambridge.  Mass..  25  Nov.,  1819,  was
graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1839,  and  studied  medi
cine  with  his  father,  with  Dr.  George  C.  Shattuck,
and  at  Harvard,  where  he  received  his  M.  I),  in
1843.  He  established  himself  in  practice  in  Bos
ton.  In  1800  he  assumed  the  editorship  of  the  Bos
ton  u  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal."  Inheriting
from  his  father  a  taste  for  music,  he  has  published
some  musical  works.  He  was  one  of  the  translators
of  Chomel's  "  Treatise  on  General  Pathology "
(Boston,  1848),  and  published  the  "  Lynde  Diaries"
(18801. — Another  son.  Peter,  author,  b.  in  Hano
ver.  N.  II.,  in  1822  ;  d.  at  sea  in  1855,  was  educated
as  a  lawyer,  practised  in  Suffolk  county,  Mass.,  and
edited  his  uncle's  "  Practical  Conveyancing."  He
was  baptized  William  Pynchon  Oliver,  but  changed
this  name  for  the  alias  Peter  when  he  reached
manhood.  He  published  articles  in  the  Xew  York
'•  Church  Review."  Dying  while  on  a  voyage  for
his  health,  he  left  an  important  work  entitled  "  The
Puritan  Commonwealth:  an  Historical  Review  of
the  Puritan  Government  in  Massachusetts,  in  its
Civil  and  Ecclesiastical  Relations,  from  its  Rise  to
the  Abrogation  of  the  First  Charter;  together  with
some  General  Reflections  on  the  English  Colonial
Policy  and  on  the  Character  of  Puritanism,"  in
which,  with  great  learning  and  literary  skill,  he
presented  all  the  unfavorable  aspects  of  the  Puri
tan  character,  and  impugned  the  motives  and  prin
ciples,  and  criticised  the  acts  and  policy  of  the
founders  of  Xew  England.  The  book  was  brought
out  by  his  brother,  Fitch  Edward  (Boston,  1856),
and  elicited  animated  replies  from  Rev.  George  E.
Ellis,  J.  Wingate  Thornton,  and  others. — Another
son.  Andrew,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hanover,  N.  H..  in
1824,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1842.  He  stud
ied  theology,  took  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episco
pal  church,  and  was  professor  of  Greek  and  Hebrew
in  St.  Stephen's  college,  Annandale,  X.  Y.,  from
1804  till  1873,  when  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of
biblical  learning  in  the  General  theological  semi
nary,  Xew  York  city.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Hobart  in  1868,  and  from  St.  Stephen's
in  1876.  Dr.  Oliver  has  published  a  translation
of  the  "Syriac  Psalter"  (Boston,  1861).

OLIVER,  Grace  Atkinson,  author,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass..  24  Sept.,  1844.  Her  maiden  name
was  Little.  She  was  educated  in  private  schools
in  Boston,  and  married  in  1869  a  son  of  the  Rev.
George  E.  Ellis.  Her  husband  died  within  two
years,  and  in  order  to  divert  her  mind  she  began
to  contribute  to  "  Old  and  Xew."  wrote  editorial
articles  for  the  Boston  '•  Advertiser."  and  book
notices  for  various  papers,  and  contributed,  under
the  signature  of  her  deceased  husband,  John  Har
vard  Ellis,  to  the  "Galaxy,"  the  "Atlantic  Month
ly,"  and  "  Scribner's  Monthly."  Biographical
sketches  of  Dora  d'Istria  and  other  persons  were
very  favorably  received.  In  1879  she  married  Dr.
Joseph  Pearson  Oliver.  She  has  published  in  book-
form  "  Life  and  \Vorks  of  Anna  L.  Barbauld "
(Boston,  1873) ;  "Life  of  Maria  Edgeworth,"  writ
ten  with  the  aid  of  family  papers  and  personal
reminiscences  that  were  afforded  her  by  members
of  Miss  Edgeworth's  family  when  she  visited  Eng
land  in  1874  (1882) ;  "  Memoirs  of  Ann  and  Jane
Taylor,  with  Selections  from  their  Works  "  (1883) :
and  "  Arthur  Penrhyn  Stanley,  his  Life,  Work,  and
Teachings"  (1885).

OLIVER,  Henry  Keml)le,  musician,  b.  in  Bev
erly,  Mass.,  24  Nov.,  1800 :  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  10
Aug.,  1885.  He  began  his  musical  career  as  a  boy
soprano  in  the  choir  of  Park  street  church,  Boston,


in  1810.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1818
and  taught  till  1844.  He  was  adjutant-general  of
Massachusetts  militia  from  1844  till  1848,  then
agent  for  a  manufacturing  company  of  Lawrence,
Mass.,  till  1858.  mayor  of  that  city  in  1859.  and
from  1861  till  1865  treasurer  of  the  state  of  Massa
chusetts.  He  returned  to  Salem,  Avas  elected  mayor
of  that  city,  and  in  1880  removed  to  Boston.
While  a  teacher  in  Salem  and  during  his  resi
dence  in  Lawrence  he  was  organist  and  director
of  the  choirs  in  various  churches.  He  organized
a  Mozart  association,  which  gave  concerts  in
1826-'7,  and  in  1832  a  glee  club  that  existed  for
twenty  years.  In  1832  he  composed  a  melody  that
Lowell  Mason  in  1835  published  in  his  "  Boston
Academy  Collection  "  under  the  name  of  "  Federal
Street."  It  became  very  popular  as  a  hymn-tune,
and  was  followed  by  "  Harmony  Grove,"  "  Morn
ing,"  "  Walnut  Grove,"  "  Elkton,"  "  Vesper,"  "  Hud
son."  "  Beacon  Street,"  and  other  sacred  airs,  to
gether  with  motets,  many  chants,  and  a  Te  Deum.
"  Merton,"  one  of  his  most  widely  sung  melodies,
was  composed  during  the  preaching  of  the  sermon
and  rendered  at  its  close  by  his  choir  in  the  Xorth
church  of  Salem  in  1843.  At  the  World's  peace
jubilee  in  Boston,  25  June,  1872,  he  conducted  a
chorus  of  20,000  voices  in  his  choral  "Federal
Street,"  set  to  his  own  words,  '•  Hail,  Gentle  Peace."
He  received  the  degree  of  Mus.  D.  from  Dart
mouth  in  1883.  He  published  the  "  Xational
Lyre  "  in  conjunction  with  Samuel  P.  Tuckerman
(Boston,  1849).  and  two  volumes  of  his  own  com
positions,  entitled  "  Collection  of  Church  Music  "
(I860)  and  "  Original  Hymn-Tunes  "  (1875) ;  also
lectures  on  the  monitorial  system  and  other  educa
tional  topics,  and  an  "Address  at  the  Dedication  of
the  Broad  Street  School "  (Salem,  1856).

OLIVER.  James  Edward,  mathematician,  b.
in  Portland,  Me.,  27  July,  1829.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1849,  and  at  once  appointed  assistant
in  the  office  of  the  "American  Xautical  Almanac."
In  1871  he  became  assistant  professor  of  mathe
matics  at  Cornell,  and  two  years  later  he  was  given
full  possession  of  the  chair."  Prof.  Oliver  has  been
elected  to  membership  in  the  American  academy
of  arts  and  sciences,  in  the  American  philosophical
society,  and  in  1872  was  chosen  to  the  Xational
academy  of  sciences.  He  has  published  "  A  Trea
tise  on  Trigonometry  "  (Xew  York,  1886).

OLIVER,  John  Morrison,  soldier,  b.  in  Penn
Yan,  X.  Y.,  in  September,  1827;  d.  in  Washington,
D,  C.,  30  March,  1872.  He  joined  the  Xational
army  as  1st  lieutenant  of  the  4th  Michigan  infantry
in  May,  1861,  became  colonel  of  the  15th  Michigan
infantry  in  January.  1862,  and  served  under  Gen.
Sherman  in  his  western  campaigns.  At  Fort  Mc
Allister  he  led  the  attack,  and  in  January,  1865,
was  commissioned  brigadier-general.  He  received
the  brevet  of  major-general  in  March,  1865,  and
in  1869  was  appointed  associate  judge  of  the  Dis
trict  of  Columbia,  but  declined.

OLIVER,  Paul  Ambrose,  manufacturer,  b.  on
shipboard  in  the  English  channel.  18  July,  1830.
He  was  educated  in  Germany,  settled  in  Xew  York,
and  engaged  first  in  the  shipping  business,  and
later  in  the  cotton  trade  in  that  city  and  Xew
Orleans.  In  February,  1862,  he  entered  the  army
as  2d  lieutenant  in  the  12th  Xew  York  volunteers,
and  in  May  was  promoted  to  1st  lieutenant  and
assigned  to  duty  on  Gen.  Daniel  Butterfield's  staff,
after  which  he  served  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.
George  G.  Meade  and  Gen.  Joseph  Hooker.  Mean
while  he  was  promoted  captain,  to  date  from  1  Jan.,
1864,  after  leading  his  company  at  Gaines's  Mills,
the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run,  Antietam,  and


576


OLIVER


OLMOS


Fredericksburg.  Later  he  again  served  on  Gen.  j
Butterfield's  staff,  and  was  present  at  the  battle  of
Lookout  Mountain  and  in  the  campaigns  to  At
lanta,  lie  then  became  acting  provost-marshal
of  the  5th  corps,  and  was  then  ordered  by  Gen.
Grant  to  the  headquarters  of  the  U.  S.  army.  He
was  given  the  brevet  of  brigadier-general  of  vol
unteers  on  13  March.  1805.  In  1870  he  established
a  powder- factory  near  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  where  he
lias  since  been  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  ex
plosives,  using  for  that  purpose  machinery  of  his
own  invention,  consisting  principally  of  devices  by
which  powder  can  be  made  in  small  quantities  at
any  time  and  at  any  place,  thus  doing  away  with
the  danger  of  violent  explosion  and  reducing  the
risk  to  a  minimum.  Gen.  Oliver's  improvements
include  principally  an  incorporating-mill,  consist
ing  of  a  succession  of  rollers  set  in  pairs  through
which  the  powder  is  made  to  pass  in  very  small
quantities  at  a  time,  and  a  new  mode  of  pressing
and  graining.  He  has  also  invented  a  bayonet-
fastening  and  a  screw-headed  key.

OLIVER,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
in  1738;  d.  in  Marietta,  Ohio,  in  May,  1810.  He
removed  in  early  life  to  Barre,  Mass.,  and  was  a
lieutenant  of  militia  in  1775.  He  was  a  captain  in
the  3d  regiment  when  it  inarched  to  Cambridge,
and  in  1779  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  10th
Massachusetts  Continentals.  He  distinguished
himself  at  the  storming  of  the  German  intrench-
inents  at  the  battle  of  Saratoga.  For  some  time
he  acted  as  adjutant-general  of  the  northern  army,
and  excelled  as  a  disciplinarian.  In  1782  he  re
ceived  the  brevet  of  colonel.  He  was  one  of  the
first  settlers  of  Marietta,  Ohio,  in  1788,  was  chosen
a  representative  in  the  territorial  legislature  in
1798,  became  a  member  of  the  council  in  1799,  find
was  its  president  in  1800-'3.  He  was  also  a  judge
of  the  court  of  common  pleas.

OLIVER,  Thomas,  lieutenant-governor  of
Massachusetts,  b.  in  Antigua,  W.  I..  5  Jan..  1734;
d.  in  Bristol,  England,  29  Nov.,  1815.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1753,  and  resided  at
Cambridge,  taking  little  part  in  public  affairs
until,  on  the  death  of  Andrew  Oliver,  he  was  ap
pointed  lieutenant-governor  at  the  suggestion  of
Thomas  Hutchinson.  He  was  also  one  of  the  coun
cillors  that  were  appointed  by  the  crown  under  a
recent  act  of  parliament,  and  was  made  president
of  the  board.  The  attempt  to  subvert  the  charter
created  intense  excitement  throughout  the  province.
The  mandamus,  councillors  were  visited  by  bands
of  freeholders  and,  one  after  another,  forced  to  re
sign.  On  the  seizure  by  the  troops  of  the  public
stock  of  powder  that  was  provided  for  the  militia,
the  yeomen  of  the  neighboring  towns  marched  to
Cambridge,  some  of  them  bringing  their  arms.
Gen.  Gage  prepared  to  send  troops  against  them.
Oliver  first  endeavored  to  persuade  the  people  to
turn  back,  and  then  hastened  to  Boston  and  pre
vailed  on  the  general  to  refrain  from  military  ac
tion.  On  his  return,  the  resignation  of  his  seat  on
the  council  board  was  called  for.  He  protested
that  he  would  sacrifice  his  property  and  his  life
rather  than  his  honor,  but  yielded  when  a  threat
ening  multitude  surrounded  his  mansion,  2  Sept.,
1774.  He  removed  then  to  Boston,  and,  when  the
British  troops  sailed  to  Halifax,  went  with  them
and  took  passage  thence  for  England.  He  was
proscribed  in  1778,  and  his  estate  confiscated.

OLLANTAI  (ol-yan-ti'),  Peruvian  soldier,  lived
in  Cuzco  in  the  15th  or,  as  some  authors  assert,  in
the  8th  century.  According  to  tradition  and  a
drama  translated  from  the  Quechua  language  by
Jose  S.  Barranca  (Lima,  1802),  Ollantai  was  gen


eral  of  the  army  of  Inca  Pachacutic,  and  fell  in
love  with  the  inca's  daughter,  Cuci-Ccoyllar,  who
returned  his  passion,  but  the  father  refused  her
hand  to  his  subject.  The  priests,  to  whom  the
inca  applied,  were  unable  to  cure  the  princess  of
her  love,  and  when  the  latter  informed  her  lover
that  she  was  about  to  become  a  mother,  Ollantai
revolted  and  shut  himself  up  in  the  fortress  Ollan-
taitamba,  the  colossal  ruins  of  which  still  exist
near  Cuzco.  (See  illustration.)  Pachacutic  died
of  sorrow  over  the  dishonor  of  his  daughter  in


1423,  and  his  successor,  Inca  Yupanqui,  besieged
the  fortress  with  his  whole  army  and  captured  the
rebel,  whom,  together  with  the  princess,  he  kept
prisoner  for  many  years.  At  last,  when  their
daughter,  I  ma  Sumac,  had  grown  to  womanhood,
she  obtained  from  her  uncle  the  pardon  of  her
parents,  and  the  inca  gave  his  sister  in  marriage
to  Ollantai.  There  is  scarcely  a  doubt  of  the  truth
of  these  facts,  but  Tschudi,  Rivero,  and  other  in
vestigators  of  inca  history  contend  that  the  drama
is  only  a  version  of  an  extremely  old  popular  tra
dition,  and  that  Barranca  adapted  it  to  the  reign
of  Pachacutic  and  Yupanqui.

OLMEDO,  Jos6  Joaquin  (ol-may'-doY,  South
American  poet,  b.  in  Guayaquil  in  1781;  d.  there,
19  Jan.,  1847.  He  studied  in  Lima  in  the  Uni
versity  of  San  Marcos,  was  one  of  the  American
deputies  to  the  first  Spanish  cortes,  and  belonged
to  the  Liberal  party.  Evading  the  persecutions  of
Ferdinand  VII..  he  returned  to  his  country,  and  in
1822  was  appointed  deputy  to  the  congress  of  Peru.
Simon  Bolivar  appointed  Olmedo  diplomatic  agent
to  the  European  courts,  in  which  character  he
stayed  in  London  till  1828,  when  he  returned  to
Guayaquil.  When  the  republic  of  Colombia  was
dissolved,  Olmedo  was  elected  vice-president  of  the
republic  of  Ecuador,  which  place  he  resigned  to
accept  the  prefecture  of  the  department  of  Guaya
quil.  In  his  country-seat  near  Guayaquil  he  gave
his  time  to  the  cultivation  of  poetry,  and  his  verses
have  been  highly  praised.  One  of  his  best  poems,
"  Canto  a  Bolivar,"  was  published  in  Paris  in  1820.
The  rest  of  his  works  appeared  under  the  title
"  Obras  poeticas  de  J.  J.  Olmedo"  (Valparaiso,
1848  ;  Paris,  1853  ;  and  Mexico,  1802).

OLMOS,  Francisco  Andres  de  (ole'-mos).  Span
ish  missionary,  b.  in  Burgos,  Spain,  toward  the  end
of  the  15th  century;  d.  in  Tarnpico,  Mexico,  8  Oct.,
1571.  He  studied  in  the  University  of  Valladolid,
entered  the  Franciscan  order,  and  went  to  Mexico
as  a  missionary  in  1528.  lie  afterward  was  called
to  the  principal  convent  of  Mexico,  and  there  com
posed  many  of  his  works  in  the  Indian  dialects,
and  a  kind  of  drama  on  the  final  judgment,  in  the
Mexican  language,  which  was  represented  before
the  viceroy.  Later  he  obtained  permission  to  re
turn  to  his  missions,  and  died  in  the  convent  of
Tampico.  lie  wrote  "Arte  de  la  lengua  Me::i-


OLMSTEAD


OLMSTED


577


cana."  from  which  Torquemada  learned  the  Mexi
can  language  (Mexico,  1555);  "  Vocabulario  Mexi-
cano,"  of  which  the  original  manuscript  is  in  the
College  of  San  Gregorio,  in  Tlalnepantla ;  "  Arte  y
Vocabulario  de  la  lengua  Huaxteca,"  of  which  the
manuscript  is  in  the  convent  of  Ozoluama ;  "  Arte
V  Vocabulario  de  la  lengua  Totonaca " ;  Arte  y
Vocabulario  de  la  lengua  Tepchuana";  "  Platicas
de  las  Senoras  Mexicanas  con  sus  hijas,  "  translated
by  Francisco  Clavigero  ;  and  several  treatises  on
the  capital  sins,  sacraments,  and  sacrileges,  in  the
Mexican  language,  the  manuscripts  of  which  were
preserved  in  the  library  of  Tlaltelolco.  in  Mexico.
According  to  Leon  Pinelo,  he  also  wrote  a  treatise
on  Mexican  antiquities.

OLMSTEAD,  James  Munson,  clergyman,  b.  in
Still  water,  N.  Y..  17  Feb.,  1794;  d.  in  Philadelphia.
Pa.,  16  Oct.,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
college  in  1819,  and  studied  until  1822  at  Princeton
theological  seminary.  During  the  following  three
years  he  was  an  itinerant  missionary  in  New  York,
Pennsylvania,  and  Virginia,  but  in  June,  1825,  he
was  ordained  and  installed  over  the  Presbyterian
churches  of  Landisburg  and  Centre,  Pa.,  where  he
remained  until  1834.  He  then  had  charge  of  Mid
dle  Tuscarora  church,  Pa.,  until  1837,  when  he  be
came  pastor  of  the  Flemington,  N.  Y.,  Presbyterian
church.  Failing  health  in  1849  led  to  his  resigna
tion  and  removal  to  Snow  Hill,  Md.,  where  he
preached  until  1854.  He  then  settled  in  Philadel
phia,  living  in  retirement  until  his  death.  Besides
minor  publications  and  contributions  to  current
literature,  he  was  the  author  of  ''Thoughts  and
Counsels  for  the  Impenitent"  (New  York,  1846);
" Our  First  Mother"  (1852);  and  "Noah  and  his
Times  "  (Boston,  1853).  The  last  was  subsequent
ly  reprinted  abroad.

'  OLMSTEAD,  John  Wesley,  clergyman,  b.  in
Saratoga  county.  N.  Y.,  13  Nov..  1816.  'He  did  not
receive  a  regular  classical  training,  but  the  honorary
degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Yale  in
1854.  and  that  of  D.  D.  by  Rochester  university  in
18G3.  After  serving  for  several  years  as  pastor  of
Baptist  churches  in  Little  Falls,  N.  Y.,  and  Chel
sea,  Mass.,  he  became,  in  1846,  editor  of  the  "  Chris
tian  Reflector "  in  Boston.  On  the  union  of  this
paper  with  "The  Watchman,"  in  1848,  he  took
editorial  control  of  the  consolidated  journals,  and
continued  in  that  post  until  1877.  In  1878  he
established  "  The  Watchtower,"  a  Baptist  journal
in  New  York,  but  subsequently  returned  to  "  The
Watchman,"  of  which  he  is  now  editor-in-chief.

OLMSTED,  Denison,  physicist,  b.  in  East
Hartford.  Conn.,  18  June,  1791;  d.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  13  May,  1859.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1813.  and  was  at  once  given  charge  of  the  Union
school  in  New  London.  In  1815  he  returned  to
Yale  as  tutor,  and  began  the  study  of  theology,
with  a  view  to  the  ministry,  but  in  1817  he  was
called  to  the  chair  of  chemistry,  mineralogy,  and
geology  in  the  University  of  North  Carolina. '  Here
he  proposed  and  executed  the  first  state  geological
survey  that  was  ever  attempted  in  the  United
States,  publishing  reports  of  his  work  in  1824  and
1825.  Although  the  state  authorized  the  execution
of  the  survey,  Prof.  Olmsted  received  no  compen
sation  for  his  services.  He  was  appointed  in  1825
professor  of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy
in  Yale,  which  chair  he  retained  until  1836.  when
it  was  divided  at  his  request,  and  the  department
of  mathematics  assigned  to  Anthony  D.  Stanley.
In  addition  to  the  duties  of  his  professorship,  he
devoted  much  time  to  the  study  of  the  various
branches  of  physical  science.  He  published  an
elaborate  theory  of  hail-stones  in  1830,  which
VOL.  IT. — 37


caused  much  discussion,  but  finally  received  the
general  approbation  of  meteorologists.  The  shower
of  shooting-stars  that  fell  in  November,  1833,  at
tracted  his  attention,  and  he  studied  their  history
and  behavior  until
he  was  able  satisfac
torily  to  demonstrate
their  cosmical  ori
gin.  Prof.  Olmsted,
and  his  associate,
Elias  Loomis  (q.  v.),
were  in  1835  the  first
American  investiga
tors  to  observe  the
Halley  comet.  For
several  years  he  car
ried  on  a  series  of
observations  of  the
aurora  boreal  is,  the
results  of  which  were
published  in  the
"  Smithsonian  Con-
tributions  to  Knowl-
edge  "  (vol.  viii.,

Washington,  1856).  Prof.  Olmsted  possessed  con
siderable  mechanical  talent,  which  he  used  in  pro
moting  and  perfecting  the  inventions  of  others,  but
while  he  himself  frequently  invented  articles  of  con
venience  and  comfort,  such  as  the  Olmsted  stove,
he  seldom  secured  his  rights  by  patents.  He  was
a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  his  more  tech
nical  papers  may  be  found  in  their  transactions.
Prof.  Olmsted  likewise  was  a  large  contributor  to
the  reviews  and  to  other  periodical  literature,
especially  in  the  direction  of  biography.  He  pub
lished  "  Life  and  Writings  of  Ebenezer  Porter
Mason  "  (New  York,  1842).  He  was  also  the  author
of  text-books,  of  which  the  entire  number  of  copies
that  were  sold  exceeded  200,000.  They  include
"  Student's  Commonplace  Book "  (New  Haven,
1828);  "Introduction  to  Natural  Philosophy"  (2
vols.,  New  York,  1831) ;  "  Compendium  of  Natural
Philosophy  "  (1832) ;  "  Introduction  to  Astronomy  "
(1839);  ""Compendium  of  Astronomy"  (1841):
"Letters  on  Astronomy,  addressed  to  a  Lady"
(1841);  and  "Rudiments  of  Natural  Philosophy
and  Astronomy "  (Cincinnati,  1844). — His  son,
Francis  Allyn,  physician,  b.  in  Chapel  Hill.  N.  C.,
14  July,  1819*:  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn..  19  July,
1844,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1839.  He  made  a
sea  voyage  to  the  Sandwich  islands  for  his  health,
and  on  his  return  was  graduated  at  the  medical
department  of  Yale  in  1844.  He  published  "  Inci
dents  of  a  Whaling  Voyage  "  (New  York,  1841). —
Another  son.  Alexander  Fisher,  chemist,  b.  in
Chapel  Hill,  N.  C..  20  Dec..  1822  ;  d.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  5  May,  1853,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1844,
and  was  called  to  fill  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  the
University  of  North  Carolina.  He  contributed
scientific  papers  to  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  Ameri
can  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science."
of  which  society  he  was  a  member,  and  published
"  Elements  of  Chemistry  "  (New  Haven,  1851).

OLMSTED,  Frederick  Law,  landscape-archi
tect,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn..  26  April,  1822.  He
followed  courses  of  special  study  in  engineering
and  agriculture  at  Yale  during  1845-'6.  and  then
became  a  laborer  on  a  farm  in  central  New  York,
in  order  to  acquire  a  practical  knowledge  of  the
details  of  agriculture.  Subsequently  he  conduct
ed  a  farm  of  his  own  on  Staten  island,  and  con
tributed  articles  to  periodicals  on  rural  subjects.
His  attention  being  directed  to  the  art  of  land
scape-gardening  and  architecture,  he  made  a  pedes
trian  tour  through  Great  Britain  and  parts  of  con-


578


OLMSTED


OLNEY


tinental  Europe  in  1850  for  the  purpose  of  observing
closely  the  agriculture  and  ornamental  grounds  of
the  various  countries.  Some  account  of  this  jour
ney  is  given  in  "  Walks  and  Talks  of  an  American

Farmer  in  Eng
land"  (New  York,
1852).  In  1852-'3
he  travelled,  most
ly  on  horseback,
through  the  south
ern  and  southwest
ern  states,  for  the
purpose  of  examin
ing  their  agricul
tural  resources,  and
also  in  order  to
study  the  effects  of
slavery  upon  agri-
culture.  His  obser-
ration  and  conclu-

sions  were  ?i ven  to

the  public  in  a  se
ries  of  letters,  and  these  were  issued  as  "  A  Journey
in  the  Seaboard  Slave  States,  with  Remarks  on  their
Economy  "  (1856).  Later  he  published  "  A  Journey
through  Texas,  or  a  Saddle  Trip  on  the  Southwest
ern  Frontier,  with  a  Statistical  Appendix  "  (1857)
and  "A  Journey  in  the  Back  Country"  (I860).
When  the  civil  war  broke  out  in  1861  a  condensed
edition  of  these  works  was  issued  in  London  under
the  title  of  "The  Cotton  Kingdom"  (2  vols..  1801),
which  was  much  quoted  in  the  controversies  that
followed.  A  commission  was  formed  in  1856  under
an  act  of  the  New  York  legislature  for  the  construc
tion  of  a  large  central  park  in  New  York  city,  and
Mr.  Olmsted  was  appointed  superintendent.  In
1857  premiums  were  offered  by  the  commission  for
the  best  plans  for  the  ground,  and.  of  thirty-four
that  were  sent  in,  the  highest  prize  was  awarded  to
the  one  that  was  prepared  by  Mr.  Olmsted  in  con
junction  with  Calvert  Vaux.  He  was  then  engaged
until  1861  in  managing  the  construction  of  the
park  upon  this  plan,  with  the  title  of  landscape-
architect.  In  1861  he  was  appointed  a  member  of
the  commission  of  inquiry  and  advice  in  regard
to  the  sanitary  condition  of  the  U.  S.  forces.  He
was  elected  its  general  secretary,  with  the  duty  of
organizing  and  controlling  its  executive  service
and  taking  charge  of  confidential  communica
tions  between  the  commission  and  the  govern
ment.  During  1861-'4  he  resided  in  Washington,
and  in  behalf  of  the  commission  was  active  in
securing  needed  legislation  in  regard  to  the  army
and  navy.  He  made  many  visits  to  armies  in  the
field,  had  large  correspondence,  and  prepared  con
fidential  reports  as  to  their  condition  and  wants,
many  of  which  were  published.  See  Charles  J.
Stille's  "  History  of  the  U.  S.  Sanitary  Commission  "
(Philadelphia,  1866).  After  the  war  he  took  part
in  the  organization  and  direction  of  the  Southern
famine  relief  commission,  and  later  was  engaged
in  the  organization  of  the  New  York  state  charities
aid  association,  of  which  he  was  vice-president  for
several  years.  In  1871  he  urged  upon  the  terri
torial  government  of  the  District  of  Columbia  the
so-called  "parking  system"  for  the  broad  streets
of  Washington,  which  has  since  been  carried  out.
He  was  active  in  the  founding  of  the  Metropolitan
museum  of  art,  and  of  the  American  museum  of
natural  history,  in  New  York  city.  In  1872  he  was
appointed  president  of  the  department  of  public
parks  in  New  York.  In  1876-'7  he  prepared  plans,
in  accordance  with  which  the  street  system  of  most
of  the  part  of  the  city  of  New  York  that  lies  north  of
Harlem  river  has  since  been  laid  out.  Mr.  Olmsted


has  been  identified  with  the  designing  of  numerous
other  public  and  private  works,  in  certain  of  which
he  has  been  associated  with  Calvert  Vaux.  and  in
others  with  his  son,  John  C.  Olmsted.  These  have
included  the  Riverside  and  Morningside  parks  in
New  York  city;  Prospect  and  Washington  parks  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  with  the  several  parkways  of  that
city ;  Washington  and  Jackson  parks,  and  several
of  the  parkways,  of  Chicago;  the  parks  and  park
ways  of  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  of  Montreal,  Canada,  and
of  Bridgeport,  Conn. ;  also  the  great  terrace  and
staircases,  and  the  outworks  and  grounds,  of  the
capitol  at  Washington.  He  was  the  first  commis
sioner  of  the  National  park  of  the  Yosemite  and  the
Mariposa  grove,  directing  the  survey  and  taking
charge  of  the  property  for  the  state  of  California.
Mr.  Olmsted  has  also  held  directing  appointments
under  the  cities  of  Boston,  Philadelphia,  Baltimore,
Wilmington,  and  San  Francisco,  the  joint  commit
tee  on  buildings  and  grounds  of  congress,  the  Ni
agara  Falls  reservation  commission,  the  trustees  of
Harvard,  Yale,  Amherst,  and  other  colleges  and
public  institutions.  Since  1886  he  has  been  large
ly  occupied  in  laying  out  an  extensive  system  of
parks  and  parkways  for  the  city  of  Boston,  and  the
town  of  Brookline,  Mass.,  and  upon  a  scheme  for
the  landscape  improvement  of  Boston  harbor.  He
received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Harvard  in
1864,  and  from  Amherst  in  1867.

OLNEY,  Edward,  educator,  b.  in  Moroau,  Sara
toga  co.,  N.  Y.,  24  July,  1827:  d.  in  Ann  Arbor,
Mich.,  16  Jan.,  1887.  With  slender  opportunities
of  early  education,  he  achieved  by  his  own  energy
distinction  as  a  scholar  and  teacher.  From  1853
till  1863  he  was  professor  of  mathematics  in  Kala-
mazoo  college,  Mich.,  whence  in  the  latter  year  he
was  transferred  to  a  similar  chair  in  the  state  uni
versity  at  Ann  Arbor.  In  this  post  he  continued
until  his  death.  He  was  the  author  of  a  complete
set  of  mathematical  text-books,  which  have  had  a
wide  circulation.  He  received  the  honorary  degree
of  LL.  D.  Prof.  Olney  was  an  active  promoter  of
various  humanitarian  enterprises,  and  was  much
interested  in  the  educational  work  of  the  Baptist
denomination,  of  which  he  was  a  member.

OLNEY,  Jeremiah,  soldier,  b.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  in  1750;  d.  there,  10  Nov.,  1812.  His  an
cestor,  the  Rev.  Thomas  Olney,  was  a  founder  of
the  Baptist  church  in  this  country.  He  joined
the  patriot  army  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution
as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  1st  Rhode  Island  regi
ment,  and  was  subsequently  colonel  and  frequently
chief  officer  of  the  state  forces.  He  also  participated
in  the  battles  of  Red  Bank,  Springfield,  Monmouth.
and  Yorktown.  After  the  war  he  was  collector  of
customs  at  Providence  for  many  years,  and  was
president  of  the  Rhode  Island  Society  of  the  Cincin
nati. — His  brother,  Stephen,  soldier,  b.  in  North
Providence,  R.  I.,  in  October,  1755;  d.  there,  23
Nov.,  1832,  entered  the  Revolutionary  army  in  1775
as  a  lieutenant,  participated  in  the  battles  of  Long
Island,  White  Plains,  Brandy  wine,  German  town,
and  Monmouth,  was  in  the  Jersey  retreat,  wounded
at  Springfield,  and  promoted  captain  for  his  gal
lant  defence  of  Red  Bank.  He  was  then  detached
to  join  Lafayette,  and  served  with  him  at  York-
town,  where  he  was  active  in  the  capture  of  a  Brit
ish  redoubt,  and  received  several  bayonet  wounds.
He  subsequently  represented  North  Providence  in
the  legislature  for  twenty  years,  besides  holding
town  offices.  See  •'  Lives  of  Barton  and  Olney,"
by  Catherine  Williams  (Providence,  R.  I.,  1839).

OLNEY,  Jesse,  geographer,  b.  in  Union,  Tolland
co..  Conn.,  12  Oct.,  1798;  d.  in  Stratford,  Conn.,  31
July,  1872.  He  was  educated  at  Whitesborough,


OLOTORACA


O'MAHONY


579


N.  Y.,  became  a  teacher  at  Whitesborough  and
Binghamtori,  and  was  for  twelve  years  principal
of  the  Stone  school,  Hartford,  Conn.,  resigning  in
1831.  In  1828,  when  he  was  in  his  thirtieth  year,
he  brought  out  ''A  Geography  and  Atlas,"  which  was
at  once  accepted  as  a  standard  work,  and  for  thirty
years  was  used  in  almost  every  public  and  private
school  of  the  United  States.  It  was  many  times
enlarged  and  revised,  and  ran  through  ninety-eight
editions,  some  of  the  editions  numbering'80,000
copies.  Millions  of  copies  were  sold,  and  the  popu
larity  of  '•  Olney's  Geography  "  has  been  surpassed
only  by  that  of  "  Webster's  Spelling- Book."  This
work  has  the  distinction  of  having  caused  a  com
plete  revolution  in  the  methods  of  teaching  geogra
phy.  Mr.  Olney  was  a  practical  instructor,  and
was  dissatisfied  with  the  existing  class-books  arid
treatises,  which  began  with  an  exposition  of  the
science  of  astronomy,  and,  making  the  centre  of  the
solar  system  the  initial  point,  developed  the  scheme
until  it  finally  included  the  earth.  Mr.  Olney  re
versed  this  method.  He  began  with  the  scholar's
own  continent — in  fact,  in  the  very  city,  town,  or
village  in  which  he  lived,  and  made  clear  by  lucid
definitions  the  natural  divisions  of  land  and  water,
illustrating  each  instance  by  the  use  of  maps.  His
plan  was  to  familiarize  the  child  with  the  surface
of  the  earth  by  going  from  the  near  to  the  distant,
and  from  the  concrete  to  the  abstract,  and  this
system  at  once  overthrew  theoretic  geography,  and
initiated  the  modern  practical  and  descriptive  sci
ence.  The  immediate  success  of  the  work  led  Mr.
Olney  to  give  up  teaching  and  devote  himself  to
authorship.  Leaving  Hartford  in  18*53.  he  settled
in  Southmgton,  Conn.,  until  1854,  when  he  removed
to  Stratford.  After  discontinuing  to  teach,  he
devoted  himself  to  the  cause  of  popular  education.
He  was  for  many  years  a  member  of  the  legislature,
afterward  comptroller  of  the  state  for  two  terms,
and  used  largely  his  legislative  and  official  powers
to  build  up  the  system  of  Connecticut  common
schools.  In  1840  he  had  become  a  Unitarian,  and
for  the  next  fourteen  years  he  gave  sympathy  and
much  practical  aid  to  the  liberal  religious  move
ment  that  was  then  agitating  New  thigland.  His
text-books  (1831-'52)  include  other  geographies,  a
series  of  readers,  a  '•  Common-School  Arithmetic,"
and  a  "  History  of  the  United  States."  lie  also
compiled  "  A  Family  Book  of  History  " ;  "  Psalms
of  Life,"  poems  ;  and  other  works.

OLOTORACA,  Indian  cacique,  b.  in  1548 ;  d.
near  Fort  San  Mateo,  Florida,  in  1573.  He  was  the
nephew  of  Satouriona,  one  of  the  three  caciques
among  whom  Florida  was  divided,  and  at  the  time
of  Pedro  Menendez's  first  expedition,  in  1565,  served
as  guide  to  the  Spaniards,  as  the  French  had  re
fused  to  lend  assistance  to  Satouriona  against  his
enemies  Outina  and  Potanou.  But  the  cruelties  of
the  Spaniards  soon  estranged  the  Indians,  and  when
Dominique  de  Gourgues  (q.  v.)  came  to  revenge
Jean  Ribaut  they  were  willing  to  assist  him.
Olotoraca  was  instrumental  in  forming  the  alliance,
and  led  Satouriona's  300  warriors  against  the  Span
ish.  But  for  him  Gourgues's  expedition  would
have  failed.  He  guided  the  French,  went  to  re
connoitre  the  position  of  the  enemy,  and  in  the
assault  on  the  first  fort  was  also  the  first  to  mount
the  glacis,  driving  his  pike  through  the  breast  of  a
Spanish  cannoneer.  Menendez  returned  a  few
months  later,  and,  after  rebuilding  Fort  San  Mateo,
re-established  Spanish  dominion  in  Florida.  Oloto
raca,  who  had  succeeded  Satouriona.  fought  to  the
end,  murdered  the  Spanish  missionaries,  and  several
times  burned  and  ruined  the  Spanish  establish
ments.  He  was  at  last  captured  and  hanged.


OLSSEN,  William  Whittingham,  clergyman,
b.  in  New  York  city,  11  May,  1827.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Columbia  in  1846,  and  at  the  Episcopal
general  theological  seminary  in  New  York  in
1849.  He  was  then  ordained  deacon  in  Holy
Trinity  church,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  1  July,  1849,  by
Bishop  Whittingham,  and  priest  in  Grace  church,
Brooklyn,  29  June,  1851,  by  Bishop  De  Lancey,  of
western  New  York.  For  two  years,  in  1849-'50,  he
served  as  missionary  at  Prattsville,  N.  Y.  He  ac
cepted  the  rectorship  of  the  Church  of  St.  James
the  Less,  Scarsdale,  N.  Y.,  in  1851,  and  held  that
post  for  twenty  years.  In  1871  he  was  appointed
professor  of  mathematics  in  St.  Stephen's  college,
Annandale,  N.  Y.,  and  he  was  transferred  to  the
chair  of  Greek  and  Hebrew  literature  in  1873.  He
received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Columbia  in
1876.  Dr.  Olssen  has  published  "Personality,  Hu
man  and  Divine  "  (New  York,  1882) ;  "  Revelation,
Universal  and  Special "  (1885) ;  and  various  ser
mons  and  essays  on  special  occasions.  He  has  also
contributed  freely  to  church  literature.

OLSSON,  Olof,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bjortorp,  Verm-
land,  Sweden,  31  March,  1841.  He  was  educated
at  the  universities  of  Stockholm  and  Upsala,  and
was  graduated  at  the  latter  in  1861,  after  spending
a  year  (1859-'60)  in  the  Missionary  institute  at
Leipsic.  He  also  studied  in  the  theological  depart
ment  of  the  University  of  Upsala,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1863.  He  was  ordained  on  15  Dec.
of  the  same  year  to  the  ministry  of  the  Lutheran
church,  and  at  once  assumed  the  duties  of  pastor,
serving  in  that  capacity  in  his  native  country  until
1868.  About  this  time  he  came  to  the  United
States  and  settled  in  Lindsborg,  Kan.,  where  he
was  pastor  of  Swedish  Lutheran  congregations  in
1869-'76.  Since  the  latter  year  he  has  been  profes
sor  of  theology  in  the  theological  seminary  of  the
Swedish  Augustana  college,  Rock  Island,  111.  He
edited  "  Nyat  Och  Gammtl,"  a  newspaper,  at  Linds
borg,  Kan.,  in  1873,  and  "  Luther- Kalender,"  an
annual  (Rock  Island,  111.,  1883),  and  has  published
in  Swedish  "At  the  Cross"  (Rock  Island,  111.),
which  has  been  reprinted  in  Sweden ;  "  Greetings
from  Afar,  being  Recollections  of  Travels  in  Eng
land  and  Germany"  (1880;  also  translated  into
Norwegian  and  published  in  Norway) ;  and  "  The
Christian  Hope,  Words  of  Consolation  in  Suffering
and  Sorrow"  (Chicago,  1887).

O'MAHONY,  John  Francis,  Fenian  leader,  b.
in  Kilbeheny,  County  Cork,  Ireland,  in  1816;  d.  in
New  York  city,  7  Feb.,  1877.  He  belonged  to  a
family  every  generation  of  which,  for  the  last  200
years,  had  been  implicated  in  movements  hostile  to
English  supremacy,  and  his  father  and  uncle  took
part  in  the  insurrection  of  1798.  He  entered  Trin
ity  college,  Dublin,  but  left  this  institution  without
taking  a  degree,  spending  most  of  his  time  in  the
study  of  Hebrew,  Sanscrit,  and  Gaelic.  He  was
already  a  fine  classical  scholar,  and  contributed
articles  to  French  journals.  He  began  to  take  part
in  the  repeal  movement  in  1843,  but  soon  became
dissatisfied  with  the  methods  of  O'Connell,  and  was
active  in  the  pai'tyof  which  Smith  O'Brien  was  the
leader.  The  part  that  he  took  in  the  abortive  re
bellion  of  1848  obliged  him  to  leave  the  country,
and  he  lived  in  France  till  1854,  when  he  came  to
the  United  States.  Here  he  published  the  "  History
of  Ireland,  by  Geoffrey  Keating,  D.  D.,  translated
from  the  Orig'inal  Gaelic,  and  Copiously  Annotated"
(New  York,  1857).  The  mental  strain  to  which
O'Mahony  was  subjected  in  the  preparation  of  this
work,  which  brought  him  no  pecuniary  gain,  affect
ed  his  reason,  and  he  was  removed  by  his  friends
for  a  short  time  to  a  lunatic  asvlum.  The  Fenian


580


OftA


ONDERDONK


brotherhood,  or  Irish  republican  brotherhood,  was
organized  by  him  in  1860.  The  object  of  the  asso
ciation  was  to  secure  the  freedom  of  Ireland.  The
name  was  probably  derived  from  O'Mahony's  Gaelic
studies,  the  Fenians  having  been  a  military  body
in  pagan  Ireland,  celebrated  in  the  songs  of  Ossian.
The  organization  of  the  new  society  was  completed
at  conventions  that  were  held  in  Chicago  in  1804.
and  in  Cincinnati  in  January.  1865.  Its  rapid
growth  in  membership  rendered  it  impossible  for
O'Mahony  to  retain  the  colonelcy  of  the  69th  regi
ment,  wh'ich  he  had  held  for  some  time,  and  resign
ing  he  gave  all  his  attention  to  the  spread  of  Fenian-
ism.  Many  differences  occurred  between  him  and
James  Stephens,  but  he  remained  president  of  the
organization  for  several  years.  The  close  of  the  civil
war  in  the  spring  of  1865  gave  a  great  impetus  to  the
movement,  owing  to  the  number  of  Irish-American
soldiers  that  were  disbanded  and  anxious  to  see
service  elsewhere.  Money  poured  into  the  Fenian
exchequer;  probably  $500.000  was  subscribed  be
tween  1860  and  1807.  O'Mahony  did  not  take  any
Eart  personally  in  the  attempted  insurrection  in
reland  or  in  the  raids  on  Canada,  although  his
advice  counted  for  much  in  these  enterprises.  He
devoted  the  last  years  of  his  life  to  literary  pur
suits,  but  suffered  from  ill  health  and  poverty.
However  visionary  may  have  been  his  objects,  he
was  honest,  and  although  thousands  had  passed
through  his  hands,  he  was  often  at  a  loss  for  a
dollar.  When  his  poverty  was  discovered  he  de
clined  to  receive  assistance  in  any  shape.  Soon
after  his  death  his  remains  were  taken  to  Ireland
and  interred  with  the  honors  of  a  public  funeral  in
Glasnevin  cemetery  near  Dublin.

ONA,  Pedro  de  (on'-yah),  Chilian  poet,  b.  in
Confines,  Araucania,  about  1560;  d.  in  Lima
about  1620.  He  was  the  son  of  an  officer  that  died
in  the  war  against  Arauco  under  the  leadership  of
Garcia  Hurtado  de  Mendoza  (q.  v.),  and  when  young
Ona  had  finished  his  studies  in  Lima  in  the  College
of  San  Felipe  and  the  University  of  San  Marcos,  he
resolved  to  celebrale  the  heroic  deeds  of  the  Span
ish  warriors  in  Arauco  in  an  epic  poem.  He
specially  glorified  Garcia  Hurtado,  whom  he  con
sidered  slighted  in  Ercilla's  poem  "  Araucana,"  and
although  many  contemporaneous  authors  attack
Oiia's  poem  as  over-partial  to  Hurtado,  others,  like
Lope  de  Vega,  Francisco  Figuero,  and  Diego  Mejia,
praise  it  very  highly ;  and  it  cannot  be  denied  that
the  versification  is  excellent,  the  language  beauti
ful,  and  the  historical  facts  concise.  The  work  ap-
B;ared  in  nineteen  cantos  under  the  title  "  Arauco
omado  "  (Lima,  1596),  of  which  edition  probably
only  one  copy,  used  by  Henry  Ternaux-Compans
for  his  translation,  now  exists;  of  a  second  edition
(Madrid,  1005)  there  is  a  copy  in  the  National  li
brary  in  Lima,  and  from  this  an  edition  was
printed  (Valparaiso,  1849).  which  has  made  this
poem  widely  known.  Ona  also  wrote  a  poem, "  Tem
blor  de  Lima  en  el  aiio  1009"  (Lima,  1012),  several
sonnets,  and  another,  rather  tedious  but  well  versi
fied,  heroic  poem  in  praise  of  St.  Ignacio  de  Loyola,
"  Ignacio  de  Cantabria  "  (Seville,  1639).

ON  DEdtARDO,  Polo  (on-day-gar'-do),  Spanish
historian,  b.  in  Spain  about  1500;  d.  in  Peru  about
1570.  The  exact  date  of  his  arrival  in  Peru  is  un
known.  According  to  William  H.  Prescott,  when
Gov.  Pedro  de  la  Gasca  (q.  v.)  arrived  to  suppress
the  usurpation  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  Ondegardo  was
one  of  the  judges  of  the  audiencia,  which  had  sub
mitted  to  the  usurper,  but  he  always  counselled
moderation,  and  when  the  extreme  party  gained
the  ascendant,  Ondegardo  joined  the  army  of  Gasca
and  accompanied  him  till  the  battle  of  Sacsahuana,


9  April,  1548.  Gasca  appointed  him  governor  of
Charcas,  and  under  the  Marquis  dc  Canete  he  be
came  governor  of  Cuzco,  whence,  by  the  viceroy's
order,  he  removed  the  mummies  of  the  incas  to
Lima.  He  was  a  student  of  Peruvian  antiquities,
ind.  gaining  the  good-will  of  the  Indians,  he  was
ilile  to  study  their  history,  religion,  and  customs,
>f  which  he  wrote  two  interesting  accounts — the
first  to  the  Marquis  de  Canete  in  1561 ;  the  second
was  furnished  ten  years  later:  but  neither  was
printed,  the  manuscript  remaining  in  the  archives
of  Simancas  and  the  Escorial.  Prescott  copied
them  from  the  collection  of  Lord  Kingsborough,
UK!  used  them  for  his  "  History  of  the  Conquest  of
Peru."  During  the  rebellion  of  Francisco  Her
nandez  Giron.  Ondegardo  accompanied  Alvarado  as
commander  of  infantry  in  the  battle  of  Chuquinga
in  1554,  where  Alvarado  was  totally  defeated.  His
name  does  not  appear  again  till  the  government  of
Francisco  de  Toledo,  when  he  is  mentioned  as  one
of  the  men  of  science  consulted  by  that  viceroy.

ONDERDONK,  Henry  Ustick,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  New  York  city,  16  March,  1789;  d.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  6  Dec!,  1858.  He  was  graduated  at
Columbia  in  1805,  went  to  Europe,  and  studied
medicine  in  London  and  Edinburgh,  receiving  the
egree  of  M.  D.  from  the  University  of  Edinburgh.
On  returning  home,  he  entered  upon  the  practice
if  his  profession  in  New  York  city,  and  was  asso
ciated  with  Dr.  Valentine  Mott  in  editing  the
"  New  York  Medical  Journal."  A  few  years  later
he  studied  theology  under  Bishop  Ilobart,  was
ordained  deacon  in  St.  Paul's  chapel,  New  York,
8  Dec.,  1815,  by  his  preceptor,  and  priest  in  Trinity
church,  New  York,  11  April,  1810,  by  the  same
bishop,  and  became  missionary  in  Canandaigua,
N.  Y.,  and  vicinity.  In  1820  he  accepted  a  call  to
St.  Ann's  church,  Brooklyn,  where  he  remained
until  his  election  to  the  bishopric.  lie  was  conse
crated  assistant  bishop  of  Pennsylvania  in  Christ
church,  Philadelphia,  25  Oct.,  1827,  received  the
degree  of  S.  T.  I),  from  Columbia  in  the  same  year,
and  on  the  death  of  Bishop  White,  in  18:30,  became
the  bishop  of  Pennsylvania,  In  1844,  under  the
pressure  of  painful  circumstances,  he  sent  in  his
resignation  to  the  house  of  bishops.  The  resigna
tion  was  accepted,  but,  as  informal  charges  of
intemperance  were  admitted  by  Bishop  Onderdonk,
he  was  sentenced  to  a  suspension  of  "  all  public
exercise  of  the  offices  and  functions  of  the  sacred
ministry,  and  in  particular  from  all  exercise  what
soever  of  the  office  and  work  of  a  bishop  in  the
church  of  God."  Two  years  before  his  death  this
suspension  was  removed,  and  he  was  allowed  to
pass  away  in  peace.  Bishop  Onderdonk  was  a  very
able  writer,  and  defended  the  claims  of  his  church
with  great  energy  and  success.  His  publications
were  "Appeal  to  the  Religious  Public  of  Canan
daigua"  (1818);  "Episcopacy  tested  by  Scripture,"
a  tract  (1830),  afterward  enlarged  to  a  volume  en
titled  "  Episcopacy  Examined  and  Re-examined,"
in  I'eply  to  Rev.  Albert  Barnes's  strictures  (Phila
delphia,  1835);  "Essay  on  Regeneration"  (1835);
"  Family  Devotions  from  the  Liturgy"  (1835);  and
"Sermons  and  Charges  "  (2  vols.,  1851).  He  con
tributed  numerous  papers  to  medical  as  well  as
theological  journals,  and  was  also  entitled  to  be
ranked  among  church  poets.  A  dozen  or  more
hyrnns  and  metre  psalms  were  written  by  him,  and
included  in  the  collection  of  the  Protestant  Episco
pal  church. — His  brother,  Benjamin  Tredwell,
P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  New  York  city,  15  July,  1791 ;
d.  there,  30  April,  1861,  was  graduated  at  Columbia
in  1809.  He  was  ordained  deacon  in  St.  Paul's
chapel,  New  York,  2  Aug.,  1812,  by  Bishop  Hobart,


ONDERDONK


O'NEILL


681


and  priest  in  Trinity  church,  Newark,  N.  J.,  26
July,  1815,  by  the  same  bishop.  He  was  appointed
assistant  minister  of  Trinity  church,  New  York,
while  in  deacon's  orders,  and  held  that  post  un
til  1830,  owing  to
the  insufficiency  of
the  Episcopal  fund
prior  to  that  date.
In  1821  he  was
elected  professor  of
ecclesiastical  his
tory  in  the  General
theological  semina
ry.  New  York,  and
also  of  the  nature,
ministry,  and  poli
ty  of  the  church,  in
the  same  institu
tion.  This  latter
chair  he  held  dur
ing  the  remainder
of  his  life,  although
he  did  not  perform
any  duties  in  it  after  1845.  From  1816  till  1830
he  was  secretary  of  the  diocesan  convention  of
New  York.  He  received  the  degree  of  of  S.  T.  D.
from  Columbia  in  1826.  On  the  death  of  Bishop
Hobart,  in  1830,  Dr.  Onderdonk  was  elected  his
successor,  as  fourth  bishop  of  New  York.  He  was
consecrated  in  St.  John's  chapel,  New  York,  26
Nov.,  1830.  Although  he  was  active,  diligent,  and
effective  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties  from  this
time  onward,  and  zealous  in  carrying  out  the  church
principles  of  Bishop  Hobart,  he  nevertheless  fell
into  grave  difficulties.  Under  the  provisions  of  a
canon,  passed  in  October,  1844,  for  the  trial  of
bishops,  he  was  brought  to  trial  on  the  ground  of
immoral  acts,  charged  to  have  been  committed
between  June,  1837,  and  July,  1842.  The  court,
consisting  of  seventeen  bishops,  sat  in  New
York  from  11  Dec.,  1844,  to  3  Jan.,  1845.  Eight
of  the  bishops  voted  for  deposition  and  nine  for
suspension.  This  latter,  accordingly,  became  the
sentence  of  the  court,  and  Bishop  Onderdonk  was
declared  to  be  "  suspended  from  all  exercise  of  his
episcopal  and  ministerial  functions."  Immediately
after  the  trial  he  published  "  A  Statement  of  Facts
and  Circumstances  Connected  with  the  Recent
Trial  of  the  Bishop  of  New  York,"  in  which  he
denied  all  criminality  in  the  matters  charged.
Even  to  the  day  of  his  death  he  persisted  in  assert
ing  his  innocence,  but  made  no  attempt  to  evade
the  sentence.  Numerous  pamphlets,  both  for  and
against  the  bishop,  were  issued  in  this  and  fol
lowing  years.  As  the  sentence  of  suspension  had
no  limitation  attached  to  it,  a  grave  question  arose
as  to  what  was  to  be  done  in  behalf  of  the  diocese
of  New  York.  The  general  convention,  in  1847.
enacted  that  the  house  of  bishops  have  power  to
remit  and  terminate  any  sentence  imposed  by
bishops  as  a  judicial  tribunal,  and  also  that  never
again  should  the  penalty  of  suspension  be  inflicted
except  it  specify  the  terms  and  the  time  of  its
ceasing  to  have  effect.  The  diocese  of  New  York
made  strenuous  efforts  to  obtain  a  remission  of  the
sentence,  and  besought  the  bishops  to  afford  relief.
The  third  and  last  memorial  was  in  1859.  when  the
convention  of  New  York,  by  a  vote  of  147  to  19  of
the  clergy  and  75  to  46  of  the  laity,  begged  the
house  of  bishops  to  terminate  the  suspension  of
Bishop  Onderdonk.  The  petition  was  not  granted,
and  the  bishop  went  down  to  his  grave  within  two
years  with  this  stigma  still  fastened  upon  him.
Bishop  Onderdonk  published  a  few  occasional  ser
mons,  and  contributed  an  excellent  preface  to  a  re-


publication,  by  the  Protestant  Episcopal  press,  of
Dr.  John  Bowden's  "Letters  on  the  Apostolic
Origin  of  Episcopacy"  (1831).  —  Their  nephew,
Henry,  historian,  b.  in  North  Hempstead.  Queens
co.,  N.  Y.,  11  June,  1804:  d.  in  Jamaica.  N.  Y.,  22
June,  1886,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1827,
and  in  1878  received  his  bachelor's  degree  from
Harvard  also,  being  enrolled  among  the  class  of
1828.  He  became  principal  of  Union  hall  academy,
L.  I.,  in  1832,  and  held  that  office  till  his  retirement
in  1865,  after  which  he  devoted  himself  to  literary
pursuits.  He  was  a  successful  teacher  and  an
accomplished  classical  scholar,  lectured  extensively
on  temperance  and  local  history,  and  gave  much
of  his  time  to  historical  and  genealogical  research.
He  was  a  member  of  many  learned  societies.  His
writings  include  "  Documents  and  Letters  Intend
ing  to  illustrate  the  Revolutionary  Incidents  of
Queens  County,  N.  Y."  (New  York,  1846) ;  '•  Corre
spondence  with  James  Fenimore  Cooper  on  the
Capture  and  Death  of  Maj.  Woodhull "  (1848);
i  "  Revolutionary  Incidents  of  Suffolk  and  Kings
j  Counties,  with  an  Account  of  the  Battle  of  Long
Island"  (1849);  ''Long  Island  and  New  "Work  in
Olden  Times,  being  Newspaper  Extracts  and  Plis-
i  torical  Sketches  "  (Jamaica.  1851) :  "  The  Annals  of
'  Hempstead  from  1643  to  1832  "  (Hempstead.  N.  Y.,
|  1878);  and  "Antiquities  of  the  Parish  Church,
I  Hempstead,  including  Oyster  Bay  and  the  Churches
in  Suffolk  County"  (1880).

O'NEALL,  John  Belton,  jurist,  b.  in  Bush
river.  S.  C.,  10  April,  1793:  d.  near  Newberry.  S.
C.,  27  Sept.,  1863.  His  grandparents  on  both  sides
were  natives  of  Ireland,  and  his  parents  were
Quakers.  He  was  graduated  at  South  Carolina
college  in  1812.  prepared  himself  for  the  profession
of  the  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1814.
He  was  elected  in  1816  to  the  lower  house  of  the
South  Carolina  legislature,  and  was  subsequently
three  times  re-elected  to  the  same  body.  During
his  last  two  terms,  in  1824  and  1826.  he  was  the
speaker  of  the  house.  In  December.  1828,  he  was
chosen  an  associate  judge,  and  in  1830  a  judge  of
the  court  of  appeals.  He  henceforth  remained
upon  the  bench  through  various  changes  of  the
judiciary  system  until  finally  he  was  made  chief
justice  of  South  Carolina.  Not  content  with  the
reputation  of  an  able  and  incorruptible  judge,  he
was  active  in  promoting  the  agricultural  interests
and  railway  enterprises  of  the  state.  He  was
especially  devoted  to  the  cause  of  temperance,  of
which  he  was  an  eloquent  and  untiring  advocate.
In  this  relation  his  reputation  was  wide.  In
the  Baptist  denomination,  of  which  he  was  a
member,  he  was  recognized  and  honored  as  a
leader.  He  was  president  of  the  southern  Baptist
convention  from  1858  till  1863.  Judge  O'Neall
was  also  active  in  the  militia,  in  which  he  rose  to
the  rank  of  major-general.  He  contributed  largely
to  the  press  on  education,  temperance,  religion,  and
agriculture,  and  delivered  numerous  addresses,
several  of  which  were  published.  He  was  also  the
author  of  a  "Digest  of  the  Negro  Law "(1848):
"Annals  of  Newberry"  (1858):  and  "Bench  and
•  Bar  of  South  Carolina  "  (2  vols.,  Charleston.  1859).
O'NEILL,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  County  Cavan,
!  Ireland,  in  1834:  d.  in  Omaha.  Neb.,  7  Jan.,  1878.
!  He  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  his  youth,
served  three  years  in  the  National  army  during  the
civil  war,  and.  resigning  in  1864,  established  a
pension  agency  in  Nashville.  Tenn..  with  branch
offices  in  other  cities.  In  1866  he  was  appointed
by  his  Irish  compatriots  to  command  the  Fenian
forces  that  invaded  Canada.  On  1  Jan.  he  set  out
|  with  1,500  men,  crossed  the  Niagara  river  at  Buffalo


582


O'NEILL  DE  TYRONE


OPDYCKE


in  canal-boats,  and  took  possession  of  Fort  Eric.
A  skirmish  ensued  the  next  day,  but  Gen.  Grant,
with  a  considerable  force  of  U.  S.  troops,  having
arrived  in  Buffalo  and  issued  orders  that  no  addi
tional  Fenians  be  permitted  to  cross  the  .river,
O'Neill's  party  was  left  without  ammunition  or
supplies,  and  by  his  order  left  the  encampment  and
retreated  to  the  American  shore.  Seven  hundred
Fenians  were  intercepted  and  arrested  by  the  U.  S.
gun-boat  "  Michigan,"  and  the  remainder  were  dis
banded  and  ordered  to  their  respective  homes.  In
September  of  the  same  year  O'Neill  was  a  delegate
to  the  Fenian  congress,  and  was  elected  inspector-
general  of  the  Fenian  forces.  After  his  second
invasion  of  Canada  in  1870  he  was  imprisoned  for
several  months.  lie  subsequently  engaged  in  lec
turing  and  in  organizing  a  movement  for  the
colonization  of  his  countrymen  in  Nebraska.

O'NEILL  DE  TYRONE,  Arthur,  Marquis  del
Norte,  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  8
Jan.,  1736;  d.  in  Madrid,  Spain,  9  Dec.,  1814.  Ik-
emigrated  with  his  parents  to  Spain  when  he  was
a  boy,  and  began  his  military  career  in  1752  as  a
cadet  m  the  Irish  infantry-  regiment.  He  took
part  in  1762  in  the  campaign  in  Portugal  and  the
expedition  to  Algiers.  At  the  beginning  of  next
year  he  volunteered  for  the  expedition  to  Brazil
under  Gen.  Cevallos  and  led  a  hazardous  attack
on  Fort  Santa  Cruz  in  the  island  of  Santa  Catha-
rina,  of  which  he  was  appointed  governor.  Toward
the  end  of  that  year  he  volunteered  again  for  the
expedition  to  Martinique  under  Gen.  Navia,  which
was  frustrated  by  the  dispersion  of  the  fleet  in  a
storm,  and  later  he  went  with  Bernardo  de  Galvez
(q.  v.)  to  Louisiana.  He  accompanied  the  latter
in  the  siege  of  Pensacola  in  1781.  repelled  several
sallies  of  the  garrison,  and  after  the  surrender  of
the  city  on  !)  May  was  appointed  its  governor,
which  post  he  occupied  till  10  Dec.,  1793,  when
he  was  appointed  cap'tain-general  of  the  province
of  Yucatan.  He  planned  and  commanded  in  1798
the  expedition  against  Belize  and  the  English  pos
sessions  in  the  Bay  of  Honduras.  At  his  request
he  was  relieved  in  1802,  and  in  the  next  year  he
was  appointed  a  member  of  the  supreme  military
court.  In  1808,  during  the  invasion  of  the  French,
notwithstanding  his  advanced  age,  he  entered  the
service  again,  led  the  second  division  of  the  army
of  Old  Castile,  and  in  the  defence  of  Madrid  com
manded  the  batteries  of  the  Gate  de  los  Pozos.

ONESIME,  Charles  Stanislas  de  Montigny
(o-nay-seem),  better  known  as  Friar  Onesime,
French  missionary,  b.  in  Riberac  in  1G41 ;  d.  in
Capesterre,  Guadeloupe,  in  1699.  He  went  to  Gua
deloupe  as  a  missionary  in  1665,  contributed  to
ward  building  up  the  colony,  and,  acquiring  influ
ence  among  the  Caribs,  taught  them  to  love  French
rule,  and  quieted  several  insurrections  that  were
incited  by  English  and  Spanish  agents.  As  he
had  some  engineering  skill,  he  directed  the  con
struction  of  dams  and  canals,  and  opened  roads
across  the  mountains.  He  also  ascended  the  vol
cano  La  Soufriere,  and  supervised  works  to  prevent
the  disastrous  effects  of  eruptions.  He  published
"  Relation  de  la  mission  du  Pere  Onesime  aux  iles
du  Vent,  contenant  1'histoire  des  colonies  francoises
et  des  decouvertes  qui  s'y  sont  faites  jusqu'a  nos
jours,  suivie  d'un  sommaire  des  expeditions  des
flibustiers  de  1'ile  de  la  Tortue,  avec  leurs  etonnantes
aventures"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1691),  a  curious  work,
which  contains  also  an  account  of  the  French  es
tablishments  in  southern  Louisiana.

ONIS,  Luis  de  (o'-nees),  Spanish  diplomatist,  b.
in  La  Mancha,  Spain,  in  1769;  d.  in  Madrid  about
1830.  He  was  trained  in  the  diplomatic  service,


employed  in  the  state  ministry  when  the  French
invaded  the  peninsula  in  1809,  and  is  believed  to
be  the  author  of  the  famous  manifest  of  Ceballo.
The  supreme  junta  of  Cadiz  appointed  him  envoy
to  the  United  States,  but,  notwithstanding  his  re
peated  efforts,  President  Madison  refused  him
recognition,  under  the  pretext  that,  as  the  crown
of  Spain  was  in  dispute,  the  American  government
could  not  pronounce  in  favor  of  either  of  the  bel
ligerents.  Onis,  however,  remained  in  this  coun
try,  where  he  rendered  great  service  to  his  govern
ment  by  communicating  events  in  Spanish  America
and  transmitting  orders  to  the  governors  and
commanders  in  those  countries.  After  the  return  of
Ferdinand  VII.  to  Spain  in  1814,  Onis  applied  again
for  recognition  to  Washington,  and  it  was  finally
given  in  December,  1815.  He  renewed  his  former
protests  against  the  American  occupation  of  Pen
sacola,  Mobile,  and  part  of  Florida,  and  against
the  fitting  out  of  expeditions  for  the  Independents
of  South  America  in  Baltimore  and  other  parts  of
the  Union,  but  obtained,  however,  only  evasive
answers,  and  in  order  to  avoid  further  complica
tions,  seeing  no  hope  for  the  recovery  of  Florida,
he  used  his  best  efforts  to  bring  about  an  advan
tageous  treaty  for  its  cession  to  the  United  States,
the  abandonment  of  the  American  claims  for  in
demnity,  and  the  fixing  of  the  boundary  between
Louisiana  and  Texas.  The  treaty  was  signed  in
Washington  in  February,  1819.  and  Onis  returned  to
Spain  to  hasten  its  ratification  by  his  government,
which  was  delayed  by  court  intrigues  till  1821.
Onis  meanwhile  had  been  appointed  minister  to
Naples  and  afterward  to  England,  whence  he  was
recalled  in  1823,  when  the  absolute  power  of  King
Ferdinand  was  re-established.  He  published  in
1810-'12  in  the  United  States,  under  the  pen-name
of  "  Verus,"  satirical  letters,  in  which  he  attacked
the  conduct  of  the  U.  S.  government  toward
Spain  ;  and  he  also  wrote  '•  Mem'orias  sobre  las
negociaciones  entre  Espana  y  los  Estados  Unidos
de  America,  que  causaron  el  tratado  dc  1819  ;  con-
teniendo  una  estadistica  del  ultimo  pais"  (Madrid,
1820 ;  English  translation,  with  notes  by  Tobias
Watkins,  Baltimore,  1821).

OORT,  Piet  Van  (ort),  Dutch  adventurer,  b.  in
Dordrecht  about  1615;  d.  in  the  province  of  Mi-
nas  Geraes,  Brazil,  in  1663.  He  was  a  soldier  and
served  in  the  Brazilian  expedition  of  the  Prince  of
Nassau-Siegen  (q.  v.),  but  deserted,  lived  with  an
Indian  tribe  for  several  years,  and  acquired  a  per
fect  knowledge  of  their  language.  On  his  return
to  Guiana  he  was  employed  as  interpreter,  but,
having  learned  from  the  Indians  that  gold  existed
in  the  Amazon  valley,  he  set  out  in  1652  with  two
companions  and  ascended  the  Amazon  for  sev
eral  hundred  miles  to  a  place  that  an  old  Indian
hunter  had  told  him  was  rich  in  gold.  He  found
little  of  that  metal,  but  several  petrified  bodies,  for
whose  peculiar  form  and  features  he  was  unable  to
account.  He  was  afterward  employed  as  interpre
ter  by  the  Portuguese  in  the  province  of  Minas
Geraes,  where  he  died.  Nothing  more  was  thought
at  that  time  of  Van  Oort's  discovery,  although
later  several  authors  mentioned  it  as  a  curiosity;
but  the  modern  anthropological  science  has  given
it  due  credit,  and  the  fossil  deposit  that  was  found
in  1867  in  the  Amazon  valley  by  the  American  ex
pedition  is  probably  the  same  as  the  one  that  was
discovered  by  Van  Oort.

OPDYCKE,  Emerson,  soldier,  b.  in  Hubbard,
Trumbull  co.,  Ohio,  7  Jan.,  1830;  d.  in  New  York
city,  25  April,  1884.  His  father  served  in  the  war
of  1812,  and  his  grandfather  was  a  captain  in  the
Revolution.  He  engaged  in  business  in  California


OPDYKE


ORBIGNY


583


and  Ohio,  and,  enlisting  in  July,  1861,  in  the  41st
Ohio  regiment,  was  mustered  in  as  1st  lieutenant,
and  soon  commissioned  captain.  At  Shiloh  he
carried  the  colors,  and  led  an  important  charge  of
his  command.  He  was  commissioned  colonel  of  the
125th  Ohio  in  January,  1808.  At  Chickamauga  a
charge  of  his  regiment,  and  later  in  the  day  its
maintenance  of  an  exposed  position,  at  a  loss  of
one  third  of  its  number  in  killed  and  wounded,
were  of  vital  importance.  At  Missionary  Ridge
his  demi-brigade  was  among  the  first  commands  to
reach  the  crest.  He  rendered  special  service  at
Rocky-face  Ridge  and  Resaca,  and  commanded  a
brigade  from  August,  18G4,  to  the  end  of  the  war,
and  on  26  July,  1865,  was  made  brigadier-general
of  volunteers.  At  Franklin,  when  the  National
line  had  been  disastrously  broken  by  Hood's  assault,
he  independently  and  without  receiving  orders
changed  his  brigade  from  reserve  into  the  gap,  and
was  credited  by  Gen.  Thomas,  the  commander  of
the  army,  with  the  success  of  the  day.  He  rendered
valuable  service  also  at  Nashville,  commanded  a
division  in  Texas,  resigned  in  January,  1866,  and
received  commission  as  major-general  of  volunteers
by  brevet,  to  date  from  the  battle  of  Franklin.  He
then  engaged  in  business  in  New  York  city,  and
published  many  papers  on  the  history  of  the  war.

OPDYKE,  (ieorge,  mayor  of  New  York,  b.  in
Hunterdon  county,  N.  J.,  in  1805  ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  12  June,  1880.  His  ancestor,  Gysbert,  was  an
early  settler  of  New  York  state.  George  went  to
the  west  at  eighteen  years  of  age  and  settled  in
Cleveland.  Ohio,  but  afterward  removed  to  New
Orleans,  La.,  and,  returning  to  the  north  in  1882,
engaged  in  business  in  New  York  city,  where  he
subsequently  established  the  banking-house  of
George  Opdyke  and  Co.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Buffalo  Free-soil  convention  in  1848,  served  on  its
committee  on -resolutions,  and  was  a  candidate  for
congress  on  the  Free-soil  ticket  in  New  Jersey,  and
while  in  the  legislature  in  1858  he  was  zealous  in
protecting  the  franchises  of  New  York  city  from
spoliation.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Re
publican  convention  in  1860,  and  was  instrumental
in  the  nomination  of  Abraham  Lincoln.  He  was
mayor  of  New  York  in  1862-'3,  and  was  energetic
in  sustaining  the  National  government,  in  raising
and  equipping  troops,  and  did  much  to  prevent
commercial  panics.  He  served  in  the  New  York
constitutional  convention  in  1867-'8,  in  the  New
York  constitutional  commission  in  1872-'5,  was  a
member  of  the  New  York  chamber  of  commerce  in
1858-'80.  and  its  vice-president  in  1867-'75.  He
published  a  "Treatise  on  Political  Economy,"  in
which  he  took  advanced  views  against  the  economic
evils  of  slavery,  and  in  favor  of  inconvertible  paper
money  and  free  trade  (New  York,  1851) ;  "  Report
on  the  Currency  "  (1858) ;  and  "  Official  Documents,
Addresses,  etc."  (1866).

OPPERT,  Charles  Etienne  d'  (op -pert),
French  magistrate,  b.  in  Toulouse  in  1749 ;  d.  there
in  1819.  He  was  a  judge  in  the  parliament  of
Toulouse  at  the  time  of  the  French  revolution,  but
emigrated  to  Spain  in  1791,  and  through  the  influ
ence  of  relatives  in  the  service  of  Charles  IV.  ob
tained  an  appointment  in  the  department  of  state
at  Lima.  He  remained  in  Peru  till  the  restoration
of  Louis  XVIII.,  when  he  returned  to  his  native
city.  While  he  was  in  Lima  he  became  interested
in  Peruvian  antiquities  and  drew  a  plan  of  the
temple  of  the  Virgins  of  the  Sun  in  Cuzco.  He
made  also  a  particular  study  of  the  songs  of  the
Peruvian  Sappho,  which  in  a  Spanish  translation
are  yet  sung  by  the  Indians  in  the  mountains  of
the  interior  of  Peru  and  Bolivia,  and  he  translated


'  into  French  several  melodies  on  the  Colqui-Cocha
or  silver  lake.  Having  recovered  a  part  of  his  es
tate  during  Napoleon's  reign,  he  resigned  his  office,
travelled  for  several  years  in  the  country,  and
formed  a  collection  of  Indian  antiquities  which  is
now  in  the  museum  of  Toulouse.  He  published
"Voyage  au  Cuzco"  (Toulouse.  1816);  "  Les  an-
tiquites  Peruviennes"  (1817);  "  Histoire  de  la  poe-
sie  Peruvienne  sous  la  domination  des  Incas"
(1819) ;  "  Yaravis,  oucomplaintes  Indiennes  "  (1819) ;
and  other  works.

ORBEGOZO,  Luis  Jos6  (or-bay-go'-tho),  Peru
vian  soldier,  b.  in  Chuquisongo,  Huamachuco,  25
Aug.,  1795;  d.  in  Lima  in  1847.  Being  destined
!  by  his  parents  for  a  literary  career,  he  studied
philosophy  and  physics  in  the  College  of  San  Car-
I  los  at  Lima.  After  the  death  of  his  father  he  took
charge  of  the  property  of  his  family  and  entered
I  the  militia  as  cadet  of  the  regiment  of  cavalry  of
Trujillo,  27  Jan.,  1815.  When  the  army  of  Gen.
;  San  Martin  arrived  in  Pisco  in  September,  1820,
!  Trujillo,  under  the  Marquis  of  Torre-Tagle,  pro
nounced  for  independence  on  29  Dec.  of  the  same
year,  and  Orbegozo  was  one  of  the  most  enthusias
tic  promoters  of  the  movement.  As  major  of  the
regiment  of  Torre-Tagle  he  took  part  in  the  cam
paign  of  1821  and  1822.  He  raised  the  "  Invenci-
bles  de  Trujillo  "  at  his  own  expense  and  did  good
service  during  the  campaign  of  the  north,  offering
all  his  property  to  the  patriotic  junta,  of  which  he
was  president,  for  the  cause  of  liberty.  Bolivar
appointed  him  prefect  of  the  Department  of  La
Libertad,  and  in  April,  1826,  promoted  him  gen
eral  of  brigade.  He  served  as  commander  of  cav
alry  in  the  campaign  against  Colombia,  and  was
several  times  elected  deputy  to  congress.  The  Na
tional  convention  chose  him  president  of  the  re
public  on  20  Dec.,  1833,  and  when  his  predecessor,
Gamarra  (q.  v.),  tried  to  depose  him  in  1834  the  at
tempt  failed :  but,  being  of  feeble  character,  Orbe
gozo  accepted  the  intervention  of  Gen.  Santa  Cruz,
president  of  Bolivia,  and  the  Peru-Bolivian  con
federation  was  formed  in  June,  1834.  When  the
federation  was  dissolved  by  the  forces  of  Chili  at
Yungay,  20  Jan.,  1839,  Orbegozo  was  exiled,  but
several  years  afterward  he  returned.

ORBIGNY,  Alcide  de  (or-been'-ye),  French
naturalist,  b.  in  Coueron,  France,  9  Sept.,  1802 ;  d.
in  Pierrefitte,  near  St.  Denis,  France.  30  June,  1857.
At  the  age  of  twenty-three  he  published  a  paper
on  foraminifera  in  the  "Annales  des  sciences  natu-
relles,"  which  resulted  in  his  being  intrusted  with
a  scientific  mission  to  South  America  by  the  Muse
um  of  natural  history.  After  travelling  across
Brazil  and  Uruguay  in  1826,  he  devoted  fourteen
months  to  the  exploration  of  the  Parana  and  its
affluents,  and  was  then  employed  by  the  Argentine
government  in  exploring  the  pampas  and  report
ing  on  the  best  means  of  utilizing  them  for  agri
culture.  He  then  went  to  Patagonia,  where  he  was
obliged  to  fight  in  the  ranks  of  a  tribe  that  gave
him  hospitality.  After  exploring  Bolivia  and  trav
elling  through  Peru,  he  returned  to  France  in  1833
with  a  rich  collection  in  zoology  and  botany.  He
received  the  grand  prize  of  the  Geographical  socie
ty,  and  the  academy  named  a  commission  to  pass
judgment  on  the  results  of  his  voyage.  On  their
favorable  report  the  government  published  the  ac-
j  count  of  his  journey.  He  wrote  altogether  fifty-
I  five  volumes,  besides  numerous  papers  that  he  pre-
j  sented  to  the  Academy  of  sciences.  His  principal
works,  embracing  the  results  of  his  explorations  in
America,  are  "  Foraminiferes  de  1'Amerique  meri-
dionale  "  (Paris,  1839) ;  "  Foraminiferes  de  Tile  de
Cuba  et  des  Antilles"  (1839);  "  Ornithologie  de


584


ORD


ORD


i'ile  de  Cuba"  (1839);  and  "Voyage  dans  1'Ame-
rique  meridionale  "  (9  vols.,  1834-'4r).  The  part  of
this  work  that  relates  to  the  geography  of  Bolivia
was  translated  into  Spanish  under  the  title  "  De-
scripcion  geografiea  histories!  y  estadistica  de  Bo
livia  "  (Paris,  1840).  lie  also  issued  numerous  valu
able  geological  charts.

OKI),  Edward  Otho  Cresap,  soldier, b.  in  Cum
berland,  Aid.,  18  Oct.,  1818  ;  d.  in  Havana,  Cuba,
22  July,  1883.  He  showed  in  his  boyhood  great
mathematical  ability,  which  attracted  attention
and  gained  for  him  an
appointment  to  the
L.  S.  military  acad
emy,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1839.  On
his  graduation  he  was
assigned  to  the  3d
artillery,  and  served
in  the  Florida  war
against  the  Seminole
Indians .  in  1839-'42,
winning  his  promo
tion  as  1st  lieutenant
in  1841.  He  was  one
of  two  lieutenants  that
were  selected  by  Col.
William  S.  Ilarney  to
assist  in  attacking  the
Indians  in  the  Ever
glades.  During  the
four  following  years  lie  served  on  garrison  duty  on
the  eastern  seaboard.  In  1847,  with  his  classmate,
Lieut.  Henry  W.  Halleck,  and  Lieut.  William  T.
Sherman,  he  was  sent  to  California  by  way  of  Cape
Horn,  and  by  his  individual  efforts  did  much  toward
preserving  law  and  order  in  Monterey  during  the
latter  part  of  the  Mexican  war.  In  1850  he  returned
to  the  east  and  was  made  captain,  but  after  two
years'  service  in  Fort  Independence,  Alass.,  he  went
back  to  California  and  was  engaged  on  coast  survey
duty  until  1833.  He  then  took  part  in  Indian  war
fare,  again  participating  in  the  campaigns  against
the  Rogue  river  Indians  in  Oregon  in  1830,  and  in
that  against  the  Spokane  Indians  in  Washington
territory  in  1858.  He  was  stationed  at  the  Presidio
in  San  Francisco  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,
but  in  September,  1801.  was  made  brigadier-general
of  volunteers  and  given  a  command  in  the  Army
of  the  Potomac.  In  November  he  was  promoted
major  and  assigned  the  3d  brigade  of  Pennsylva
nia  reserves.  His  first  engagement  was  at  Dranes-
ville,  where  he  defeated  the  Confederates  after  a
sharp  contest  of  several  hours.  Following  the  de
feats  of  Bull  Run  and  Ball's  Bluff,  this  victory  did
much  toward  raising  the  spirits  of  the  soldiers.
Gen.  John  F.  Reynolds  said  at  the  time  :  "  I  knew  if
there  was  a  fight  to  be  scared  up.  Ord  would  find
it."  Later  he  was  sent  down  the  valley  of  Virginia
with  Gen.  Franz  Sigel,  with  the  understanding
that  he  should  by  his  advice  control  most  of  the
movements  of  the  command,  but,  failing  to  accom
plish  this,  he  abruptly  returned  to  Washington.
On  2  May,  1802,  he  was  made  major-general  of
volunteers  and  transferred  to  a  command  under
Gen.  Halleck  in  the  Department  of  the  Mississippi.
He  led  the  left  wing  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee
under  Gen.  Grant  when  it  advanced  upon  luka
from  the  north,  and  is  reported  as  having  "  showed
untiring  zeal,"  although  he  did  not  participate  in
the  battle.  In  the  subsequent  fights  before  Corinth,
Gen.  Grant  says  in  his  orders  that  Gen.  Ord's
'•  forces  advanced  with  unsurpassed  gallantry,
driving  the  enemy  back  across  the  Hatchie,  over
ground  where  it  is  almost  incredible  that  a  supe


rior  force  should  be  driven  by  an  inferior,  cap
turing  two  of  the  batteries,  many  hundred  small
arms,  and  several  hundred  prisoners."  Among
these  were  several  field  officers  and  an  aide-de
camp  to  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn.  lie  was  severely
wounded  late  in  the  afternoon  and  had  to  be  car
ried  from  the  field,  serving  during  his  recovery  on
the  military  commission  that  was  appointed  to  in
vestigate  Gen.  Don  Carlos  Buell's  campaign  in
Kentucky  and  Tennessee.  In  June,  1803,  he  was
put  in  command  of  the  13th  army  corps  in  the
Army  of  the  Tennessee,  before  Vicksburg,  and
after  its  surrender,  on  4  July,  1803,  he  was  given
command  of  the  right  wing  of  Gen.  William  T.
Sherman's  army  in  the  movement  that  resulted  in
the  capture  of  Jackson,  Aliss.,  and  in  clearing  that
part  of  the  state  of  the  organized  forces  of  the
enemy.  He  was  then  sent  to  New  Orleans,  but
was  relieved  in  October,  owing  to  illness,  returning
later  to  his  command  of  the  13th  corps,  then  in  the
Department  of  the  Gulf.  In  July,  1804,  he  was
given  command  of  the  8th  army  corps  and  the
troops  in  the  Aliddle  department,  and  at  once
began  to  quiet  the  confusion  in  Baltimore  and  the
surrounding  country.  After  confidence  had  been
restored  he  was  given  the  18th  army  corps  in  the
vicinity  of  Petersburg,  Va.  He  took  part  in  the
movements  before  that  city,  and,  crossing  to  the
north  side  of  the  James,  on  29  Sept.,  1804,  led  the
forces  that  carried  the  strong  fortifications  and
long  line  of  intrenchments  below  Chapin's  farm,
known  as  Fort  Harrison.  On  this  occasion  he
captured  about  fifteen  pieces  of  artillery  and  nearly
300  prisoners,  but  during  the  assault  he  received
a  wound  that  temporarily  disabled  him.  When
the  10th  and  18th  corps  were  consolidated  he  was
placed  in  command,  but,  owing  to  feeble  health,  was
ordered  to  Washington  for  a  few  months.  After
the  return  of  the  troops  from  Fort  Fisher  he  re
sumed  command  of  his  corps,  but  in  January,  1803,
was  given  the  Army  of  the  James  and  the  Depart
ment  of  Virginia.  In  this  capacity  he  participated
in  the  operations  that  resulted  in  the  evacuation  of
Richmond  and  the  surrender  of  Gen.  Lee.  Gen.
Sherman  says  that  he  "had  always  understood
that  his  (Ord's)  skilful,  hard  march  the  night  be
fore  was  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  Lee's  surrender."
He  then  was  given  the  Department  of  the  Ohio,
which  he  retained  until  he  was  mustered  out  of  the
volunteer  service  in  September,  1806,  after  receiv
ing,  on  13  March,  1805,  the  brevets  of  brigadier-
general  and  major-general  in  the  IT.  S.  army,  and
the  commissions  of  lieutenant-colonel,  on  11  Dec.,
1805,  and  of  brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army,
26  July,  1800.  Subsequently  he  had  command  of
the  Department  of  Arkansas,  the  4th  military  dis
trict,  the  Department  of  California,  the  Depart
ment  of  the  Platte,  and  that  of  Texas.  On  0  Dec.,
1880,  he  was  retired  with  his  brevet  rank  of  major-
general,  and  on  this  occasion  Gen.  Sherman  wrote
of  him:  "  He  has  had  all  of  the  hard  knocks  of  ser
vice,  and  never  on  soft  or  fancy  duty.  He  has  always
been  called  on  when  hard  duty  was  expected,  and
never  flinched."  Gen.  Ord  then  accepted  theappoinl-
ment  as  engineer  on  the  construction  of  a  Mexican
railroad,  but  died  of  yellow  fever  while  on  his  way
from  Vera  Cruz  to  New  York  by  way  of  Cuba.
The  order  that  announced  his  death  closed  with
these  words :  "  As  his  intimate  associate  since  boy
hood,  the  General  [Sherman]  here  bears  testimony
of  him,  that  a  more  unselfish,  manly,  and  patriotic
person  never  lived."

ORD,  (ieorsre,  naturalist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1781 ;  d.  there,  24  Jan.,  1800.  He  was  an
ardent  student  of  natural  history,  and,  although  of


ORDAZ


ORE


585


a  retiring  disposition,  was  held  in  high  esteem  by
his  fellow-workers  in  science,  especially  in  the  de
partment  of  ornithology.  Mr.  Ord  was  a  fellow  of
the  Linnaean  society  of  London,  and  vice-president
of  the  American  philosophical  society,  and  president
of  the  Academy  of  natural  sciences  of  Philadelphia
in  1851-'8.  He  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Alexan
der  Wilson,  the  naturalist,  and  accompanied  him
on  many  of  his  rambles.  After  Wilson's  death  in
1813  Mr.  Ord  completed  the  eighth  volume  of  the
former's  "  American  Ornithology  "  (Philadelphia,
1814),  and  wrote  the  entire  letter-press  of  the  con
cluding  volume,  to  which  he  added  a  sketch  of  the
author's  life.  In  1825  Mr.  Ord  prepared  a  new
edition  of  the  last  three  volumes  of  the  ornithology,
and  in  1828  issued  his  life  of  Wilson  as  a  separate
volume.  He  also  contributed  to  the  scientific
journals,  and  was  the  author  of  memoirs  of  Thomas
Say  (1834)  and  of  Charles  A.  Lesueur  (1849).  He
assisted  in  the  enlargement  of  Johnson's  dictionary,
and  also  in  the  lexicographical  labors  of  Xoah
Webster.  Mr.  Ord  bequeathed  over  $16,000  to  the
Pennsylvania  hospital,  to  be  used  for  the  benefit  of
the  insane,  and  to  the  College  of  physicians  in
Philadelphia  he  gave  his  large  and  valuable  library
of  scientific  works.

ORDAZ,  Diearo  de,  Spanish  adventurer,  b.  in
Castro  Verde  in  1483 ;  d.  in  Paria,  Venezuela,  in
1333. He  cam?  in  his  youth  to  South  America,
served under Diego Velasquez in Cuba, joined
Cortes  in  1518  with  a  ship,  and  took  an  active  part
in  the  conquest  of  New  Spain,  deciding  by  a  timely
movement  the  success  of  the  battle  of  Ceutla,  25
March,  1519. He  was  the  first  European  to  ascend
Popocatepetl,  which  feat  greatly  impressed  the  In
dians,  and  for  which  he  was  permitted  by  a  decree  j
of  Charles  V.,  dated  22  Oct.,  1523,  to  add  to  his  i
escutcheon  a  burning  volcano. He  afterward  ex-  |
plored  the  province  of  Oaxaca  and  sailed  up  the  j
river  Coatzacoalco. He  was  sent  in  1521  to  Spain  |
to  present  the  emperor  with  a  narrative  of  Cortes's  [
discovery,  and  again  in  1522  to  obtain  for  Cortes  j
the  government  of  New  Spain,  which  was  granted  j
by  decree  of  15  Oct. With  this  good  news  Ordaz
returned  to  Mexico,  but  after  some  years  he  went  i
again  to  Spain,  where  he  obtained  a  grant  of  the  '
country  between  Cape  Vela  and  the  Bay  of  Vene-  j
zuela. After  forming  an  expedition  he  left  San
Lucar  in  March,  1531,  and  sailed  along  the  coast
of  South  America,  discovering  Orinoco  river,  which
he  explored  for  nearly  200  miles  and  which  he  was  j
the  first  to  ascend. On  his  way  to  Spain  to  give  I
an  account  of  his  discovery  he  touched  at  Paria,
where  he  died  suddenly.

ORDONEZ,  Diego  (or-done'-yeth),  Central
American  author,  b.  in  Salamanca,  Spain,  in  1491;
d.  in  Sombrerete,  Mexico,  in  1G08.  He  entered  the
priesthood  in  early  youth  and  became  archdean  of
his  native  city,  but  in  1511  he  left  this  post,  en
tered  the  order  of  St.  Francis,  and  a  few  years  af
terward  came  with  five  other  monks  to  Guatemala.
He  founded  the  villages  of  Aletenango  and  San  Pe
dro  Xoh,  became  provincial  of  his  order  for  Guate
mala,  and  after  thirty  years  of  missionary  labor
was  called  to  Mexico  as  a  judge  of  the  Inquisition.
Although  he  was  more  than  a  centenarian,  he  began
his  missionary  labor  again  in  the  province  of  Xew
Biscay,  and  one  day  while  preaching  at  Sombrerete
fainted  in  the  pulpit  and  died  thirty  days  after
ward,  at  the  age  of  117.  According  to  Vasquez,  he
was  the  first  to  write  in  the  Cakchiquel  language.
His  works  are  "  Doctrina  dogmatica  en  lengua  de
Guatemala  para  instruir,  a  los  Indios,"  '•  Exhorta-
ciones  sobre  la  Penitencia  y  Comunion,"  in  (Quiche
dialect ;  and  ••  Sermones  panegiricos  y  morales  en


lengua  de  Guatemala" — all  of  which  are  in  manu
script  in  the  convent  of  Guatemala:  and  '•Comen-
tarios  del  Subtil  Dr.  Scoto"  (Spanish  manuscript),
in  the  convent  of  Xombre  de  Dios,  Zacatecas.

ORDOXEZ  ¥  CEVALLOS,  Pedro,  Spanish
traveller,  b.  in  Seville  in  the  latter  half  of  the  IGth
century  :  d.  in  Spain  about  1620.  He  became  a  sol
dier  in  his  youth  and  set  out  for  America  in  search
of  adventures.  He  landed  at  Carthagena.  travelled
as  far  as  Chili,  and,  after  visiting  the  Antilles  and
Mexico  in  1570,  embarked  at  Acapulco  for  the
Philippines.  He  then  returned  to  Spain,  was  or
dained  priest,  and  wrote  the  history  of  his  travels.
It  was  published  under  the  title  "  Viage  del  Mun-
do  "  (Madrid,  1614,  1616,  and  1691).  A  part  of  it
was  translated  into  Latin  by  Barlaeus  and  pub
lished  under  the  title  "  Descriptio  India1  Occidenta-
lis "  (Amsterdam,  1622).  There  is  also  a  French
translation.  This  work  gives  a  good  idea  of  the
West  Indies  at  the  close  of  the  16th  century.  The
author  speaks  with  indignation  of  the  cruelties
committed  bv  his  fellow-countrymen  in  America.

ORD  WAY,  John  Morse,  chemist,  b.  in  Ames-
bury,  Mass.,  23  April,  1823.  He  was  graduated  at
Dartmouth  in  1844,  and  then  studied  chemistry.
In  1847  he  became  superintendent  of  the  Roxbury
color  and  chemical  company,  which  place  he  held
until  1858,  except  during  1851-'4.  when  he  was
principal  of  Grand  river  college  in  Edinbtirg,  Mo.
Subsequently  he  was  chemist  to  the  Hughesdale
chemical  works,  Johnston,  R.  I.,  in  1858-'60,  then
successively  chemist,  manager,  and  superintendent
of  the  Manchester,  X.  H..  print  works  in  1860-'66,
and  superintendent  of  the  Bayside  alkali  works.
South  Boston,  in  1866-74.  Meanwhile,  in  1869,  he
became  professor  of  industrial  chemistry  at  the
Massachusetts  institute  of  technology,  where  he
remained  until  1884,  when  he  accepted  the  chair
of  chemistry  and  biology,  with  the  superintendence
of  the  manual  training  department  in  Tulane
university,  Xew  Orleans.  Prof.  Ordway  is  a  mem
ber  of  various  scientific  societies,  and  in  1880  was
chairman  of  the  chemical  section  of  the  American
association  for  the  advancement  of  science.  His
investigations  have  been  numerous,  but  are  princi
pally  in  the  direction  of  original  researches  in  vari
ous  branches  of  industrial  chemistry  for  private
corporations.  In  consequence  his  scientific  papers
have  been  few  and  have  appeared  chiefly  in  the
••  American  Journal  of  Science  ''  and  in  the  "  Pro
ceedings  of  the  American  Institute  of  Mechanical
Engineers."  He  has  published  "  Plantarum  Ordi-
num  Indicator  "  (Boston,  1881).

ORE,  Luis  Jeronimo  de  (o'-ray),  Peruvian  R.
C.  bishop,  b.  in  Huamanga,  Peru ;  d.  in  Concep-
cion,  Chili,  in  1628.  After  his  ordination  he  was
appointed  professor  in  the  College  of  the  Twelve
Apostles,  Peru,  and  in  1612  he  was  sent  as  com
missary  to  Florida.  He  was  nominated  bishop  of
Concepcion  in  1620.  He  was  a  voluminous  writer,
and  published  collections  of  his  sermons,  treatises
on  theology,  and  lives  of  the  saints.  It  was  as  an
Indian  scholar  that  he  chiefly  distinguished  him
self,  having  become  familiar  with  all  the  Peruvian
dialects,  into  which  he  translated  several  religious
works.  He  wrote  "  Orden  de  ensenar  la  doctrina
Cristiana  en  las  lenguas  Quichua  y  Aymara  "  (Lima,
1598) ;  "  Simbolo  Catolico  Indiano  " ;  "  Una  De-
scripcion  del  Xuevo  orbe  y  de  las  costumbres  de
sus  Xaturales  "  (1598) ;  "  R'elacion  de  los  Martires
que  ha  habido  en  Florida."  (1604) ;  and  "  Manuale
Peiiianum  ac  brevem  formam  administrandi  sacra-
menta  juxta  ordinem  Sancta?  Ecclesiae  Romanae
cum  translationibus  in  linguas  Provinciarum  Pe-
ruanarum  "  (Xaples,  1607).


586


O'REGAN


O'REILLY


O'REGAN,  Anthony,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Kil-
tullagh,  Ireland,  early  in  the  19th  century;  d.  in
London.  England,  13  Nov..  1866.  He  emigrated
to  the  United  States,  was  appointed  vicar-general
of  the  diocese  of  St.  Louis,  and  was  also  president
of  the  college  of  Carondelet,  and  professor  of
theology  and  sacred  scriptures.  In  1853  he  was
nominated  bishop  of  Chicago.  He  declined  the
appointment,  but  a  rescript  from  the  pope  was
sent  to  him  in  1854,  that  ordered  him  to  accept
the  post,  and  he  was  consecrated  the  same  year.
The  diocese  was  in  a  very  disorganized  condition  ;
there  was  considerable  opposition  to  the  adminis
trative  methods  of  the  new  bishop,  and  he  found
it  a  difficult  task  to  restore  order.  Although  he
was  partially  successful,  many  complaints  were
made  to  the  pope  of  his  harshness,  and  he  went  to
Rome  to  obtain  permission  to  resign.  lie  was
finally  successful  and  was  transferred  to  the  titular
see  of  Dora  in  1858.  He  did  not  return  to  the
United  States,  but  left  large  sums  for  the  training
of  ecclesiastical  students  for  the  diocese  of  Chicago,
and  the  erection  of  a  hospital  in  that  city.

O'REILLY,  Count  Alexander,  Spanish  soldier,
b.  in  Ireland  about  1730;  d.  in  Chinchilla,  Murcia,
in  1794.  He  entered  the  Spanish  service,  became
sub-lieutenant  in  the  Hibernian  regiment,  and  rose
rapidly.  He  became  in  1764  second  in  command
at  Havana  with  the  rank  of  major-general.  After
restoring  and  strengthening  the  fortifications  of
the  city  he  returned  to  Spain.  He  was  in  1767  ap
pointed  governor  of  Louisiana,  which  province  had
opposed  its  annexation  to  Spain  and  had  resisted
the  first  governor,  Ulloa.  The  rigorous  measures
that  he  adopted  to  force  the  inhabitants  to  acqui
esce  in  Spanish  rule  made  him  many  enemies,  and
in  1769  he  was  recalled  to  Spain.  He  led  an  expe
dition  against  Algiers  in  1775,  and  was  appointed
to  command  the  Army  of  the  Eastern  Pyrenees
shortly  before  his  death.

01REILLY,  Bernard,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  County
Longford,  Ireland,  in  1803 ;  d.  at  sea  in  1856.
After  receiving  as  good  an  education  as  was  possi
ble  in  the  condition  of  his  country  at  the  time,  he
embarked  for  the  United  States  on  17  Jan.,  1825,
with  the  intention  of  studying  for  the  priesthood.
Soon  after  his  arrival  he  went  to  Canada  and  en
tered  the  ecclesiastical  seminary  of  Montreal.  He
finished  his  theological  studies  in  St.  Mary's  col
lege,  Baltimore,  and  was  promoted  to  the  priest
hood  in  1831.  His  first  mission  was  at  St.  James's
church,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  In  the  cholera  epidemic
of  1832  his  services  won  the  admiration  of  the
whole  community.  He  was  twice  prostrated  by
the  disease.  In  December  of  the  same  year  he  was
transferred  to  St.  Patrick's  church,  Rochester,
X.  Y.,  where  he  had  charge  of  all  the  missions  west
of  Auburn  and  east  of  Niagara  Falls.  The  prog
ress  that  his  church  made  in  this  district  was
mainly  due  to  his  exertions.  In  1847  he  removed
to  Buffalo  and  was  made  vicar-general  of  the
diocese  and  president  of  the  seminary,  having  also
in  charge  the  hospital  of  the  Sisters  of  Charity.  In
1850  he  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Hartford.  The
Roman  Catholic  population  grew  rapidly  in  num
bers  during  the  few  years  of  his  administration,
but  he  met  with  considerable  opposition  in  his  at
tempt  to  introduce  religious  orders.  In  1855  the
House  of  Mercy  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  was  sur
rounded  by  a  mob,  which  threatened  the  inmates
with  death.  He  addressed  the  rioters  fearlessly,
declaring  that  he  would  protect  the  sisters  while  he
had  life,  and  his  courage  awed  the  rioters,  who  dis
persed  without  doing  harm.  He  embarked  for
Europe  on  5  Dec.,  1855,  with  the  object  of  secur


ing  religions  teachers  for  his  schools.  The  "  Pacific,"
on  which  he  sailed  from  Liverpool  for  the  United
States,  in  January,  1856,  was  never  heard  from.

O'REILLY.  Bernard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Done
gal,  Ireland,  in  1823.  He  came  to  Canada  at  an
early  age.  entered  the  Seminary  of  Quebec,  and,
after  finishing  his  studies,  was  ordained  a  priest.
He  was  for  several  years  on  the  Canadian  mission,
devoting  himself  particularly  to  the  interests  of
those  of  his  countrymen  that  were  forced  to  emi
grate  by  the  famine  of  1848,  and  was  also  engaged  in
a  plan  for  promoting  Irish  colonization,  which  was
only  partially  successful.  He  was  professor  of
rhetoric  in  St.  John's  college.  Fordharn,  for  some
time  after  1851,  and,  after  studying  abroad,  was
attached  to  the  church  of  St.  Francis  Xavier,  New
York.  He  afterward  travelled  extensively  through
Europe,  at  the  same  time  devoting  himself  with
success  to  literary  pursuits.  His  intercourse  with
Pius  IX.  and  Leo  XIII.  has  been  confidential,  and
the  latter  pontiff  selected  him  to  write  the  official
"  Life  of  Leo  XIII."  He  was  raised  to  the  dignity
of  domestic  prelate  of  the  papal  throne  in  1887.
His  principal  works  are  "  Mirror  of  True  Woman
hood"  (New  York,  1876):  "Life  of  Pius  IX."
(1877):  "True  Men"  (1878);  "Key  of  Heaven"
(1878);  "The  Two  Brides,"  a  novel  (1879);  and
"Life  of  Leo  XIII."  (1887).

O'REILLY,  Henry,  journalist,  b.  in  Carrick-
macross,  Ireland,  6  Feb.,  1806 ;  d.  in  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  17  Aug.,  1886.  He  came  to  this  country
with  his  father  in  1816,  and  learned  the  printer's
trade  in  New  York.  In  1826  he  went  to  Roches
ter,  N.  Y..  and  there  established  the  "  Advertiser,"
the  first  daily  newspaper  that  was  published  west
of  Albany,  which  he  edited  for  four  years.  It  was
notable  for  its  opposition  to  Thurlow  Weed.  After
the  invention  of  the  telegraph  Mr.  O'Reilly  entered
upon  the  work  of  extending  the  lines  to  the  west,
but  became  involved  in  lawsuits  which  almost
ruined  him  financially.  He  had  also  been  promi
nent  in  advocating  the  enlargement  of  the  Erie
canal  and  improvement  of  the  public-school  system.
In  18  he  was  postmaster  of  Rochester,  and  sub
sequently  he  was  connected  with  various  journals.
He  published  "Sketchesof  Rochester,  with  Notices  of
Western  New  York"  (Rochester,  1838)  and  "Amer
ican  Political  Anti-Masonry  "  (New  York,  1879).

O'REILLY,  James,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  County
Cavan,  Ireland,  about  1850;  d.  in  Wichita,  Kansas,
26  July,  1887.  He  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in
his  boyhood,  and  soon  afterward  entered  the  Catho
lic  ecclesiastical  seminary  at  Milwaukee,  where  he
followed  a  course  of  theology  and  philosophy.  He
was  ordained  priest  in  1874,  and  appointed  a  few
months  afterward  pastor  of  Irish  Creek,  Kan.  He
was  next  transferred  to  the  cathedral  of  Leaven-
worth,  where  he  acted  as  assistant,  and  also  attended
Fort  Leavenworth  and  Kickapoo.  He  was  then  for
several  months  pastor  of  the  cathedral.  In  1881
his  labors  began  to  affect  his  health  and  he  went
to  Europe,  visiting  Ireland.  Italy,  and  other  parts
of  the  continent.  After  his  return,  in  March,
1882,  he  was  made  pastor  of  Topeka,  where  he  ad
vanced  the  interests  of  his  church  materially.  lie
made  purchases  of  property  in  North  and  South
Topeka,  began  a  church  for  colored  people,  and
spent  large  sums  in  other  improvements.  He  was
nominated  first  bishop  of  Wichita,  and  appointed
by  the  pope  on  6  July,  1887,  but  died  before  the
bulls  of  consecration  reached  him.

O'REILLY7,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ireland  in
1797;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  4  March,  1862.  He
emigrated  to  the  United  States,  entered  Mount  St.
Mary's  college,  Emmettsburg,  Md.,  and  was  or-


O'REILLY


ORfiLIE  ANTOIXE  I.


587


clained  priest  in  1827.  He  was  appointed  pastor
of  Huntingdon  and  the  adjacent  counties,  built
several  churches,  and  was  then  transferred  to
Pittsburg.  He  afterward  went  to  Rome  and  en
tered  the  Congregation  of  the  Mission.  On  his
return  to  the  United  States  he  was  made  superior
of  the  house  of  the  fathers  of  his  order  in  St.
Louis.  He  was  then  transferred  to  La  Salle,  where
he  built  a  church  and  founded  a  monastery,  of
which  he  was  elected  superior.  He  was  next  sent
to  the  Seminary  of  St.  Mary  of  the  Angels.  Niagara
Falls,  where  he  succeeded  the  present  archbishop  of
Toronto  as  president.  He  was  elected  deputy  to
the  general  assembly  of  the  priests  of  the  Congre
gation  of  the  Mission  in  Paris  in  1861,  and  on  his
return  retired  to  St.  Louis.

O'REILLY,  John  Boyle,  author,  b.  at  Dowth
Castle,  County  Meath.  Ireland,  28  June,  1844.  At
the  age  of  fourteen  he  learned  type-setting,  and
afterward  became  a  reporter  for  various  English
journals.  He  returned  to  Ireland  in  1863  and  en
listed  in  the  10th  Hussars.  He  had  meantime
joined  the  Fenian  society,  and  his  entrance  into
the  English  army  was  with  the  object  of  spreading
disaffection  among  the  Irish  soldiers.  His  connec
tion  with  Fenianism  was  discovered  in  1866.  His
propaganda  of  revolutionary  principles  had  been
successful,  and  several  Irish  regiments,  known  to
be  ready  to  participate  in  a  rebellion,  were,  in  con
sequence,  scattered  through  the  most  unhealthful
parts  of  the  British  possessions.  O'Reilly  was
tried  for  high  treason,  and  sentenced  to  be  shot.
The  sentence  was  commuted,  and  he  was  confined
in  different  English  prisons.  When  in  Dartmoor,
aided  by  other  Irish  prisoners,  he  collected  and
buried  the  scattered  bones  of  the  French  and
American  prisoners  of  war  who  were  shot  in  1814.
In  1867  he  was  sent  to  Australia.  He  was  one  of
those-  excluded  from  the  amnesty  granted  to  the
political  prisoners  in  1869.  He  escaped  from  the
western  coast  of  Australia  in  an  open  boat,  was
picked  up  by  Capt.  Gifford,  of  the  American  ship
"Gazelle,"  and  landed  in  Philadelphia  on  23  Nov.,

1869.  He  lectured  and  wrote  for  the  journals  for
a  time,  followed  the  Fenian  raid  into  Canada  in

1870.  and described  its  incidents  for  the  Boston
journals. The  same  year  he  became  connected
with  the  Boston  "Pilot,"  of  which  he  is  now (1888)
editor  and principal  owner. He  founded the
Papyrus  club  in  Boston. He  has  appeared  as  a
lecturer,  has  contributed  to  periodicals,  and  has
published  in  book-form  "Songs  of  the  Southern
Seas'' (Boston,  1873);  ''Songs,  Legends,  and  Bal
lads"  (1878);  "Mopndyne,"  a  novel  (1879);  "Stat
ues  in  the Block"  (1881); and "In  Bohemia"
(1886). He  has  in  preparation  ''The  Country  with
a  Roof,"  an  allegory  dealing  with  certain  faults  in
the American  social  system.  "The  Evolution of
Straight  Weapons."  and  a  work  on  the  material
resources  of  Ireland.

O'REILLY,  Patrick  Thomas,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
in  Cavan,  Ireland,  24  Dec.,  1833.  He  emigrated  to
the  United  States  at  an  early  age,  and  was  edu
cated  by  a  wealthy  uncle  in  Boston.  He  began
his  philosophical  and  theological  studies  in  St.
Charles's  college,  Md..  and  completed  them  in  St.
Mary's  seminary,  Baltimore.  On  his  return  to
Boston,  he  was  ordained  priest  there  in  1857.  His
first  mission  was  at  St.  John's  church.  Worcester,
which  he  left  in  1862  to  organize  St.  Joseph's  par
ish,  Boston.  He  remained  in  charge  of  this  for
two  years,  and  was  then  sent  back  to  Worcester.
He  was  nominated  first  bishop  of  Springfield  on
28  June,  1870,  and  consecrated  by  Archbishop
McCloskey  on  25  Sept.  The  administration  of


Bishop  O'Reilly  has  been  very  successful.  The
district  at  the  time  of  its  formation  into  a  diocese
contained  fifty-four  churches  and  forty  priests.
There  are  now  (1888)  141  priests,  fifty  ecclesiastical
students,  ninety  churches,  and  fourteen  stations.

ORELIE  ANTOINE  I.  (o-ray-lee),  king  of
Araucania  and  Patagonia,  the  name  assumed  by
ORELIE  ANTOIXE  CHARLES  DE  TONNEIXS,  or  Tou-
NEISS,  a  French  adventurer,  b.  in  Chourgnac,  near
Perigueux,  in  October,  1820  ;  d.  in  Tourtoirac,  Dor-
dogne,  19  Sept.,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  law
in  Toulouse,  and  became  an  attorney  in  Perigueux,
but  failed  in  business,  and  emigrated  to  Buenos
Ayres  about  1852.  He  resided  afterward  in  Santi
ago  and  Concepcion  as  a  merchant,  and,  having
occasion  to  trade  with  the  natives  of  Araucania,
made  the  acquaintance  of  several  chiefs.  By  skil
ful  machinations  with  the  principal  caciques  of  the
different  tribes,  he  obtained  his  proclamation  as
king  of  Araucania  and  Patagonia  at  a  mass-meet
ing  that  was  held  in  the  valley  of  Los  Angeles
in  March,  1861.  He  immediately  endeavored  to
organize  his  kingdom  on  the  plan  of  a  European
state,  and  issued  a  manifesto  to  all  the  govern
ments  of  Europe  and  America,  informing  them  of
his  accession  to  the  throne.  The  sudden  creation
of  this  new  monarchy  only  excited  ridicule  in
both  continents,  but  as  Napoleon  III.  discussed
the  question  of  Orelie's  recognition  in  his  privy
council,  the  Chilian  government  saw  the  necessity
of  acting  vigorously.  Meanwhile  Orelie's  letters
to  the  French  emperor  began  to  excite  the  interest
of  Europe,  and  London  and  New  York  papers
published  editorials  favorable  to  the  cause  of  the
adventurer.  The  Chilian  authorities  had  threat
ened  the  Araucanians  with  war  if  they  did  not
expel  De  Tounens,  and  Orelie  visited  the  principal
caciques  to  organize  the  defence.  ,  One,  named
Guenterol,  promised  to  lead  an  army  of  40,000
men  in  case  of  invasion,  but  Orelie  was  captured
by  a  party  of  Chilian  cavalry,  taken  to  Nacimiento,
and  afterward  imprisoned  in  the  fortress  of  Los
Angeles.  Orelie's  capture  excited  indignation  in
France,  and  Napoleon  instructed  the  Viscount  of
Cazotte,  French  consul  in  Santiago,  to  enter  a
protest.  Fearing  foreign  complications,  all  the
Chilian  courts  affirmed  their  incompetency  in
Orelie's  case.  The  latter  meanwhile  escaped  from
his  prison,  but  was  recaptured  a  few  days  later,
and  at  last  the  Santiago  court  of  appeals  declared
him  a  lunatic  on  2  Sept..  1862,  and  decided  to  keep
him  a  prisoner  till  he  should  be  claimed  by  his  family
or  the  French  government.  However,  a  few  days
later  he  was  put  on  board  a  ship  bound  for  France.
On  3  Dec.,  1863,  he  addressed  a  protest  to  the  for
eign  governments,  and  tried  to  interest  the  pub
lic  in  his  case  by  the  issue  of  a  narrative  entitled
"  Orelie  Antoine  I.,  roi  d'Araucanie  et  de  Patagonie,
son  avenement  au  trone  et  sa  captivite  au  Chili  "
(Paris,  1863).  He  also  began  a  series  of  lectures
in  the  principal  cities.  Toward  the  end  of  18C9
he  returned  to  Patagonia,  but  was  coolly  received,
and  after  a  few  months  left  for  Marseilles.  There
he  founded  the  journal  "  Les  Pt-ndus "  in  Decem
ber.  1871,  in  which  he  narrated  his  second  expedi
tion.  In  March,  1872,  he  began  the  publication  of
"  La  Couronne  d'acier,"  a  journal  of  Araucania

i  and  Patagonia,  and  founded  the  order  of  the  same
name,  the  decoration  of  which  he  bestowed  very

!  liberally.  In  April,  1874,  having  interested  some
financiers  in  his  cause,  he  left  Bordeaux  with  a
supply  of  arms  and  ammunition,  and  freighting  a
small  schooner  in  Buenos  Ayres,  under  the  as
sumed  name  of  Jean  Prat,  set  out  for  his  king
dom.  But  an  Argentine  sloop-of-war,  at  the  re-


588


ORELLANA


ORLANDO


quest  of  the  Chilian  authorities,  overtook  him  and
brought  him  back  on  19  July  to  Buenos  Ayres,
where  he  was  imprisoned.  After  his  release,  on
31  Oct.,  he  returned  to  France,  where  he  was  at  one
time  an  inmate  of  a  poor-house  in  Bordeaux.  Hav
ing  again  made  partisans,  he  formed  a  cabinet,
and,  securing  the  support  of  a  wealthy  retired  na
val  officer,  was  preparing  a  new  expedition,  when
he  died.  Besides  the  works  already  cited,  he  pub
lished  "'  Historique  appel  a  la  nation  f  rancaise  "
(Paris,  1803);  "Manifests  d'Orclie  Antoine  I.,  roi
cVAraucanie  et  de  Patagonie"  (1864);  "  lletour  en
France  du  roi  d'Araucanie  et  de  Patagonie  "  (Mar
seilles.  1871);  and  other  works.

ORELLANA,  Francisco  (o- rayl-yah'-nah),
Spanish  adventurer,  b.  in  Trujillo,  Spain,  about
1500:  d.  in  Guiana  in  1545.  He  was  a  school-mate
of  Francisco  Pizarro,  and,  following  him  to  Peru,
participated  in  the  conquest.  In  1537  he  rebuilt
the  city  of  Guayaquil.  He  commanded  the  rear
guard  "as  Gonzalo  Pizarro's  deputy  in  the  hitter's
expedition  of  153!)  in  search  of  El  Dorado.  They
arrived  at  the  junction  of  Coca  river  with  the  Xapo,
and  Orellana  was  ordered  with  sixty  men  to  ex
plore  the  river  in  a  boat  and  return  with  provisions,
lie  was  rapidly  carried  down  stream,  but  found
only  villages  of  warlike  natives.  After  many  days
he  reached  the  mouth  of  the  Xapo,  where  it  joined
a  mighty  river,  which  he  called  Orellana.  He  re
solved  to  continue  down  the  latter,  and,  after  being
at  the  point  of  starvation,  reached  a  large  village,
where,  after  a  fight  with  the  inhabitants,  the  ex
plorers  found  abundant  provisions  and  much  gold.
Shortly  afterward  they  arrived  in  the  possessions
of  a  cacique  named  Aparia.  who  received  them
well,  and  Orellana  resolved  to  build  a  brigantine,
as  his  boat  was  in  a  precarious  condition.  A  forge
was  erected,  from  their  old  arms  and  stirrups
nails  were  made,  and  after  thirty-five  days  the
brigantine  was  launched.  On  20  June  they  dis
covered  many  villages,  where  they  were  fiercely
attacked.  According  to  Carvajal,  the  chronicler
of  the  expedition,  the  natives  were  commanded  by
warlike  women  of  imposing  aspect,  and  he  was  told
that  the  country  belonged  to  women,  who  lived
alone  in  communities.  In  consequence  the  story
of  an  Amazon  country  became  current,  and  this
name  was  given  to  4he  river  that  Orellana  had
discovered.  As  they  approached  the  ocean,  they
made  cordage  from  grass  and  sails  from  their
blankets  and  cloaks,  took  in  water  and  provisions,
find  coasted  as  far  as  the  Gulf  of  Paria,  which  they
entered  on  4  Sept.,  reaching  on  11  June  the  island
of  Cubagua,  or,  according  to  Garcilaso,  Trinidad.
Orellana  was  certainly  the  first  European  to  navi
gate  the  Amazon  for  the  greater  part  of  its  course.
He  went  immediately  to  Spain  to  give  the  king  an
account  of  his  discoveries  and  solicit  the  govern
ment  of  the  territory  along  the  river.  On  2  Feb.,
1544,  he  obtained  a  grant  of  the  country  under
the  name  of  Nueva  Andalucia,  and  he  left  San
Lucar  on  11  May  with  four  ships  and  400  men,
accompanied  by  his  wife.  The  expedition  met
with  many  drawbacks,  and,  after  several  defeats  by
the  savages,  Orellana  died.  His  wife  returned
with  the  few  survivors  to  the  island  of  Trinidad,
where  she  fixed  her  residence.  A  relation  of  Orel-
lana's  first  voyage,  by  Friar  Caspar  de  Carvajal,
was  presented  by  the  former  to  the  king  in  1542.
and  is  to  be  shortly  published  in  Madrid.

ORGAZ,  Francisco  (or-gath'),  Cuban  author,  b.
in  Havana  in  1815 ;  d.  in  Madrid  in  1873.  He  was
educated  in  his  native  city,  where  he  began  his  lit
erary  career  by  writing  for  the  newspapers.  In
1839  he  went  to  reside  in  Madrid,  Spain,  and  there


published  a  volume  of  poems,  "Preludios  del  Ar-
pa "  (1841),  which  has  gone  through  several  edi
tions  and  given  him  a  rank  among  the  best  lyrical
poets  of  Spanish  America.  He  also  translated  into
Spanish  several  historical  works,  published  a  col
lection  of  poems.  "Las  Tropic-ales,"  the  subjects
being  taken  chiefly  from  the  traditions,  uses,  and
customs  of  the  Cuban  aborigines  (Madrid,  1850),
and  wrote  two  dramas.

ORdiOSEZ,  Rodrigo  (or-goan'-yeth),  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  Oropesa  about  1490;  d.  in  Salinas,
near  Cuzco,  Peru,  26  April,  1538.  He  attained  the
rank  of  lieutenant  in  the  army  of  the  Constable  of
Bourbon,  taking  part  in  the  famous  attack  on
Rome  in  1527.  According  to  some  writers,  he  went
to  Peru  with  Diego  de  Almagro,  and  according  to
others,  with  the  expedition  from  Guatemala  under
Pedro  de  Alvarado  (</.  r.).  He  was  the  confiden
tial  friend  of  Almagro,  and  when  the  latter  re
solved  to  conquer  Chili  he  appointed  Orgonez
second  in  command.  When  Almagro  received  the
royal  appointment  of  governor  of  New  Toledo,
Orgonez  convinced  him  of  the  necessity  of  return
ing  to  Peru  to  take  possession  of  the  government,
and  after  the  refusal  of  Prince  Manco-Inca-Yupan-
que  (q.  v.)  to  form  an  alliance  with  Almagro,
Orgonez  was  commissioned  to  attack  him,  and  de
feated  the  Indians.  After  Ilernando  Pizarro  occu
pied  the  city  of  Cuzco  and  refused  to  deliver  it  to
Almagro,  Orgonez  surprised  the  city  during  the
night  and  captured  Pizarro  and  his  brother  Gon
zalo.  He  also  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Abancay,
12  July,  1537,  where  he  captured  Alonso  Alvarado.
and  would  have  killed  him  but  for  the  intervention
of  Almagro.  Orgonez  was  then  sent  with  200
soldiers  to  destroy  the  forces  of  Manco-Inca,  who
had  taken  up  arms  in  favor  of  Pizarro.  and  totally
defeated  him.  When  Alonso  Alvarado  and  Gon
zalo  Pizarro  escaped,  Orgofiez  predicted  Almagro's
ruin,  and.  although  strenuously  opposed  to  submit
ting  Almagro's  rights  to  the  decision  of  Father
Bobadilla,  followed  his  chief  faithfully  till  the  un
fortunate  battle  of  Salinas,  where  he  was  killed  by
one  of  the  followers  of  Ilernando  Pizarro.

ORLANDO,  Giuseppe  Alberoni  d'  (or-lan'-do),
Italian  clergyman,  b.  in  Vieenza  in  1709;  d.  in
Rome  in  1781.  He  became  a  Jesuit,  and  was  em
ployed  in  the  missions  of  South  America  till  the
expulsion  of  the  order  in  1767,  residing  for  many
years  in  Cuzco,  where  he  taught  rhetoric  and  ac
quired  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  Quichua  lan
guage.  He  particularly  applied  himself  to  the  in
terpretation  of  the  Quipos,  a  collection  of  little
knots  and  ribbons  of  different  colors,  by  means  of
which  the  Peruvians  formerly  recorded  the  princi
pal  events  of  history.  Among  his  maid-servants
was  one  that  was  supposed  to  be  descended  from
Ilia,  the  inventor  of  the  Quipos.  and  who  pretended
to  know  how  to  read  them ;  but  she  could  afford
litllc  help  to  Orlando.  The  latter  finally  procured
a  manuscript  of  Canon  Bartolome  Cervantes,  who
lived  among  the  Charcas  in  the  16th  century,  and
by  its  means  found  a  key  to  the  Quipos.  The
authorities  looked  at  first  with  favor  on  the  labors
of  Orlando,  and  a  royal  order  gave  him  permission
to  search  for  Quipos  in  the  departments  of  state  and
in  libraries,  but,  under  the  pretence  that  Orlando's
mission  would  cause  a  revival  of  patriotic  spirit
among  the  Indians,  this  permission  was  afterward
revoked,  and  he  was  even  compelled  to  restore  the
Quipos  he  had  procured.  On  his  return  to  Rome
he  published  "Historia  del  Peru"  (2  vols.,  Rome,
1775),  which  threw  new  light  on  the  subject  of
which  it  treated.  Ferdinand  Denis  is  the  only
modern  writer  that  mentions  the  Quipos.  Orlando


ORLEANS


ORLEANS


589


left  also  several  manuscripts  that  are  deposited  in
the  Vatican  library  in  Rome.

ORLEANS,  Louis  Philippe  <T,  king  of  the
French,  b.  in  Paris,  France,  6  Oct.,  1773:  d.  in
Claremont,  England,  26  Aug.,  1850.  He  was  edu
cated  by  Mme.  de  Genlis,  embraced  the  doctrines
of  the  French  revolution  with  his  father,  who  ex
changed  his  title  of  Duke  d'Orleans  for  the  name
Philippe  Egalite,  and  performed  brilliant  services
in  the  revolutionary  army.  Becoming  involved  in
the  schemes  of  Charles  F.  Dumouriez,  he  escaped
with  that  general,  and  for  several  months  taught
mathematics  and  geography  in  a  school  at  Reiche-
nau.  Switzerland.  After  his  father  was  beheaded
he  travelled  under  an  assumed  name  in  northern
Europe,  and  on  24  Sept.,  1796,  to«k  passage  as  a
Danish  subject  on  the  ship  "  America,''  and  landed
in  Philadelphia  on  21  Oct.  He  was  joined  by  his
brothers,  the  Duke  de  Montpensier  and  the  Count
de  Beaujolais,  and  made  a  tour  through  the  United
States,  travelling  through  the  New  England  states,
exploring  the  great  lakes  and  the  valley  of  the
Mississippi,  and  visiting  Washington  at  Mount
Vernon  in  1797.  They  set  out  for  Spain  after  their
mother  was  released  and  took  up  her  residence  at
Madrid,  but  were  detained  by  the  Spanish  authori
ties  at  Havana,  and  compelled  to  sail  for  the  United
States.  He  returned  with  his  brothers  to  Europe
in  1800.  attempted  to  stir  up  insurrections  in  Spain,
and  resided  in  Twickenham,  near  London,  until
he  was  permitted  to  return  to  France  in  1817.  He
was  a  leader  of  the  revolution  of  July,  1830,  was
elected  king  of  the  French,  and  reigned  until  he
was  compelled  to  abdicate  in  favor  of  his  grandson,
the  Count  of  Paris,  in  consequence  of  the  revolu
tion  of  February,  1848. — His  son,  Francois  Fer
dinand  Philippe  Louis  Marie,  Prince  de  Join-
ville,  b.  in  Neuilly,  14  Aug.,  1818,  entered  the  navy
when  very  young,  was  commissioned  as  1st  lieu
tenant  (1836)  to  the  Mediterranean  squadron  under
Admiral  Hugon,  and  landed  (1837)  at  Bona  to  join
his  brother,  the  Duke  of  Nemours,  in  his  attack  on
Constantine,  but  arrived  after  the  city  had  already
fallen.  He  was  intrusted  with  the  mission  of  ob
taining  reparation  from  the  government  of  Mexico,
and  assisted,  as  commander  on  board  the  frigate
'•  La  Creole,"  at  the  bombardment  of  San  Juan  de
Ulua  (27  Nov.,  1838).  and  a  few  days  afterward,  at
the  head  of  a  landing  force  of  sailors,  he  forced
the  gates  of  Vera  Cruz,  and,  despite  a  galling
fire,  took  with  his  own  hand  the  Mexican  general
Arista.  For  his  brilliant  conduct  on  this  occasion
he  was  rewarded  with  the  cross  of  the  Legion  of
honor  and  the  rank  of  full  captain.  In  1840  he
received  the  command  of  the  ships  commissioned
to  transport  the  remains  of  Napoleon  I.  from  St.
Helena  to  France.  In  1843  he  married  in  Brazil
the  Princess  Francesca  da  Braganca,  sister  of  the
Emperor  Pedro  II..  and  was  appointed  (1844)  rear-
admiral  and  a  member  of  the  council  of  admiralty.
He  commanded  in  1845  the  French  fleet  operating
against  Morocco,  bombarded  (6  Aug.)  langiers,
took  Mogador  (15  Aug.).  and  was  raised  to  the
rank  of  vice-admiral.  At  the  outbreak  of  the  revo
lution  (1848)  he,  together  with  his  brother,  the  Duke
of  Nemours,  was  still  serving  in  Algiers,  but  then
resigned  his  command,  and  retired  to  England  to
join  his  exiled  father  and  family.  At  the  beginning
of  the  war  of  secession  he  came  to  the  United
States  (in  1861).  and,  leaving  his  son,  the  Duke  of
Penthievre,  in  the  naval  academy  of  Annapolis,
with  his  two  nephews,  the  Count  of  Paris  and
the  Duke  of  Chartres,  joined  the  staff  of  Gen.
McClellan  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  Chicka-
hominy  campaign,  returning  to  England  in  1862.


He has contributed to  the "  Revue des deux
mondes  "  many  articles,  some  of  which  have  been
reprinted  in  pamphlet -form. Among  these  are
••  Notes  sur  1'etat  des  forces  navales  de  la  France  "
(1844) ;  "  Etude  sur  1'escadre  de  la  Mediterranee  "
1  (1852);  "  La  guerre  de  la  Chine"  (1857);  and  "La
j  guerre  d'Amerique,  campagne  du  Potomac  "(1863).
I  One  of  his  articles,  published  in  1865,  is  a  study  of
the  fleet  of  the  United  States  as  compared  with  that
!  of  France. To  him  also  is  attributed  an  article  on
j  the  battle  of  Sadowa,  published  (1868)  under  the
j  signature  of  Louis  Buloz  in  the  "  Revue  des  deux
I  mondes,"  the conclusions  of  which  were  directed
I  against  the  new  military  law. After  the  fall  of  the
I  empire  he  returned  to  France,  was  elected  in  1871  to
i  the  national  assembly,  and  remained  there  till  the
j  decree  of  expulsion,  when  he  accompanied  the  other
princes  to  England. — Louis  Philippe's  grandson,
Louis  Albert  Philippe,  Count  of  Paris,  son  of
the  Due  d'Orleans,  b.  in  Paris.  France,  24  Aug.,
1838,  was  educated  by  his  mother,  the  Duchesse
Helene.  daughter  of  the  grand  duke  of  Mecklen-
burg-Schwerin,  at
Claremont, Eng
land. In  the  au
tumn  of  1861  he
and his  brother,
|  the  Duke  of  Char
tres,  accompanied
their uncle, the
Prince de Join-
ville,  to  the  Unit
ed States. At
the  invitation  of
Gen. George B.
McClellan, the
young  princes  en
tered  the  military
service of the
United States,
and  wer^  attached
to  his  staff,  with
the  rank  of  cap
tains  in  the  volun
teer  army. They
stipulated that

they  should  receive  no  pay,  and  should  be  free  to
resign  their  commissions  whenever  they  desired.
They  served  on  Gen.  McClellan's  staff  till  the  close  of
the  Virginia  campaign  and  the  retreat  of  the  Army
of  the  Potomac  in  June,  1862.  when  they  returned
to  Europe.  While  in  the  field  they  frequently
volunteered  on  detached  expeditions.  At  Gaines's
Mills  they  displayed  courage  and  zeal  in  conveying
despatches,  and  in  efforts  to  reform  the  line  of
battle.  After  the  establishment  of  a  republic  in
France  he  resided  in  Paris.  Since  the  death  of  the
Count  of  Chambord  in  1883  he  has  been  acknowl
edged  by  the  great  majority  of  the  Legitimists  as
the  heir" to  the  throne  of  the  Bourbons.  In  1886
the  expulsion  bill  drove  him  again  into  exile,  and
he  returned  to  England  to  reside.  He  is  the  author,
besides  a  book  on  "  Trade  Unions  in  England  "
(1869),  of  a  work  not  yet  completed,  entitled  "His-
toire  de  la  guerre  civile  en  Amerique"  (8  vols.,
Paris,  1874-'87).  A  translation  by  Louis  F.  Ta-
sistro,  the  first  three  volumes  of  which  were  edited
by. Henry  Coppee  and  the  last  by  Col.  John  P.
Nicholson,  has  been  published  under  the  title  of
"  History  of  the  Civil  War  in  America  "  (Phila
delphia,"  1875-'88).  —  Robert  Philippe  Louis
Eugene  Ferdinand,  Duke  of  Chartres,  soldier,
brother  of  the  Count  of  Paris,  b.  in  Paris,  France,
9  Nov..  1840,  was  brought  up  by  his  mother  in
Eisenach,  Germany,  and  in  England,  studied  in


590


ORLEANS


ORMSBY


the  military  school  at  Turin,  Italy,  served  in  the
war  against  Austria  in  1859,  and  in  August,  1801,
came  with  his  brother  to  the  United  States.  While
with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  he  performed  va
rious  daring  services.  During  the  seven  days'
fight  before  Richmond  he  brought  in  seventeen
prisoners  on  the  eve  of  the  battle  of  Williamsburg.
After  returning  to  Europe  he  married  his  cousin,
the  eldest  daughter  of  the  Prince  de  Joinville.
Subsequent  to  the  fall  of  Sedan  he  joined  Gen.
Auguste  Chauzy's  staff  under  the  assumed  name
of  Robert  le  Fort,  and  fought  with  signal  bravery
during  the  rest  of  the  war.  He  was  appointed  a
major  in  the  French  army  in  1871,  but  in  1883  his
name  was  stricken  from  the  rolls  by  a  decree  of  the
government,  and  in  1886  he  went  into  exile  with
the  other  royal  princes. — Another  grandson,  Louis
Philippe  Marie  Ferdinand  Gaston,  Count  d'Eu,
soldier,  b.  in  Neuilly,  France,  28  April,  1842,  is
the  son  of  the  Due  de  Nemours,  Louis  Philippe's
second  son.  He  was  brought  up  in  exile,  educated
in  England,  and  entering  the  military  service  of
Spain  in  December,  1859.  served  in  Morocco  on  the
staff  of  Field-Marshal  O'Donnell,  and  was  deco
rated  on  the  field  of  battle  for  bravery.  He  next
entered  the  artillery  college  at  Segovia,  and  was
graduated  in  April,  1803.  He  was  promoted  captain
shortly  afterward,  and  served  in  various  regiments
till  February,  1804,  when  he  was  compelled  by  ill
ness  to  take  leave  of  absence.  On  15  Oct.,  1804,
he  married  at  Rio  Janeiro  the  princess  imperial
Donna  Isabel  do  Braganca,  eldest  daughter  and
heiress  presumptive  to  Dom  Pedro  II.,  emperor  of
Brazil.  He  was  made  a  field-marshal  in  the  Bra
zilian  army  in  July,  1805,  and  took  part  on  the
emperor's  staff  in  the  successful  campaign  of  that
year  against  Paraguay.  On  22  March,  1869,  he  was
appointed  commander-in-chief  of  all  the  Brazilian
forces  on  land  and  water,  which  since  1864  had
been  at  war  with  Francisco  Solano  Lopez  (q.  v.),
president  of  the  republic  of  Paraguay.  He  as
sumed  the  command  at  Luque,  a  village  near
Asuncion,  on  10  April,  1869.  By  a  series  of  suc
cessful  manoeuvres  the  enemy  were  driven  from
their  positions,  nearly  the  whole  of  the  Paraguayan
territory  was  occupied,  and  Lopez  being  killed  the
war  was  ended.  The  Count  d'Eu,  by  order  of  the
government  of  the  emperor,  gave  up  the  command-
in-chief  of  the  forces  on  16  April,  1870,  and  re
turned  to  Rio  Janeiro  on  29  April.  He  has  held
since  November,  1805,  except  while  on  leave  of
absence,  the  post  of  commander-general  of  the
Brazilian  artillery,  and  president  of  various  com
missions.  In  1874-'G  he  presided  over  the  Bra
zilian  national  exhibition  commission  for  arrang
ing  the  exhibition  at  Rio  Janeiro  in  1875  and
selecting  exhibits  for  the  Centennial  exhibition  at
Philadelphia.  In  1883  he  was  president  of  a  com
mittee  for  calling  a  general  conference  on  the  im
provement  of  education.  Owing  to  financial  and
legislative  difficulties,  the  intended  conference  did
not  take  place,  but  the  labors  of  the  committee
resulted  in  the  collecting  and  printing  of  a  large
number  of  reports  that  were  prepared  for  the  con
ference,  as  well  as  in  the  holding  of  an  Interna
tional  pedagogic  exhibition  at  Rio  Janeiro  on  29
July,  1883,  and  ultimately  in  the  establishment  of
a  National  educational  museum  in  the  capital.
Since  1807  he  has  been  president  of  the  Brazilian
polytechnic  institute,  and  since  1883  of  the  Society
for  providing  shelter  and  education  to  destitute
children  through  establishing  agricultural  asylums
and  of  the  National  museum  of  education.— The
Prince  de  Joinville's  son,  Pierre  Philippe  Jean
Marie,  Duke  of  Penthievre,  naval  officer,  b.  in


France,  4  Nov.,  1845.  was  educated  at  the  College
of  Edinburgh,  and  on  14  Oct.,  1801,  was  admitted
to  the  U.  S,  naval  academy,  then  at  Newport,  R.  1.,
under  the  name  of  Pierre  d'Orleans.  He  was
graduated  in  1863,  and  commissioned  as  acting  en
sign,  but  was  on  leave  of  absence  during  his  four
teen  months'  service.  Resigning  his  commission
on  30  May,  1804,  he  served  in  the  Brazilian  navy
for  two  years,  and  subsequently  made  a  voyage
round  the  world.  After  the  return  of  his  family
to  France,  he  served  as  an  officer  in  the  French
navy  until  he  was  deprived  of  his  commission  by
the  decree  against  the  princes.

ORME,  William  Ward,  soldier,  b.  in  Wash
ington,  I).  C.,  17  Feb.,  1832;  d.  in  Bloommgton,
111.,  13  Sept.,  1800.  He  was  educated  at  Mount  St.
Mary's  college,  Emmettsburg,  Md.,  removed  to
Illinois,  and  settled  in  the  practice  of  law  in  Bloom-
ington.  He  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitu
tional  convention  in  1860,  raised  the  94th  Illinois
regiment  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  was
appointed  its  colonel,  and  became  brigadier-general
of  volunteers,  29  Nov.,  1862.  Failure  of  health
soon  compelled  his  retirement,  and  he  was  subse
quently  supervising  agent  in  the  U.  S.  treasury.

ORMONI),  C6sar  Venceslas  d'  (or'-mong),
French  missionary,  b.  in  Bagneres  de  Bigorre  in
1089;  d.  in  Bordeaux  in  1741.  He  was  a  Jesuit,
and  came  in  his  youth  to  South  America,  where  he
was  attached  for  twenty  years  to  the  missions  of
Chili  and  Paraguay.  He  disapproved  of  the  Indian
policy  of  the  Spanish  Jesuits,  advocated  the  estab
lishment  of  a  kind  of  feudal  system  in  which  the
Indians  should  not  be  slaves,  but  clients,  and  had
already  begun  the  experiment  in  his  own  mission,
but  the  authorities  expelled  him  from  the  country
and  petitioned  Rome  to  censure  him.  Ormond,  on
his  return  to  France,  separated  from  the  order  and
settled  on  his  paternal  estate  near  Bordeaux,  and
died  there.  His  papers  were  seized  and  destroyed
by  the  authorities  immediately  after  his  death,  and
it  is  said  that  several  important  works  concerning
the  establishments  of  the  Jesuits  in  South  America
were  thus  lost.  Among  his  published  works  are
"  Voyage  ii  travers  Jes  missions  du  Paraguay  et  du
Chili"  (Bordeaux,  1738)  and  "Coup  d'ceil  his-
torique  sur  les  Aldees  Indiennes"  (1740).

ORMSBY,  Stephen,  congressman,  b.  in  Vir
ginia  in  1705  ;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  6  Sept.,  1840.
lie  received  a  liberal  education,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  removed  to  Kentucky,
where  he  engaged  in  the  early  Indian  wars,  and
was  a  brigadier-general  under  Gen.  Josiah  Harmar
in  the  campaign  of  1790.  He  subsequently  re
turned  to  his  profession,  attained  eminence  at  the
bar,  and  became  a  circuit  judge.  He  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1810,  served  one  term,
and  was  defeated  for  the  13th  congress,  but  his
successful  competitor,  John  Simpson,  was  killed  at
the  battle  of  the  River  Raisin  before  taking  his
seat  and  Ormsby  succeeded  him.

ORMSBY,  Waterman  Lilly,  engraver,  b.  in
Hampton,  Windham  co.,  Conn.,  in  1809;  d.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  1  Nov.,  1883.  He  received  a  pub
lic-school  education,  removed  to  New  York  city,
and  was  for  many  years  an  engraver  there.  He
invented  several  ruling-machines,  transfer-presses,
and  other  implements  that  are  used  in  bank-note
engraving,  a  machine  for  engraving  on  steel  called
the  "  grammagraph,"  and  one  for  splitting  wood.
He  was  a  founder  of  the  Continental  bank-note
company,  which  during  the  civil  war  and  after
ward  executed  a  large  amount  of  work  for  the  U.  S.
government ;  and  the  peculiar  design  of  the  five-
dollar  bank-note  was  largely  the  result  of  Mr.


ORXB


O'RORKE


591


Ormsby's  idea  for  the  prevention  of  counterfeiting.
It  is  claimed  that  he  assisted  Samuel  F.  B.  Morse
and  Henry  A.  Munson  in  the  invention  of  the
Morse  alphabet,  and,  aided  by  Mr.  Munson,  he
transmitted  messages  at  the  first  public  exhibition
of  the  telegraph  in  New  York  city.  He  published
several  pamphlets,  and  a  quarto  volume  entitled
'•  Ormsby  Bank-Xote  Engraving  "  (New  York,  1852).
ORNE,  Azor,  patriot,  b.  in  Marblehead,  Mass.,
.22  July,  1731 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  6  June,  1796.
Previous  to  the  Revolution  he  was  a  successful
merchant.  He  early  became  attached  to  the
patriot  cause,  and  in  1774  was  a  delegate  to  the
Essex  convention  and  the  Provincial  congress.
He  was  also  a  member  of  the  committees  of  safety,
of  military  affairs,  on  the  organization  of  forces,
and  on  the  collecting  of  arms  and  ammunition.
He  became  a  judge  of  the  general  court  in  1775,
and  in  January,  1776,  was  appointed  by  the  Provin
cial  congress  one  of  the  three  major-generals  of
Massachusetts  militia.  On  11  Nov.,  1780,  he  was
a  representative  to  the  Hartford  convention  that
assembled  to  propose,  as  a  foundation  of  a  safe
system  of  finance,  to  provide  by  taxes  or  duties  a
certain  and  unalienable  revenue  to  discharge  the
interest  on  the  funded  part  of  the  public  debt,  and
on  future  loans:  and  was  one  of  the  committee
that  prepared  a  circular  letter  to  that  effect  to  all
the  states.  After  the  adoption  of  the  state  consti
tution  in  1780  he  was  in  the  state  senate  and  coun
cil  for  many  years,  refusing  higher  office  on  account
of  his  lack  of  early  education.  He  was  an  advocate
of  public  schools  and  did  much  for  the  system.

ORO,  Justo  <le  Santa  JIaria  de,  Spanish-
American  bishop,  b.  in  San-Juan-de-Cuyo,  Argen
tine  Republic,  in  1771 ;  d.  there  in  1836.  He  entered
the  Dominican  order  early  in  life,  and  afterward
distinguished  himself  as  a  theologian  and  canon
ist,  teaching  theology  and  philosophy  in  the  con
vents  of  St.  Dominick  and  Our  Lady  of  Bethle
hem.  He  received  the  title  of  doctor  of  theology
from  the  University  of  San  Felipe,  where  he  ac
quired  great  reputation  by  his  public  discussions.
He  was  elected  prior  in  1804,  and  conceived  the
project  of  founding  a  congregation  connected  with
the  convent  of  Bethlehem  which  would  pay  special
attention  to  education.  With  this  object  he  set
out  for  Spain  in  1809,  where  he  obtained  the  per
mission  and  requisites  for  the  new  enterprise.  On
his  return  he  began  the  erection  of  the  College  of
St.  Vincent  in  Apoquindo,  which  he  wished  to
make  the  seminary  of  the  new  congregation  ;  but
the  outbreak  of  revolution  in  the  provinces  of  La
Plata  interrupted  Lis  projects.  He  was  an  ar
dent  partisan  of  the  national  movement,  and  his
countrymen  elected  him  deputy  to  the  national
congress  of  Buenos  Ayres.  In  1819  he  was  electee1
provincial  of  Santiago,  and  he  insisted  that,  in  this
capacity,  he  had  jurisdiction  over  the  convent  of
Bethlehem,  which  claimed  to  be  independent  of
the  province.  The  quarrel  that  ensued  was  very
bitter,  especially  as  De  Oro  appealed  to  the  civil
power  and  had  one  of  the  monks  exiled.  In  1330
he  was  nominated  bishop  of  San-Juan-de-Cuyo.

O'RORKE,  Patrick  Henry,  soldier,  "b.  in
County  Cavan,  Ireland,  25  March.  1837;  killed  in
the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  2  July,  1863.  He  came
to  this  country  with  his  parents  when  but  a  year
old,  and  in  1842  the  family  settled  in  Rochester,
X.  Y.  There  young  O'Rorke  was  distinguished
as  among  the  brightest  pupils  in  the  public  schools,
and  in  his  sixteenth  year  he  was  offered  one  of
the  three  free  scholarships  given  by  the  University
of  Rochester  to  the  city,  but  declined  in  deference
to  the  wishes  of  his  mother.  He  then  went  to


work  as  a  marble-cutter,  and  remained  at  his  trade
until  he  was  appointed  to  a  cadetship  in  the  U.  S.
military  academy,  where  he  stood  third  in  his
class  at  the  end  of  the  first  year,  and  was  gradu
ated  at  the  head  of  it  in
June,  1861.  He  was  as
signed  to  duty  on  the  staff
of  Gen.  Daniel  Tyler,  in
command  of  the  1st  di
vision  of  McDowell's  army,
and  served  at  Blackburn's
Ford,  18  July,  and  Bull
Run,  21  July.  1861,  his
horse  being  killed  under
him  in  the  latter  action.
In  August,  1861,  he  was
sent  to  Fort  Monroe,  and
was  afterward  assigned  to
the  staff  of  Gen.  Thomas
W.  Sherman,  in  command
of  the  Port  Royal  expedi
tion  which  sailed,  2&  Oct.,
1861.  He  was  employed  in  constructing  the  bat
teries  on  Tybee  island  for  the  reduction  of  Fort
Pulaski,  and  showed  rare  skill  and  talent  as  an
engineer  officer,  as  well  as  courage  and  enter
prise  in  a  preliminary  reconnoissance.  On  the
reduction  of  the  fort,  10  April,  1862,  he  was  se
lected  as  one  of  the  officers  to  receive  the  sur
render.  In  September,  1862,  he  accepted  the
colonelcy  of  the  140th  regiment  of  Xew  York  vol
unteers.  The  regiment,  which  was  placed  in
Warren's  brigade,  Sykes's  division,  oth  corps,  was
composed  of  good  material,  and,  largely  through
the  effects  of  its  colonel's  thorough  discipline,
became  one  of  the  best  in  the  Army  of  the  Po
tomac.  O'Rorke  was  under  fire  with  his  regi
ment  at  Fredericksburg,  but  not  actively  en
gaged,  Sykes's  division  being  held  in  reserve  near
the  town.  In  the  Chancellorsville  campaign  he
was  temporarily  in  charge  of  a  brigade.  On  2
July,  1863,  as  he  was  leading  his  regiment  on
to  the  field  of  Gettysburg,  bringing  up  the  rear
of  Weed's  brigade,  his  former  commander  and  inti
mate  friend,  Gen.  Gouverneur  K.  Warren,  then  of
the  engineer  corps,  met  him,  and,  though  without
authority  to  order  it,  asked  him  to  turn  aside  and
defend  "Little  Round  Top,  which  was  seriously
threatened,  and  the  loss  of  which  would  jeopard
the  whole  battle.  On  a  less  important  occasion
O'Rorke  had  been  known  to  meet  the  suggestion
of  a  staff-officer,  that  he  should  change  the  posi
tion  of  his  regiment,  with  the  sceptical  question  :
"  Is  that  an  order  from  the  general,  or  is  it  merely
an  idea  of  your  own?"  But  he  recognized  the
nature  of  the  crisis,  changed  the  direction  of  his
advance,  and  led  his  men  rapidly  up  Little  Round
Top.  helping  to  haul  the  guns  of  Hazlett's  battery
to  the  summit.  As  he  went  over  the  crest,  the
regiment  hesitated  for  an  instant  when  the  storm
of  fire  struck  it,  and  he  caught  the  colors,  sprang
upon  a  rock,  and  fell  dead  from  a  bullet-wound
through  the  neck  as  his  men  responded  to  his  ap
peal  and  his  example.  The  Count  of  Paris,  in  his
"History  of  the  Civil  War,"  describes  the  inci
dent  in  detail.  O'Rorke  was  made  brevet  2d  lieu
tenant  of  engineers,  24  June.  1861 :  2d  lieutenant.
24  June,  1861 ;  1st  lieutenant,  3  March,  1863 ;  brevet
captain,  15  March,  1862,  for  meritorious  service
with  the  Port  Royal  expeditionary  corps ;  brevet
major,  13  Dec.,  1862,  for  gallant  and  meritorious
service  at  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg;  brevet
lieutenant-colonel,  1  May,  1863.  for  gallant  and
meritorious  service  at  the  battle  of  Chancellorsville :
and  brevet  colonel,  2  July,  1863,  for  gallant  and


592


OROSZ


ORR


meritorious  service  at  the  battle  of  Gettysburg. His
widow  entered  the  sisterhood  of  the  Sacred  Heart.

OROS/,  or  OROS,  Ladislas  (o-rosh1),  Hungarian
clergyman,  b.  in  Hungary,  18  Dec.,  1697 ;  d.  in
Tyrnau,  Austria,  in  the  latter  half  of  the  18th
century.  He  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus  in  1710,
embarked  for  South  America  in  1726,  and  labored
in  Paraguay,  where  he  converted  some  Indian
tribes.  He  was  afterward  rector  of  the  College  of
Buenos  Ayres,  subsequently  provincial  of  the  j
Jesuits,  and  returned  to  Europe  in  1768.  He  wrote
"  Decades  quinque  Virorum  lllustriuin  Paragiiaria?
S.  G.  ex  Historia  Provincia?  et  aliunde  depromp-
ta?"  (Tyrnau,  1759).  He  brought  with  him  from
Paraguay  the  materials  for  several  other  volumes  I
on  the  history  of  that  country,  and  prepared  a  sec-  j
ond  part  for  the  press,  but  on  his  submitting  it  t<>
the  heads  of  his  order  they  suppressed  it,  as  its
publication  would  give  offence  to  the  Spanish  au
thorities.  Father  Orosz  wrote  accounts  of  his  mis
sionary  labors  and  of  the  manners  and  customs  of
the  natives  of  South  America,  beginning  in  1726
and  ending  in  1741,  all  of  which  arc  published  in
Stocklein's  "  Neue  Weltbote  "  (Griitz).

OROZCO  Y  BERRA,  Manuel  (o-roth  -ko-e-
ber-rah),  Mexican  historian,  b.  in  the  city  of
Mexico,  8  June,  1816 ;  d.  there,  27  Jan.,  1881.  He
entered  the  College  of  mines,  and  in  1834  was
graduated  as  a  topographical  engineer.  He  after
ward  studied  jurisprudence  in  the  seminary  at
Puebla,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1847.  He
was  sent  to  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1851  to  defend  a
lawsuit  for  the  state,  and  in  the  next  year  ap
pointed  director  of  the  national  archives.  He  was
secretary  of  public  works  from  1857  till  the  fall  of
the  Liberal  government,  and  in  1860  was  professor
of  geography  and  history  in  the  military  college.
On  the  return  of  Juarez  to  Mexico  in  1861,  Orozco
became  assistant  secretary  of  public  works,  and  in
the  next  year  took  charge  of  the  portfolio,  and
after  the  abolition  of  that  office  he  was  commis
sioned  to  write  a  memoir  on  native  languages.  In
May,  1863,  he  was  appointed  associate  judge  of  the
supreme  court,  and  when  the  government  aban
doned  the  capital  before  the  French  army  he  re
mained  in  Mexico  to  work  for  a  living.  He' refused
a  seat  in  the  junta  de  notables,  but  later,  when
many  distinguished  Liberals  thought  it  their  duty
to  assist  the  new  imperial  government,  he  accepted
office.  In  November,  1865,  he  became  assistant
secretary  of  public  works  and  director  of  the  Na
tional  museum,  and  in  August,  1866.  he  was  ap
pointed  professor  of  national  history  in  the  College
of  mines.  On  25  Sept.  of  that  year  he  was  appointed
councillor  of  state,  and  in  the  conference  at  Orizaba
in  November  he  was  one  of  the  few  frankly  to
express  the  opinion  that  the  empire  could  no  longer
be  maintained.  After  the  capture  of  the  capitalby
the  Republican  forces,  Orozco  was  sentenced  to
four  years'  imprisonment,  but  in  November  of  the
same  year  the  sentence  was  commuted.  He  was  !
pardoned  in  1868,  and.  obtaining  through  his  friends  i
a  post  in  the  mint,  devoted  himself  to  scientific  !
studies,  and  was  soon  an  acknowledged  authority  !
on  ancient  Mexican  history  and  hieroglyphics.  He
became  a  member  of  the  Royal  geographical  society
of  Madrid  and  numerous  foreign  and  Mexican
scientific  associations.  He  was  one  of  the  principal
editors  of  Jose  M.  Andrade's  "  Diccionario  Univer
sal  de  Historia  y  Geojjrafia  Mexicana"  (7  vols.,
Mexico,  1853-'5),  and  chief  editor  of  the  appendix
to  that  work  (3  vols.,  1855-'6).  He  wrote  "  Noticia
historica  de  la  Conjuracion  del  Marques  del  Valle,
1565  a  1568"  (1853);  "  Memoria  para  la  carta
hidrografica  del  valle  de  Mexico  "  (1864) ;  "  Geo-


grafia  de  las  lenguas  y  Carta  etnografica  de  Mexi
co,  con  apuntes  para  la  immigracion  de  las  tribus  "
(1865);  "Memorias  para  cl  piano  de  la  ciudad  de
Mexico  "  (1867) ;  "  Materiales  para  una  cartografia
Mexicana"  (1871);  "Historia  de  la  Geografia  en
Mexico  "  (1876  and  1880);  and  '•  Historia  antigua
de  Mexico,"  his  most  famous  work  (1880-'l),  in
four  parts:  " Civilization,"  " The  Primitive  Man,"
"  Ancient  History," and  "Conquest." — His  brother,
Fernando,  Mexican  poet,  b.  in  San  Felipe  del
Obraje,  3  June,  1822  ;  d.  in  Mexico  in  1851,  went
in  early  life  to  the  city  of  Mexico  with  his  parents,
and  in  1836  entered  the  seminary,  studying  Latin
and  beginning  a  course  of  medicine  :  but  his  father
died  and  his  family  went  to  Puebla.  where  he  was
graduated  in  medicine  in  1845.  and  began  practice.
In  1848  he  published  a  theatrical  review,  "El  En
treat-to,"  but  his  satirical  criticisms  and  his  liberal
religious  ideas  made  him  unpopular,  and  he  was
obliged  to  return  to  Mexico.  There  he  took  part
in  editing  several  papers.  About  that  time  he
finished  his  novel  "La  Guerra  de  30  anus"
(Mexico,  1850).  At  his  death  he  was  editor  of  the
"  Siglo  XIX."  He  also  wrote  "LaTienda  de  Mo-
das,"  "  Tres  Patriotas,"  and  "Tres  Aspirantes,"
comedies  of  three  acts  in  verse,  and  "  Amistad,"  a
comedy  of  five  acts  in  prose.  He  left  in  manu
script  "  El  Novio  y  el  Alojado,"  and  other  comedies,
and  the  articles  "  Ensayo  Dramutico,"  "  La  Poli-
tica,"  "  Primeras  Impresiones,"  "Costumbres  Pro-
vinciales,"  and  ''  La  China,"  which  were  published
in  a  collection  of  his  works  (Mexico,  1886).

ORR,  Hugh,  inventor,  b.  in  Lochwinoch,  Ren
frewshire,  Scotland.  13  Jan.,  1717;  d.  in  Bridge-
water,  Plymouth  co..  Mass..  6  Dec.,  1798.  He
emigrated  to  this  country  in  1737,  and,  after  resid
ing  a  year  in  Easton,  Pa.,  settled  in  Bridgewater,
where,  having  been  educated  as  a  gun-  and  lock
smith,  he  built  a  scythe  and  axe  manufactory,  and
erected  the  first  trip-hammer  that  was  set  up  in
that  part  of  the  country.  For  several  years  he  was
the  only  maker  of  edged  tools  in  that  section  of
New  England.  About  1753  he  invented  a  machine
for  dressing  flax,  and  became  an  exporter  of  flax-
seed.  Previously,  in  1748.  he  had  made  500  stand
of  arms  for  the  province  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  and
they  were  deposited  in  Castle  William,  but  were
nearly  all  carried  away  by  the  British  when  they
evacuated  Boston.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war  of
the  Revolution,  Orr  became  a  warm  adherent  of
the  popular  cause,  and  was  again  employed  in  the
manufacture  of  arms.  In  concert  with  a  French
gentleman  he  erected  a  foundry  for  casting.  Here
a  great  number  of  iron  and  several  pieces  of  brass
ordnance  varying  from  3-  to  42-pounders  were
made,  besides  a  vast  quantity  of  cannon-shot  which
proved  of  the  xitmost  value  to  the  patriots.  In
1786  he  employed  two  brothers,  named  Robert  and
Alexander  Barr,  from  Scotland,  to  build  for  him
three  carding,  roping,  and  spinning  machines.
The  legislature  voted  a  grant  of  £200  to  insure
their  completion,  and  subsequently  awarded  the
Barrs  six  tickets  in  the  state  land  lottery,  in  which
there  were  no  blanks,  as  a  reward  1'or  their  "  inge
nuity  "  and  "  public  spirit."  Mr.  Orr  was  allowed
to  use  the  machines  as  compensation  for  his  trouble.
They  cost  £187,  and  are  believed  to  have  been  the
first  "  jenny  "  and  "  stock-card  "  machines  that  were
made  in  the  United  States.  Mr.  Orr  was  for  several
years  a  state  senator. — His  son,  Robert,  was  the
inventor  of  an  improved  method  of  making  scythes
with  the  trip-hammer,  and  was  the  pioneer  in  New
England  in  the  manufacture  of  iron  shovels.  In
1804  he  was  master-armorer  at  the  U.  S.  arsenal  at
Springfield,  Mass.


ORR


ORRY


593


ORR,  James  Lawrence,  statesman,  b.  in  Cray-
tonville,  Anderson  co.,  S.  C.,  12  May,  1822 ;  d.  in
St.  Petersburg,  Russia,  5  May,  1873.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of 'Virginia  in  1842,

studied  law,  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar,
and  practised  at
Anderson,  S.  C..
where  he  also  es
tablished  and  edit
ed  the  il  Gazette.''
He  sat  in  the  state
legislature  in  1844-
'57,  where  he  de
nounced  nullifica
tion,  and  was  elect
ed  and  re-elected  to
congress  as  a  Demo
crat,  serving  from
3  Dec.,  1849,  till  3
March,  1859.  With
the  exception  of  his
original  contest,
there  was  no  opposition  to  his  election.  In  con
gress,  while  he  deprecated  the  agitation  of  the  sla
very  question,  he  was  a  devoted  friend  of  the  Union.
He  opposed  the  compromise  measures  that  were
introduced  by  Henry  Clay.  While  he  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  33d  congress  he  was  appointed  chairman
of  the  committee  on  Indian  affairs,  and  made  an
elaborate  report  on  the  best  method  of  civilizing  the
various  tribes,  which,  in  the  case  of  several  of  them,
was  adopted  with  considerable  success.  On  the  as
sembling  of  the  35th  congress  in  December,  1857,
lie  was  chosen  speaker.  As  a  member  of  the  South
ern  Rights  convention  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  in  May,
1851,  he  opposed  the  policy,  while  maintaining  the
right,  of  secession  in  the  several  states,  and  to  his
efforts  is  attributed  the  failure  of  the  secession
ordinance  that  was  framed  on  that  occasion.  On
4  July,  1854,  Mr.  Orr.  with  Stephen  A.  Douglas  and
others,  addressed  a  Democratic  meeting  in  Phila
delphia,  taking  a  strong  stand  against  the  Know-
Xothing  party,  and  is  said  by  his  arguments  to
have  prevented  many  public  men  from  joining  its
ranks.  At  the  Secession  convention  he  earnestly
opposed  the  withdrawal  of  South  Carolina,  bu't
when  he  found  that  the  state  was  determined  to
secede  he  acquiesced  and  declared  that  he  would
yield  his  judgment  and  cast  his  lot  with  his  state.
He  was  subsequently  appointed  one  of  the  three
Confederate  commissioners  that  visited  Washing
ton  in  December,  I860,  to  treat  with  the  govern
ment  for  the  surrender  of  the  U,  S.  forts  in  Charles
ton  harbor  and  to  transact  other  business.  On  his
return  to  South  Carolina,  he  organized  a  rifle  regi
ment  which  he  led  in  the  field  until  1862,  when  he
was  elected  a  member  of  the  Confederate  senate,
and  served  until  the  dispersion  of  that  body  at  the
end  of  the  war.  He  was  chosen  governor  of  the
state  of  South  Carolina  under  President  Johnson's
plan  of  reconstruction,  and  served  until  1868.  In
1866  he  represented  his  state  in  the  Philadelphia
constitutional  union  convention,  and  in  1872  he
was  sent  to  the  National  Republican  convention.
In  1870  he  was  elected  circuit  judge  for  South
Carolina,  which  office  he  held  until  his  appoint
ment  as  U.  S.  minister  to  Russia  in  1872.  His
death  took  place  in  St.  Petersburg  within  two
months  after  the  presentation  of  his  credentials  to
the  Russian  government.

ORR,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  1747 ;  d.  in  Bedford,

Ilillsborough  co.,  X.  H.,  23  Dec.,  1822. He  served

in  the  war  of  the  Revolution  and  was  so  severely

wounded  at  the  battle  of  Bennington,  Vt.,  that  he

VOL.  iv. — 38


was  crippled  for  life.  He  was  for  many  years  a
representative  and  senator  in  the  Xew  Hampshire
legislature,  also  state  counsellor,  and  served  for
twenty  years  as  justice  of  the  peace. — His  son,
Benjamin,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bedford,  X.  H..  1  Dec..
1772;  d.  in  Brunswick,  Me.,  5  Sept.,  1828,  was
graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1798,  studied  law  with
Samuel  S.  Wilde,  and  began  to  practise  in  Tops-
ham,  Sagadahoc  co.,  Me.,  but  subsequently  removed
to  Brunswick,  where  he  attained  eminence  at  the
chancery  bar.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
representative  from  Massachusetts,  and  served
from  1  Dec.,  1817,  till  3  March,  1819.  He  was  the
author  of  "  An  Oration  on  the  Death  of  Washing
ton  "  (1800). — Another  son,  Isaac,  clergyman,  b.
in  Bedford.  X.  H.,  in  1793;  d.  in  Amherst,  Mass.,
28  April,  1844,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1814.
He  studied  theology,  was  ordained  and  became  a
teacher  at  the  asylum  for  the  deaf  and  dumb  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  and  afterward  labored  as  a  mis
sionary  among  the  colored  people  in  Washington,
D.  C.,  and  other  southern  cities,  being  employed
by  the  American  colonization  society.  He  was  pro
ficient  in  mathematics  and  the  natural  sciences,
and  had  a  talent  for  mechanics,  one  of  his  inven
tions  being  an  air-tight  stove.  He  was  a  volumin
ous  writer  for  the  newspaper  and  periodical  press,
contributing  forty-five  letters  signed  "  Hampden  "
to  the  Xew  York  "  Commercial  Advertiser,"  and
eighty  letters  over  the  signature  of  "Timoleon"
to  the  Boston  "  Courier."  Among  his  unpublished
manuscripts  is  a  commentary  on  the  books  of
••  Daniel  "  and  "  Revelation."

ORR,  John  William,  wood-engraver,  b.  in  Ire
land,  31  March,  1815  ;  d.  in  Jersey  City,  X.  J.,  4
March,  1887.  He  was  brought  to  this  country  in
infancy,  his  father  settling  in  Buffalo,  X.  Y.  In
1836  John  went  to  X'ew  York  city,  where  he  stud
ied  drawing  under  William  Redfield.  one  of  the
most  skilful  of  the  early  engravers  on  wood.  The
following  year  he  was  awarded  a  silver  medal  by
the  Mechanics'  institute  for  the  best  specimen  of
engraving.  The  same  year  he  began  business  on
his  own  account  in  Buffalo,  but  he  removed  to
Albany  in  1842.  where  he  was  employed  in  making
illustrations  for  the  state  reports  on  geology.  In
the  latter  year  he  received  a  gold  medal  from  the
State  agricultural  society  "  for  the  best  specimen
of  domestic  animals  engraved  on  wood."  In  1844
he  went  to  Xew  York  city,  where  the  remainder
of  his  business  life  was  spent.  His  first  important
work  was  for  the  frontispieces  for  Harper's  "  Illus
trated  Shakespeare."  When  Mr.  Orr  removed  to
Xew  York,  wood-engraving  was  but  little  used,  but
by  advertising  extensively,  engaging  the  best  assist
ants  he  could  procure,  and  by  introducing  new  in
ventions,  he  placed  his  establishment  in  the  front
rank  in  his  profession,  which  position  it  retained  for
more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century.  He  employed
skilled  English,  French,  and  GeVman  engravers,
and  adopted  an  original  device  for  economizing  their
time.  He  engaged  a  young  man  to  read  to  them
daily,  and  it  was  found  that  the  men  became  too
much  interested  to  waste  their  time  in  discussions
and  arguments  that  previously  had  caused  them
to  neglect  their  work.  Mr.  Orr  was  an  active  mem
ber  of  the  society  of  Odd  Fellows,  and  from  1862
till  1871  edited  and  published  "The  American  Odd
Fellow,"  the  official  organ  of  that  order.

ORRY.  Louis  Victor,  French  missionary,  b.  in
Longumean  in  1642 :  d.  in  Three  Rivers,  Canada,
in  May,  1691.  He  united  with  the  Recollets,  came
to  Canada  in  1657.  and  was  attached  to  the  mis
sions  of  Lake  Superior.  He  tried  to  form  an
establishment  in  the  deserted  island  of  Michipi-


594


ORTEGA


ORTH


coton,  in  that  lake,  but  in  vain,  owing  to  the
belief  of  the  Indians  that  the  island  was  floating
and  the  abode  of  spirits.  However,  in  August.
1009.  he  landed  there  with  a  small  band  of  Indians,
and  after  celebrating  divine  service  set  out  with
two  companions  for  an  excursion  into  the  interior.
During  his  absence  the  Indians  prepared  their
repast  and,  as  was  their  custom,  cooked  their  meal
by  heating  stones  and  casting  them  into  a  pail  of
water.  Unfortunately,  the  stones  contained  copper,
and  poisoning  the  meat  caused  the  death  of  the
majority  of  those  who  partook  of  it.  The  others
were  terrified  during  the  night  by  the  large  lynxes
and  hares  that  abounded  on  the  island,  and,  despite
Orry's  entreaties,  they  abandoned  the  settlement  on
the  following  morning.  For  a  long  time  afterward
no  Indians  dared  visit  the  island.  The  Recollet
provincial,  on  hearing  the  report  that  Michipicoton
contained  an  abundance  of  copper,  felt  much
grieved  at  the  unsuccessful  attempt  to  colonize  it,
and,  after  disciplining  Orry,  bid  him  renew  his
efforts.  All  his  attempts  proving  unsuccessful,  he
joined,  in  1070,  the  mission  of  Sault  Sainte  Marie,
where  he  remained  for  fifteen  years,  and,  being  pro
moted  in  1086  a  visitor  of  the  order,  travelled
through  Upper  and  Lower  Canada,  founding  mis
sions  and  building  churches,  schools,  and  semina
ries.  He  died  of  malarial  fever.  Orry  left  a  valu
able  manuscript,  which  afterward  found  its  way
into  the  library  of  the  city  of  Nancy,  where  it  still
exists.  It  is  entitled  "  Histoire  des  etablissements
de  la  foi  fondes  dans  la  Xouvelle  France  de  I'Ame-
rique  Septentrionale,  dite  Le  Canada,  par  les  peres
de  la  mission  dite  Recollect,  avec  une  breve  his-
toire  de  la  dccouverte  de  ce  pays,  et  un  vocabulaire
du  langage  parle  par  les  sauvages  de  cette  contree."

ORTEGA,  Jos6  (or-tay  -gah),  Mexican  clergy
man,  b.  in  Tlaxcala,  Mexico,  15  April,  1700;  d.
probably  in  California  after  1754.  He  entered  the
Jesuit  novitiate  in  Tepozotlan,  20  April,  1717.  As
soon  as  his  studies  were  finished  he  was  sent  to  the
Xayarit  mission,  where  he  labored  for  the  conver
sion  of  the  Indians  for  more  than  thirty  years.
He  possessed  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  native
dialects,  and  gave  his  leisure  to  linguistic  studies.
He  wrote  "  Doctrina  cristiana,  oraciones,  con-
fesionario,  arte  y  vocabulario  de  la  lengua  Cora  "
(Guadalajara,  1729) ;  "  Vocabulario  en  lengua  Cas-
tellana  y  Cora  "  (Mexico,  1732) ;  and  "  Apostolicos
afanes  de  la  Compania  de  Jesus  en  la  America
Septentrional"  (Barcelona,  1754).  The  last-named
work  gives  the  history  of  the  conversion  of  the
Indians  of  Nayarit  and  of  Pimeria  Alta,  the  upper
Pima  country,  embracing  much  of  the  present  ter
ritory  of  Arizona.  It  also  describes  their  manners
and  customs,  and,  besides  being  written  in  an  in
teresting  style,  is  one  of  the  principal  sources  of
information  for  the  history  of  Arizona,  Xew
Mexico,  and  Upper  California  during  the  17th
century  and  the  first  half  of  the  18th.

ORTEGA  Y  MONTAGES,  Juan  (or-tay -gah),
Mexican  archbishop,  1).  in  Siles,  Murcia,  3  July,
1627:  d.  in  Mexico  in  1708.  He  studied  theology
and  canonical  law  in  the  University  of  Alcala,
where  he  was  graduated,  and  in  1070  was  appointed
judge  of  the  Inquisition  of  Mexico.  In  1074  he
was  nominated  bishop  of  Durango  and  consecrated
in  Mexico,  but  before  leaving  for  his  diocese  he
was  promoted  bishop  of  Guatemala.  He  entered
upon  his  duties  in  1676,  founded  the  convent  of
Barefooted  Carmelites,  and  consecrated  the  new
cathedral.  In  1682  he  was  transferred  to  the
diocese  of  Michoacan.  where  he  built  at  his  own
expense  the  present  bishop's  palace.  In  1090  he
was  provisionally  viceroy  until  the  arrival  of  the


Count  of  Moctezuma,  and  in  1701  he  was  promoted
archbishop  of  Mexico.  During  his  government  of
the  diocese  he  finished  the  cathedral  of  Our  Lady
of  Guadalupe,  for  which  he  solicited  contributions
from  door  to  door.  In  1702  he  was  again  for
several  months  in  charge  of  the  viceroyalty,  from
the  departure  of  the  Count  of  Moctezuma  till  the
arrival  of  the  Duke  of  Albuquerque,  and  in  that
interval  he  despatched  a  treasure-fleet  with  $18,-
000.000,  which  was  sunk  by  the  English  in  the
harbor  of  Vigo.  He  wrote  two  works  on  ecclesias
tical  jurisdiction  (Mexico,  1085  and  1707).

ORTH,  Godlove  Stoner,  statesman,  b.  near
Lebanon,  Lebanon  co..  Pa.,  22  April,  1817;  d.  in
Lafayette.  Ind.,  10  Dec.,  1882.  He  was  a  descend
ant  of  Balthazer  Orth,  a  German,  who  in  1742
purchased  of  John
Thomas  and  Rich
ard  Penn,  the  pro
prietors  of  Penn
sylvania,  282  acres
of  land  in  Leba
non  county,  where
on  the  birthplace
of  Godlove  Orth
was  soon  after
ward  built  and  still
stands.  His  Chris
tian  name  is  a
translation  of  the
German  Gottlieb,
which  was  borne
by  many  of  his  an
cestors.  He  was
educated  at  Penn
sylvania  college,
Gettysburg,  Pa.,

studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1839,
and  began  to  practise  in  Indiana.  He  was  a
member  of  the  senate  of  that  state  from  1842  till
1848.  and  served  one  year  as  its  presiding  officer.
In  the  latter  year  he  was  presidential  elector  on  the
Taylor  and  Fillmore  ticket.  He  repi-esented  Indi
ana  in  the  Peace  conference  of  1861.  The  part
that  he  took  in  its  debates  gave  him  a  wide  repu
tation,  and  his  definitions  of  "state  rights  "and
"state  sovereignty  "  have  been  quoted  by  Hermann
von  Hoist  with  approval.  In  1862,  when  a  call  was
made  for  men  to  defend  Indiana  from  threatened
invasion,  he  organized  a  company  in  two  hours,  and
was  made  captain  and  placed  in  command  of  the
U.  S.  ram  '•  Horner,"  in  which  he  cruised  in  the  Ohio
river,  and  did  much  to  restore  order  on  the  borders
of  Kentucky,  Indiana,  and  Illinois.  He  was  elected
and  re-elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  serving
from  7  Dec.,  1803,  till  3  March,  1871.  Two  years
later  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  43d  congress,
and  served  from  1  Dec.,  1873,  till  3  March,  1875.
During  his  long  congressional  career  he  was  the
chairman  and  member  of  many  important  com
mittees.  He  urged  the  vigorous  prosecution  of  the
war,  and  voted  for  the  13th,  14th.  and  loth  amend
ments  to  the  constitution.  After  his  return  to
congress  in  1866  he  began  to  labor  to  secure  from
European  governments  the  recognition  of  the
right  of  expatriation,  and  lived  to  see  it  recognized
in  the  treaties  of  the  United  States  with  most  of
the  other  powers.  In  1868,  at  the  request  of  the
administration,  he  undertook  the  management  of
the  legislation  that  looked  to  the  annexation  of
Santo  Domingo.  At  the  same  session  he  framed
the  "  Orth  bill."  which  reorganized  the  diplomatic
and  consular  system,  and  much  of  which  is  still  in
force.  Early  in  1871  a  recommendation,  urging
his  appointment  as  minister  to  Berlin,  was  signed


ORTIZ


ORTOX


595


by  every  member  of  the  U.  S.  senate  and  house  of
representatives,  and  President  Grant  at  one  time
intended  to  comply  with  the  request,  but  circum
stances  arose  that  rendered  the  retention  of  George
Bancroft  desirable.  Mr.  Orth  soon  afterward  de
clined  the  office  of  commissioner  of  internal  reve
nue.  In  1876  he  was  the  Republican  candidate  for
governor,  but  withdrew  from  the  canvass.  He  had
frequently  been  a  member  of  the  congressional
committee  on  foreign  affairs,  and  in  March.  1875.
was  appointed  minister  to  Austria,  after  declining
the  mission  to  Brazil.  He  returned  to  the  United
States  in  1877.  and  was  again  elected  to  congress,
serving  from  18  March.  1879.  until  his  death.

ORTIZ.  John  F.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Santa  Fe,
New  Mexico,  in  1798;  d.  there,  20  Jan.,  1858.  He
studied  in  the  College  of  Durango.  was  ordained  in
1822.  appointed  pastor  of  San  Juan  de  los  Caballe-
ros  in  1823.  and  transferred  to  Santa  Fe  in  1825.
In  1829  he  was  named  "  Cura  Propio  de  Santa
Fe,"  and  in  1832  he  was  appointed  administrator
of  Xew  Mexico.  When  Bishop  Lamy  was  chosen
to  take  his  place  in  1850,  the  prejudice  against
citizens  of  the  United  States  was  very  strong  in
Xew  Mexico,  and.  but  for  the  devotion  of  Father
Ortiz,  the  new  vicar-apostolic  would  have  been  in
great  difficulties.  He  received  Dr.  Lamy  with
respect,  placed  his  house  at  his  disposal,  and  ac
companied  him  in  all  his  journeys.  Father  Ortiz
remained  pastor  of  Santa  Fe  till  1853.

ORTIZ,  Tomas,  South  American  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  ill  Calzadilla.  Estremadura,  late  in  the  15th
century :  d.  in  Toeuyo,  Venezuela,  in  1538.  He
entered  the  order  of  Dominicans  in  their  convent
of  Salamanca  in  1510.  came  soon  afterward  to  the
missions  of  Hispaniola,  and  in  1525  was  appointed
vicar-general  of  his  order  for  Xew  Spain.  He  was
later  appointed  first  commissary  of  the  Inquisition,
and  when  the  disturbances  between  Hernan  Cortes
and  the  treasurer,  Alonso  de  Estrada,  occurred  in
1526,  Ortiz,  together  with  the  Franciscan  provin
cial.  Martin  de  Valencia,  appeased  the  contending
parties  and  restored  peace.  As  some  of  his  monks
had  died.  Ortiz  returned  to  Spain  in  1528.  and
through  the  president  of  the  council  of  the  Indies.
( 'ardinal  Loayza.  obtained  many  favorable  conces
sions  for  his  order,  returning  with  twenty  monks
to  Mexico.  In  1534  he  was  appointed  to  the  newly
created  diocese  of  Venezuela,  where  he  died.  He
wrote  "  Relacion  curiosa  de  la  Vida.  Leyes,  Cos-
tumbres  y  Ritos.  que  los  Indies  observan  en  su
policia.  religion  y  guerras"  (1527).  which  remains
in  manuscript  in  the  archives  of  Simancas.

ORTON.  Azariah  Giles,  theologian,  b.  in  Ty-
ringham.  Berkshire  co..  Mass..  6  Aug.,  1789;  d.  in
Lisle,  Broome  co..  X.  Y..  28  Dec.,  1864.  He  was
graduated  at  Williams  in  1813.  and  at  Princeton
theological  seminary  in  1820.  On  completing  his
theological  course  he  was  commissioned  by  the
board  of  missions  of  the  Presbyterian  assembly
li  to  preach  to  destitute  places  in  Georgia.''  In
1822  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian
church  at  Seneca  Falls,  X.  Y.,  where  he  remained
until  1835.  After  preaching  three  years  at  Lisle.
X.  Y..  he  accepted  a  call  from  a  Congregational
church  at  Greene,  X.  Y..  which  connection  he
maintained  from  1838  till  1852.  He  then  re
turned  to  Lisle,  and  labored  there  until  1860.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University
of  the  city  of  Xew  York  in  1849  and  from  Union
college  in  1850.  In  1838  he  published  a  reply  to
Prof.  Moses  Stuart  on  the  constitution  of  the
United  States  in  its  relation  to  slavery.  In  1842
he  prepared  the  memorial  of  Chenango  county.
X.  Y.,  to  the  state  senate,  praying  that  the  bill  for


the  abolition  of  capital  punishment  might  not  be
come  a  law.  by  the  timely  reception  of  which  the
final  passage  of  the  bill  was  prevented.  He  was
also  the  author  of  an  article  on  the  Scripture  ar
gument  for  capital  punishment,  parts  of  which
were  printed  in  the  "  Genesee  Evangelist  "  of  1849.
In  1854  he  delivered  an  address  at  Miami  university
on  "  Xature  and  Revelation."  which  was  published.
He  also  was  the  author  of  several  poems.  Dr.  Or-
ton  was  a  man  of  profound  scholarship. — His  son,
James,  naturalist,  b.  in  Seneca  Falls,  X.  Y.,  21
April,  1830;  d.  on  Lake  Titicaca,  Peru.  25  Sept.,
1877,  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1855.  and
at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1858.  After
spending  some  time  in  travel  in  Europe  and  the
East,  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Congrega
tional  church  in  Greene.  XT.  Y.,  on  11  July,  I860.
In  1861  he  accepted  a  charge  in  Thomaston,  Me.,
where  he  remained  until  1864,  when  he  became
pastor  in  Brighton,  X.  Y.  He  was  appointed  in
structor  in  natural  sciences  in  the  L  niversity  of
Rochester  in  1866,  and  in  1869  was  called  to  the
chair  of  natural  history  at  Vassar  college,  which  he
held  until  his  death.'  In  1867  he  visited  South
America  at  the  head  of  an  expedition  of  students
that  were  sent  out  under  the  auspices  of  Williams
college.  On  this  occasion  he  crossed  the  continent
by  way  of  Quito,  the  Xabo,  and  the  Amazon,  dis
covering  the  first  fossils  that  were  found  in  the
valley  of  the  latter  river.  He  made  a  second  jour
ney  in  1873,  and  crossed  from  Para,  by  way  of  the
Amazon,  to  Lima  and  Lake  Titicaca.  In  1876  he
undertook  the  exploration  of  the  Great  Beni  river,
which  carries  the  waters  of  eastern  Bolivia  to  the
Amazon  by  way  of  the  Madeira,  and  he  died  on
this  journey  during  the  passage  of  Lake  Titicaca,
on  his  way  to  Puno.  Prof.  Orton  was  regarded  as
the  best  authority  on  the  subject  of  the  geology
and  physical  geography  of  the  west  coast  of  South
America  and  the  Amazon  valley.  Xo  one  since
the  time  of  Alexander  von  Humboldt  has  con
tributed  so  much  to  the  exact  knowledge  of  that
country.  He  was  a  member  of  scientific  societies
in  the  United  States  and  in  Europe,  whose  trans
actions  he  enriched  with  papers  on  the  natural  his
tory  of  South  America.  His  publications  include
"  Miners'  Guide  and  Metallurgists'  Directory  "  (Xew
York,  1849):  "The  Proverbalist  and  the  Poet"
(Philadelphia.  1852):  "  The  Andes  and  the  Ama
zon  "  (Xew  York,  1870) ;  "  Underground  Treasures :
How  and  Where  to  find  Them"  (Hartford.  1872);
"  Liberal  Education  of  Women  "  (Xew  York,  1873) ;
and  "Comparative  Zotilogy"  (1875).

ORTON.  Edward,  geologist,  b.  in  Deposit,  X.  Y.,
9  March,  1829.  He  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  in
1848.  after  which  he  studied  at  Lane  and  Andover
theological  seminaries  and  at  the  Lawrence  scien
tific  school  of  Harvard.  In  1856-'9  he  was  profes
sor  of  natural  science  in  the  Xew  York  state  nor
mal  school  at  Albany.  He  was  called  to  the  chair
of  natural  history  in  Antioch  college  in  1865,  and
became  its  president  in  1872.  A  year  later  he  ac
cepted  the  presidency  of  the  Ohio  state  university,
which  he  held  until  his  resignation  in  1881.  Since
that  time  he  has  filled  the  chair  of  geology  in  that
institution.  Prof.  Orton  was  assistant  state  geolo
gist  of  Ohio  in  1869-'75.  and  since  1881  has  had
entire  charge  of  the  survey.  The  degree  of  Ph.  D.
was  conferred  on  him  by  Hamilton  in  1876.  and  in
1881  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Ohio  state  university.  He
is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  was  presi
dent  of  the  State  sanitary  association  of  Ohio  in
1884-'o.  Besides  various  addresses,  scientific  pa
pers,  and  contributions,  he  is  the  author  of  the
article  on  Ohio  in  the  "Encyclopaedia  Britannica,"


596


ORTON


OSBORN


Geology  of  Ohio  "  (2  vols..  1888-'8)  and  of  "  Petro
leum  and  Inflammable  Gas  "  (1887).

ORTON,  Jason  Roekwood,  author,  b.  in  Ham-
ilton,  Madison  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1806;  d.  in  Brooklyn.  I
N.  Y.,  13  Feb.,  1807. He  was  educated  as  a  physi
cian,  and  practised  for  many  years,  but  abandoned
medicine  on  account  of  his  health,  removed  to  New-
York  city  in  1850,  and  devoted  himself  to  litera-  '
ture. He  was  for  several  years  a  contributor  to  j
the  '•  Musical  World,"  and  he  subsequently  edited
the  "  Weekly  Review  "  and  the  Binghamton,  N.  Y..
"  Courier." He was the author of "  Poetical
Sketches,  or  Leisure  Hours  of  a  Student "  (1820) :
'•Arnold,  and  Other  Poems"  (New  York.  1854);
"Camp Fires of the Red  Men, or  A Hundred
Years  Ago"  (1855) ;  and  "  Confidential  Experiences
of  a  Spiritualist "  (1858).

ORTON,  William,  Federal  official,  b.  in  Cuba,
Allcghany  co.,  N.  Y.,  14  June.  1826 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  22  April,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  the
State  normal  school,  Albany,  N.  Y.,  and  became  a
teacher.  In  1850  he  entered  the  book-store  of
George  Derby  and  Co.,  at  Geneva.  N.  Y.,  and  soon
afterward  he"  became  a  partner.  After  the  death
of  George,  James  C.  Derby  entered  the  firm,  and
the  business  was  subsequently  removed  to  New
York  city,  where,  in  1857,  the  firm  became  insol
vent.  Orton  was  then  employed  in  the  publishing-
house  of  J.  G.  Gregory  and  Co.  About  this  time
he  began  to  take  an  active  interest  in  politics  as  a
Republican,  and  in  1802  he  was  appointed  collector
of  internal  revenue  for  the  Oth  district  of  New
York.  In  1865  he  was  promoted  to  be  commis
sioner  of  internal  revenue.  lie  had  discharged  his
duties  only  for  a  few  months  when  he  resigned  to
accept  the  presidency  of  the  United  States  telegraph
company,  which  corporation  was  in  the  following
April  consolidated  with  its  rival,  the  Western
Union  telegraph  company.  Mr.  Orton  being  made
vice-president  of  the  new  organization.  He  be
came  president  in  1807.  and  retained  that  office
until  his  death.  In  the  latter  year  he  established
the  "Journal  of  Telegraphy."  Mr.  Orton  was  a
man  of  great  executive  ability.

ORVILLIERS,  Louis  Gnf  lionet,  French  sailor,
b.  in  Moulins,  France,  in  1708 ;  d.  there  in  1792.
His  father  was  governor  of  Cayenne,  and  at  the
age  of  fifteen  the  son  entered  the  military  service
of  that  colony,  rising  rapidly  to  the  rank  of  lieu
tenant  of  infantry.  He  passed  into  the  navy  in
1728,  reached  the  grade  of  post-captain  in  1754,
and,  after  taking  an  active  part  in  various  cam
paigns  in  Europe,  Santo  Domingo,  and  the  An
tilles,  was  made  vice-admiral  in  1704.  In  1777  he
was  named  lieutenant-general  of  the  naval  armies
in  consequence  of  the  approaching  intervention  of
France  in  the  war  between  Great  Britain  and  her
American  colonies.  In  1778  he  engaged  the  Eng
lish  under  Admiral  Keppel  from  23  to  27  July,
and  although  both  fleets  suffered  equally,  the  ad
vantage  remained  with  the  French.  An  attempt
to  capture  Portsmouth  and  Plymouth  in  the  fol
lowing  year  was  a  failure,  and  D'Orvilliers,  being
censured  for  not  turning  to  better  account  the  im
mense  naval  forces  at  his  disposal,  resigned  his
command.  On  the  death  of  his  wife  in  1783  he
retired  to  the  Abbey  of  St.  Magloire,  Paris,  but  he
returned  to  his  native  town  some  time  afterward.

OSBECK,  Peter,  Swedish  explorer,  b.  in  Got-
tenburg,  Sweden,  9  May,  1723  ;  d.  in  Hasloef,  23
Dec.,  1805.  He  was  a  pupil  of  Linnasus,  and,  be
coming  chaplain  of  a  vessel  of  the  Indian  company,


visited  several  of  the  West  Indies,  South  America,
and  China  in  1748-'52,  and  was  appointed  ecclesias
tical  bailiff  of  Hasloef  in  1700.  He  published
"  Dagbok  of  min  Indisk  Resa"  (Stockholm,  1757),
which  contains  interesting  observations  of  the
countries  visited  by  the  author,  and  is  terminated
by  an  accurate  description  of  the  island  of  Fernando
de  Noronha.  Linnaeus  gave  the  name  of  Osbeckia
to  a  tree  of  the  family  of  the  Melastomacese.

OSBORN,  Ethan',  clergyman,  b.  in  Litchfield,
Conn.,  21  Aug.,  1758;  d.  in  Fairton,  Cumberland
co.,  N.  J.,  1  May,  1858.  At  the  age  of  eighteen  he
volunteered  during  the  second  year  of  the  Revolu
tionary  war.  and  served  under  the  immediate  com
mand  of  Gen.  Washington  in  the  retreat  of  the
American  army  through  New  Jersey.  After  being
graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1784.  he  studied  the
ology,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1780.  and  ordained,
3  Dec.,  1789,  as  pastor  of  the  "Old  Stone  Church"
at  Fairfield,  N.  J.  His  long  pastorate  of  fifty-four
years  was  unmarked  save  by  several  extensive  re
vivals.  His  sermons  were  plain,  practical,  solemn.
and  earnest.  His  last  discourse,  as  he  preached
occasionally  after  his  pastoral  connection  had  been
dissolved,  was  delivered  in  1855,  in  his  ninety-
seventh  year,  although  he  was  able  to  speak  briefly
on  24  Jan.,  1858,  being  then  ninety-nine  years  and
five  months  old.  During  his  ministry  more  than
600  communicants  were  admitted  to  his  church,
1,000  couples  were  married,  and  1,500  persons
buried.  "  The  singular  goodness,  beauty,  wisdom,
uprightness,  fruitfulness,  and  continuance  of  his
career,"  said  a  speaker  at  the  bi-centennial  celebra
tion  of  the  "Old  Stone  Church,"  "has  no  parallel,
perhaps,  in  the  annals  of  the  American  pulpit."

OSBORN,  Henry  Stafford,  educator,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17  Aug.,  1823.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1841,
and  at  the  New  York  union  theological  seminary
in  1846.  He  also  studied  at  Bonn,  Germany,  and
at  the  Polytechnic  institution  of  London,  lie  was
pastor  of  the  Pres.  Davies's  church  at  Hanover,
and  at  Liberty,  Va.,  between  1846  and  1858,  and
at  Belvidere,  N.  J.,  from  1859  till  1866.  Before
the  civil  war  he  had  held  the  chair  of  natural
science  in  Roanoke  college,  Va.,  and  in  1800  he
accepted  a  professorship  in  Lafayette  college.  He
left  it  in  1870,  and  in  1871  became  professor  in
Miami  university,  Ohio,  where  he  remained  until
that  institution  was  closed  in  1873.  While  he  was
pastor  of  a  church  at  Millville,  Ohio,  his  health
failed,  and  he  has  since  given  his  attention  to  liter
ary  pursuits,  especially  to  the  illustration  of  Bible
history.  To  this  end  he  has  spent  much  time  in
visiting  and  making  surveys  of  famous  localities
in  Syria,  Palestine,  Egypt,  and  the  islands  of  the
Mediterranean.  He  has  also  prepared  many  of  the
maps  of  Bible  lands  that  are  now  used  in  the
United  States  and  at  various  mission  stations  and
other  places  abroad.  He  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Lafayette  in  1805.  Among  his  publi
cations  are  "  Palestine  Past  and  Present "  (Phila
delphia,  1855) ;  "  Fruits  and  Flowers  of  the  Holy
Land  "  (1850) ;  "  Pilgrims  in  the  Holy  Land  "  (1857) ;
"  Scientific  Metallurgy  of  Iron  and  Steel  in  the
United  States "  (1870) ;  "  The  New  Descriptive
Geography  of  Palestine"  (Oxford,  Ohio,  1877);
"  Manual  of  Bible  Geography "  and  "  Ancient
Egypt  in  the  Light  of  Recent  Discoveries  "  (Cin
cinnati,  1885) ;  "  Chart  of  the  Books  of  the  Bible  "
(3d  ed..  Oxford,  Ohio,  1886);  "The  Useful  Minerals
and  Mining  Architecture"  (Philadelphia.  1887);
and  "Biblical  History  and  Geography"  (1888).

OSBORN,  Langhton,  poet,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  1809 ;  d.  there,  12  Dec.,  1878.  He  was  gradu-


OSBORN


OSBORN


597


ated  at  Columbia  in  1827,  and  shortly  afterward
published  his  first  book,  "  Sixty  Years  of  the  Life
of  Jeremy  Levis  "  (2  vols..  New  York,  1831).  which
has  been  styled  "  a  rambling,  Shandean  autobiogra
phy  ;  grotesque,  humorous,  sentimental,  and  satiri
cal,  though  too  crude  and  unfinished  to  hold  a
high  rank  for  any  of  those  qualities."  This  was
followed  by  "  The  Dream  of  Alla-ad-Deen,"  in
which  he  attempted  to  reconcile  humanity  to  death
and  evil  on  the  ground  that  mankind  are  of  but
little  importance  in  the  scale  of  creation.  "  The
Confessions  of  a  Poet"  (Philadelphia.  1835),  his
next  work,  was  severely  criticised  by  part  of  the
Xew  York  press,  especially  by  "  The  Commercial
Advertiser,"  edited  by  Col.  William  L.  Stone,  on
the  score  of  morality."  To  these  Osborn  replied  by
publishing  "  The  Vision  of  Rubeta,  an  Epic  Story
of  the  Island  of  Manhattan,  with  Illustrations
Done  on  Stone  "  (Boston,  1838).  It  also  contained
a  fierce  onslaught  on  the  poet  Wordsworth.  In
1841  appeared  his  best  and  most  elaborate  work,
"  Arthur  Carry  1.  Cantos  First  and  Second  ;  Odes :
Epistles  to  Milton.  Pope,  Juvenal,  and  the  Devil ;
Epigrams :  Parodies  of  Horace ;  England  as  She
Is,  and  Other  Minor  Poems"  (Xew  York).  All  the
foregoing  were  published  anonymously  by  Osborn,
who  was  an  eccentric  literary  re'cluse.  'His  scholar
ship  was  varied.  He  was  familiar  with  the  clas
sics,  wrote  poetry  in  French  and  Italian  with  fa
cility,  was  a  painter  of  some  merit,  a  skilled  musi
cian,  and  a  gifted  conversationalist.  Of  his  later
works,  several  were  issued  over  his  own  name.
They  include  "  Handbook  of  Oil-Painting,  by  an
American  Artist  "(Xew  York,  1856);  "Calvary —
Virginia:  Tragedies,"  ''Alice,  or  the  Painters
Story,"  and  "The  Silver  Head  and  The  Double
Deceit :  Comedies  "  (1867) ;  "  Bianca  Capello,  a
Tragedy."  "  The  Montanini — The  School  for
Critics :  Comedies,"  and  "  Travels  by  Sea  and  Land
of  Alethitheras  "  (1868);  "  Ugo-da-Este— Uberto—
The  Cid  of  Seville :  Tragedies,"  and  •'  The  Mag-
netizer — The  Prodigal :  Comedies  in  Prose  "  (1869) ;
"  The  Last  Mandeville — The  Heart's  Sacrifice —
The  Monk — Matilda  of  Denmark:  Tragedies"
(1870);  "  Meleagros— The  Xew  Calvary:  Trage
dies"  (1871);  and  "  Mariamne,  A  Tragedy  of
Jewish  History  "  (1873).  See  "  Bryant  and"  His
Friends  "  (Xew  York,  1886).

OSBORN,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ireland
about  1690 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  about  1785.  He
came  to  this  country,  studied  for  the  ministry,  and
was  ordained  pastor  of  the  church  at  Eas'tham,
Mass.,  in  1718.  There  he  remained  until  1737,
when  he  was  dismissed  for  his  Armenian  opinions.
Subsequently  he  taught  in  a  private  school  in
Boston  for  more  than  ten  years.  He  was  interested
in  agriculture,  and  introduced  the  use  of  peat  on
Cape  Cod.  He  published  "  Case  and  Complaint  "
(1743). — His  son,  John,  poet,  b.  in  Sandwich,  Barn-
stable  co..  Mass.,  in  1713  ;  d.  in  Middletown,  Conn.,
31  May,  1753,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1735,
and  studied  theology.  At  the  expiration  of  two
years  he  read  a  sermon  before  the  assembled  clergy
of  the  neighborhood  with  a  view  of  soliciting  ordi
nation  ;  but  the  decision  of  his  auditors  being  ad
verse  to  the  doctrines  that  he  set  forth,  although
they  admitted  the  literary  merits  of  the  discourse,
he  was  refused  their  recommendation.  He  then
studied  medicine,  and  was  admitted  to  practice.
He  declined  a  tutorship  at  Harvard,  as  celi
bacy  was  one  of  the  conditions,  and  after
his  marriage  he  removed  to  Middletown,  where
he  spent  the  rest  of  his  life.  He  is  best
known  by  two  brief  poems,  "  The  Whaling  Song,"
which  was  for  many  years  very  popular  (1755),  and


"  An  Elegiac  Epistle  on  the  Death  of  a  Sister." —
Samuel's  grandson.  John,  physician,  b.  in  Middle-
town,  Conn..  17  March.  1741;  d.  there  in  June.

1825,  studied  medicine,  and  practised  more  than
sixty  years  in  his  native  place. At  the  age  of
seventeen  he  served  in  the  army  at  Ticonderoga.
He  afterward  attained  note  as  a  chemist,  and  is
said  to  have  had  the  most  valuable  medical  library
in  the  state. Before  the  Revolution  he  published
a  translation  of  Condamine's  "  Treatise  on  Inocu
lation,"  with  an  original  appendix. — The  second
John's  son,  John  Churchill,  physician,  b.  in  Mid
dletown, Conn., in September,  "1766 ; d. in  the
island  of  St.  Croix,  5  March,  1819,  studied  medicine
with  his  father,  and  practised  at  Xew  Berne.  X.  C..
from  1787  till  1807. In  1808  he  was  appointed
professor  of  the  institutes  of  medicine  in  Columbia,
which  office  he  resigned  in  1813  to  accept  the  chair
of  obstetrics  in  the  Xew  York  college  of  physicians
and  surgeons. He  died  in  the  West  Indies,  where
he  sought  relief  from  a  pulmonary  disease. Dr.
Osborn  was  a  connoisseur  in  poetry,  belles-lettres,
and  painting. Joel  Barlow  submitted  the  poem  of
"  The  Vision  of  Columbus  "  to  him  for  revision.

OSBORN.  Selleek,  journalist,  b.  in  Trumbull.
Conn.,  in  1783;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1  Oct..

1826.  After  receiving  an  English education he
entered a printing-office in  Danbury,  Conn.,  at
twelve  years  of  age. In  August,  1805"  with  Timo
thy  Ashley,  he  established  the  Litchfield  "Wit
ness"  by  invitation  of Democrats  in  that  town,
which  was  then  a  stronghold  of  Federalism. Mr.
Osborn,  who  was  sole  editor  of  the  paper,  wielded  a
caustic  and  somewhat  unscrupulous  pen  and  gave
much  offence  by  his  personalities. He  was  finally
found  guilty  of  a  libel  and  sentenced  to  the  pay
ment  of  a  heavy  fine,  in  default  of  which  he  was
committed  to  jail,  where  he  remained  a  year,  pre
ferring,  as  he  said,  to  have  his  body  imprisoned
rather  than  his  mind. Much  political  capital  was
made  from  this  incident,  and  Osborn  was  regarded
as  a  martyr  by  his  party  throughout  the  country.
Indignation  meetings  were  held  in  distant  state's,
while  a  committee  visited  his  jail  and  issued  week
ly  bulletins  describing  indignities  to  which  he  was
subjected. These  accusations  were  denied  by  the
sheriff, but  the  excitement  finally  became  "such
that  a  demonstration  was  made  on  6  Aug..  1806.
which  was  attended  by  Democrats  from  far  and
near. It  included  a  salute  of  seventeen  guns  at
sunrise, a military and  civic procession which
passed under Osborn's window with uncovered
heads,  giving  him  a  brigadier's  salute,  a public-
meeting  with  religious  services,  and  a  banquet.
The prisoner was finally released and resumed
control  of  the  "Witness,"  which  was  discontinued
in  the  summer  of  1807. Osborn  was  commissioned
1st  lieutenant  of  light  dragoons  in  the  U.  S.  array
on  8  July,  1808.  and  promoted  captain  in  Febru
ary.  1811. He  served  in  the  war  of  1812  on  the
Canadian frontier,  but  left  the  service in May.
1814,  and  returned  to  journalism,  editing  a  paper
in  Bennington.  Vt..  then  the  "  American  Watch
man  "  at  Wilmington.  Del.,  and  for  a  short  time
in  1825  a  journal  in  Xew  York  city,  advocating
the  election  of  John  C.  Calhoun  to  the  presidency.
Afterward  he  removed  to  Philadelphia. Osborn
began  to  write  verses  at  an  early  age  and  attained
reputation  as  a  poet. His  most  popular  piece  was
"  The  Ruins." He  published  "  Poems,  Moral,  Sen
timental,  and  Satirical  "  (Boston,  1823).

OSBORN,  Sherard,  English  naval  officer,  b.  in
Madras.  25  April,  1822  ;  d.  in  London,  6  May,  1875.
He  was  the  son  of  a  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  army,
and,  entering  the  navy  as  a  first-class  volunteer  in


598


OSBORX


OSCAXYAX


1837,  was  attached  for  several  years  to  the  stations
of  the  Indian  ocean.  Although  only  a  lieuten
ant,  he  was  appointed  in  1849  to  the  command  of
the  "  Pioneer,"  one  of  the  three  ships  that  were
sent  out  to  search  for  Sir  John  Franklin,  and  he
made  a  remarkable  sledge-journey  to  the  western
extremity  of  Prince  of  Wales  island.  For  his
services  in  the  Black  sea  during  the  Crimean  war
he  was  made  a  K.C.  B.  and  a  knight  of  the  Legion
of  honor,  and  given  the  Turkish  order  of  the
Medjidieh.  After  serving  as  admiral  in  the  Chi
nese  navy  in  1862-'3,  he  was,  in  1867-70.  managing
director  of  the  Telegraph  construction  and  main
tenance  company  for  the  construction  of  a  sub
marine  system  of  telegraphs  between  Great  Britain,
Canada,  and  Australia.  He  was  promoted  rear-
admiral  in  1873,  and  continued  to  interest  him
self  in  the  arctic  regions,  inducing  Arthur  II.
Markman  to  visit  Baffin  bay  in  a  whaler,  and
published,  at  his  own  expense,  Markman's  report
on  the  possibilities  of  ice-navigation  with  the  aid
of  steam.  The  result  was  that  toward  the  close
of  1874  the  lords  of  the  admiralty  gave  to  him.  in
conjunction  with  Rear-Admiral  Richards  and  Sir
Leopold  MacClintock.  the  power  to  fit  out  a  new
expedition,  which  sailed  in  1875.  He  published
"Stray  Leaves  from  an  Arctic  Journal"  (London.
1852) ;  "  Journals  of  Robert  MacClure.  giving  a
Narrative  of  the  Discovery  of  the  Northwest  Pas
sage  "  (185G) ;  '•  The  Career.  Last  Voyage,  and  Fate
of  Sir  John  Franklin  "  (1800) :  and  "  The  Past  and
Future  of  British  Relations  in  China"  (I860),  etc.

OSBORN,  Thomas  W.,  senator,  b.  in  Scotch
Plains,  Union  co.,  X.  J.,  9  March.  1830.  He  re
moved  with  his  parents  to  Wilna,  N.  Y.,  in  1842,
and  was  graduated  at  Madison  university  in  1800.
He  studied  law  in  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  but  as  soon
as  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1801  he  entered
the  National  army,  being  commissioned  captain  in
the  1st  Xew  York  artillery,  and  serving  successive
ly  as  chief  of  artillery  of  various  army  corps  and
of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee.  He  served  as
assistant  commissioner  of  the  Bureau  of  refugees
and  freedmen  for  Florida,  with  the  rank  of  colonel
in  1805-'6.  He  was  three  times  wounded  in  battle,
and  had  an  arm  and  shoulder  broken  in  a  railway
accident.  After  the  war  he  went  to  Florida  for
his  health,  practised  law  in  Tallahassee,  was  made
a  register  in  bankruptcy  in  1807,  was  a  member  of  >
the  convention  that  adopted  the  state  constitution
which  he  drafted,  and  was  elected  to  the  upper
branch  of  the  legislature.  He  afterward  removed  '
to  Pensacola,  and  was  chosen  to  represent  Florida
in  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Republican,  serving  from  !
30  June,  1868.  till  3  March,  1873.

OSBORN  E,  Thomas  0.,  soldier,  b.  in  Jer-  !
sey,  Licking  co.,  Ohio,  11  Aug.,  1832.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Ohio  in  1854,  ;
studied  law  with  Gen.  Lewis  Wallace  at  Craw-  !
fordsville,  Ind.,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  be
gan  to  practise  in  Chicago.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  offered  his  services  to  the  govern
ment  and  devoted  his  time  and  means  to  the  or
ganization  of  the  39th  Illinois  regiment,  of  which
he  became  lieutenant-colonel  and  afterward  colo
nel.  He  was  sent  to  the  east  with  his  command
and  ordered  to  guard  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  rail
road  between  Alpine  and  Great  Capacon,  W.  Ya.
When  '•  Stonewall "  Jackson  made  his  first  raid
into  Morgan  county  in  the  state  in  the  winter  of
1861-'2,  he  kept  that  officer  at  bay  for  several
hours,  although  the  latter  was  at  the  head  of  a
largely  superior  force,  and  succeeded  in  making
good  his  retreat  across  the  Potomac  with  but
slight  loss.  He  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Win


chester  in  April,  1862,  served  during  the  operations
in  Charleston  harbor  in  1863,  accompanied  Gen.
Benjamin  F.  Butler  up  James  river  in  May,  1864,
and  was  severely  wounded  at  Drury's  Bluff,  losing
the  use  of  his  right  arm.  At  the  siege  of  Peters
burg.  Va..  he  commanded  the  1st  brigade,  1st  di
vision,  24th  army  corps,  and  on  2  April,  1865,  he
captured  Fort  Gregg,  the  key  to  the  works  about
Petersburg  and  Richmond,  by  one  of  the  most  gal
lant  and  successful  charges  of  the  war.  For  thi*
service  he  was  made  brigadier-general  of  volun
teers.  Subsequently  by  a  rapid  movement  he  cut
off  the  Confederate  troops  from  the  Lynchburg
road  and  contributed  to  the  capture  of  Lee's  army.
This  and  his  other  services  throughout  the  war
were  recognized  by  promotion  to  the  rank  of  bre
vet  major-general  of  volunteers.  At  the  close  of
hostilities  he  returned  to  the  practice  of  his  pro
fession  in  Chicago.  In  February,  1874,  he  was  ac
credited  as  consul-general  and  minister-resident  to-
the  Argentine  Republic,  which  office  he  held  until
June,  1885.  when  he  resigned.

OSCANYAN.  Hatchik,  author,  b.  in  Constanti
nople,  Turkey,  23  April.  1818.  His  parents,  who
were  Armenians,  christened  him  Hatchik,  which
in  after-years  he  changed  to  Christopher.  He
learned  from  private  tutors  the  Armenian,  Turk
ish,  and  modern  Greek  languages :  to  these  he
soon  added  Italian  and  French,  and,  having  heard
English  spoken,  he  conceived  a  desire  to  acquire  it
also.  To  this  end  he  made  the  acquaintance  of
the  American  missionaries  that  had  then  lately
arrived  in  Turkey.  One  of  these,  Rev.  Harrison
G.  O.  Dwight,  took  an  interest  in  him,  and  after
the  death  of  Oscanyan's  mother  enabled  him  to
come  to  this  country  to  obtain  a  liberal  education.
He  arrived  in  Xew  York  in  1835  and  was  at  once
matriculated  at  the  university  in  that  city.  Fail
ing  health  compelled  him  to  leave  college  in  his
junior  year,  and  he  joined  the  staff  of  civil  engi
neers  engaged  in  the  construction  of  the  Charles
ton  and  Cincinnati  railroad.  Returning  to  Con
stantinople  in  1841,  he  established  the  first  news
paper  that  was  published  there  in  Armenian,  the
"Astarar  Piizantian  "  (-'Byzantine  Advertiser'').
But  the  authorities  would  not  tolerate  the  expres
sion  of  liberal  opinions,  and  he  was  soon  com
pelled  to  abandon  the  undertaking.  In  1843  he-
became  the  private  secretary  of  Fethi  Pasha,  son-
in-law  of  the  sultan,  and  minister  of  ordnance.
While  he  was  thus  engaged  he  was  appointed  spe
cial  agent  to  purchase  the  trousseau  of  Adile  Sul
tana,  who  was  about  to  be  married  to  Mehmed
Aali  Pasha,  and  in  this  capacity  he  frequently  vis
ited  the  palace.  After  the  ceremony  he  acted  as
correspondent  for  several  American  and  European
newspapers.  In  1849  he  wrote  a  satirical  romance
in  Armeno-Turkish,  or  Turkish  written  in  the  Ar
menian  character,  entitled  "Acaby."  This  was
followed  in  1851  by  "  Veronica,"  another  work  of
fiction,  and  by  "  Bedig,''  a  book  for  children.
The  same  year  he  published  an  Armenian  trans
lation  of  "  The  Mysteries  of  Paris."  In  1853,  with
the  assistance  of  others,  he  opened  an  Oriental  mu
seum  in  London,  but  the  enterprise  was  not  suc
cessful  and  he  returned  to  Xew  York.  Here  he
wrote  and  published  "  The  Sultan  and  His  People  "
(Xew  York,  1857),  16,000  copies  of  which  were  sold
in  four  months.  In  1868  Mr.  Oscanyan  was  made
Turkish  consul-general  in  Xew  York  city,  and  he
held  the  office  until  1874.  Having  occasion  to
visit  Constantinople  in  1872,  he  was  assigned  by
the  porte  as  the  representative  of  the  sultan  in  en
tertaining  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman  during  his
visit  to  Turkey.  On  resigning  his  consulship  he


OSCEOLA


OSGOOD


again  busied  himself  in  literary  pursuits  in  Xew
York  city,  in  which  he  is  still  (1888)  engaged.  He
has  lately  written  another  work  on  his  native  land
and  the  libretto  of  a  comic  opera.

OSCEOLA,  or  AS-SE-HE-HO-LAR  (Black
Drink).  Seminole  chief,  b.  on  Chattahoochee  river,
Ga..  in  1804 ;  d.  in  Fort  Moultrie.  S.  C..  30  Jan.,
1838.  He  was  the  son  of  William  Powell,  an  Eng
lish  trader  with
the  Indians,  and
his  mother  was
the  daughter  of
a  chief.  In  1808
he  removed  with
his  mother  to
Florida,  where  he
was  early  distin
guished  for  abil
ity,  courage,  and
hatred  of  the
whites,  attained
great  influence
among  the  Semi-
noles,  and  strong
ly  opposed  the
cession  of  the
tribal  lands  in
Florida.  In  1835.

while  on  a  visit  to  Fort  King,  his  wife,  the  daughter
of  a  fugitive  slave,  was  stolen  as  a  slave,  and  Osceola,
in  demanding  her  release  of  Gen.  Thompson,  the  U.  S.
Indian  agent,  used  threatening  language.  He  was
seized  by  order  of  the  agent  and  put  in  irons,  but
was  released  after  six  days'  imprisonment.  Six
months  later,  on  28  Dec.,  he  avenged  himself  by
killing  Thompson  and  four  others  outside  the  fort,
and  thus  began  the  second  Seminole  war.  Osceola
immediately  took  command  of  a  band  of  Indians
and  fugitive  slaves  who  on  the  same  day  had  sur
prised  and  massacred  Maj.  Francis  L.  Dade  and  a
detachment  of  110  soldiers.  On  31  Dec.,  with  200
followers,  he  encountered  Gen.  Duncan  L.  Clinch
and  600  U.  S.  troops  at  the  crossing  of  the  Ouithla-
coochee.  and  after  a  hard-fought  action  was  com
pelled  to  retreat,  having  been  wounded  early  in
the  battle.  He  afterward  had  several  engagements
with  the  troops  under  Gen.  Edmund  P.  Gaines,
and  on  8  June.  1836.  led  a  daring  and  well-con
ducted  assault  upon  the  fortified  post  at  Micanopy,
which  was  repelled  with  difficulty  by  the  garrison
of  300  regular  troops.  He  made  an  unsuccessful
attack  on  Fort  Drane  on  16  Aug.  and  narrowly  es
caped  capture.  For  more  than  a  year  he  con
tended  with  skill  and  energy  against  overwhelm
ing  odds ;  but  on  21  Oct.,  1837,  while  holding  a
conference  under  a  flag  of  truce  with  Gen.  Thomas
S.  Jesup  near  St.  Augustine,  he  was  seized  with
several  of  his  followers  and  confined  at  Fort
Moultrie,  where  he  died.  He  was  a  brave  and
generous  foe,  and  always  protected  women  and
children.  Jesup  asserted  that  his  act  was  neces
sary,  as  Osceola  had  repeatedly  shown  that  he
would  not  regard  the  sanctity  of  a  treaty.

OSCULATI,  Gaetano.  Italian  naturalist,  b.  in
Yedano.  Lombardy.  29  Xov.,  1808.  At  an  early
age  he  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  the  natural
sciences,  and  in  1830-'!  he  visited  Greece.  Egypt,
Asia  Minor,  and  other  provinces  of  the  Turkish
empire.  He  embarked  for  South  America  in  1834,
traversed  the  greater  part  of  that  continent,  and  in
1836  returned  to  Europe  by  the  way  of  Cape  Horn.
In  1841  he  visited  Arabia.  Armenia.  Persia,  and
the  coast  of  Malabar,  and  in  1846  he  visited  this
country.  After  passing  hurriedly  through  Canada,
the  United  States,  the  Antilles,  and  Venezuela,  he


went  to  Quito,  and  thence  started  on  an  expedition
to  the  Xapo.  a  tributary  of  the  Amazon.  After
several  days'  march  he  was  abandoned  by  his
Indian  guides,  but  he  succeeded  in  reaching  the
Xapo  alone,  after  a  journey  across  a  wide  expanse
of  unsettled  country  and  through  trackless  forests.
He  suffered  for  food,  and  during  two  weeks  sub
sisted  on  palm-leaves  and  a  single  kind  of  fruit.
In  1848  he  returned  to  Europe  with  a  rich  collec
tion.  He  published  "  Ezplorazione  delle  regioni
equatorial!  lungo  il  Xapo ''  (Milan,  1854).

OSGOOD,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Andover,
Mass.,  14  Oct.,  1747;  d.  in  Medford,  Mass..  12  Dec..
1822.  His  ancestor.  John  Osgood,  was  one  of  the
founders  of  Andover.  David  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1771.  ordained  14  Sept..  1774,  and  set
tled  in  Medford,  where  he  continued  as  a  preacher
for  nearly  fifty  years.  He  was  a  zealous  Federalist.
and  one  of  his  sermons  in  1794.  upon  Edmund
Genest's  appeal  to  the  people  against  the  U.  S.
government,  attracted  great  attention,  and  passed
rapidly  through  several  editions.  His  election  ser
mon  in  1809  was  the  most  noted  of  his  discourses.
His  sermon  in  opposition  to  the  declaration  of  war
with  Great  Britain  was  published  (Boston.  1812).
and  a  volume  of  his  sermons  appeared  in  1824.

OSGOOD,  Emma  Aline,  singer,  b.  in  Boston
about  1852.  Early  in  life  she  married  Dr.  Osgood,
I  a  physician  of  her  native  city.  Her  first  appear-
i  ance  in  public  was  made  in  Boston,  when  she
was  so  successful  that  she  was  engaged  for  two
years  to  sing  in  Canada  and  the  United  States.  In
1875  she  went  to  England  to  study  oratorio,  and
made  her  debut  at  the  Crystal  palace  in  the  same
year,  but  did  not  appear  again  till  1876.  when
she  accompanied  Charles  Halle  on  a  provincial
tour,  and  gained  great  reputation  as  a  vocalist.
In  this  year  she  also  won  praise  as  the  soprano  in
Liszt's  new  oratorio  ''Saint  Elizabeth,"  and  at  the
Crystal  palace  sang  frequently  selections  from
Wagner's  "Tristan  and  Isolde."  and  Gounod's  clas
sical  compositions.  In  March.  1878,  Mrs.  Osgood
visited  her  native  country,  and  appeared  with  ac
ceptance  at  Theodore  Thomas's  concerts  in  Xew
York,  at  Cincinnati,  and  in  Canada.  She  returned
to  England  in  the  autumn  of  1878,  sang  at  the
Shakespeare  memorial  festival  at  Stratford-on-
Avon  in  June.  1879,  and  at  Christmas  in  Liverpool
in  Sir  Arthur  Sullivan's  "  Light  of  the  World."  In
1880  she  appeared  at  the  state  concert  at  Bucking
ham  palace,  and  in  August  of  that  year  she  revisited
the  L  nited  States  and  made  a  successful  tour.  In
oratorio  many  consider  that  she  is  unrivalled.
Since  1875  she  has  resided  principally  in  England.
OSGOOD,  Frances  Sararent.  author,  b.  in  Bos
ton,  Mass.,  18  June,  1811;  d.  in  Hingham,  Mass.,
12  May,  1850.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Joseph
Locke,"  a  merchant  of  Boston,  but  most  of  her
childhood  was  passed  in  the  village  of  Hingham.
At  an  early  age  she  displayed  a  talent  for  writing
verses,  and  several  of  her  poems,  under  the  signa
ture  of  "Florence."  that  were  published  in  the
'•Juvenile  Miscellany."  gave  her  a  reputation.
During  this  early  period  of  her  life  she  wrote  also
for  "The  Ladies'  Companion."  which  she  subse
quently  edited  for  a  short  time.  In  1835  she  mar
ried  Samuel  Stillman  Osgood.  a  portrait-painter,
and  soon  afterward  accompanied  him  to  London,
England,  where,  in  addition  to  other  literary  work,
she  wrote  for  the  English  magazines.  She  returned
with  her  husband  to  Boston  in  1840.  and  soon
afterward  removed  to  Xew  York,  where  she  re
sided,  with  occasional  intervals  of  absence,  during
the  remainder  of  her  life.  She  published,  among
other  works,  "The  Casket  of  Fate"  (London):  "A


600


OSGOOD


OSGOOD


Wreath  of  Wild  Flowers  from  New  England "
(1839);  "The  Happy  Release,  or  the  Triumph  of
Love,"  a  play  written  at  the  request  of  Sheridan
Knowlcs :  ""Poetry  of  Flowers,  and  Flowers  of
Poetry"  (New  York,  1841);  "Poems"  (1840);
"  The  Floral  Offering  "  (Philadelphia,  1847) ;  and
"  Poems,"  illustrated  (1849).  A  complete  edition
of  her  poems  has  been  published  (New  York,  1850).
Soon  after  her  death  a  "  Memorial  "  by  her  friends,
with  a  "  Life  "  by  liufus  W.  Griswold,  appeared.

OSCJOOl),  Helen  Louise  Uibson,  philanthro
pist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  about  1835 ;  d.  in  Newton
Centre,  Mass.,  20  April,  1868.  During  her  child
hood  she  removed  with  her  parents  to  Chelsea,
Mass.,  and  after  their  death  she  became  the  ward
of  Francis  B.  Fay,  of  that  place,  in  whose  family
she  lived  for  several  years.  She  was  well  educated,
and  was  endowed  with  great  musical  and  conversa
tional  powers.  When  the  civil  war  began  she  was
among  the  first  to  organize  soldiers'  aid  societies,
and  provided  employment  for  those  wives  and
daughters  of  soldiers  that  were  in  straitened  cir
cumstances.  In  the  early  spring  of  1802  she  went
to  the  army  as  a  nurse.  She  organized  and  con
ducted  for  many  months  a  hospital  for  1,000  col
ored  soldiers  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  dis
played  great  executive  ability.  In  1806  she  mar
ried  Mr.  Osgood,  who  was  connected  with  the  sani
tary  commission  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.
Her  patriotic  labors  superinduced  the  illness  which
caused  her  death.

OSdrOOI),  Howard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Plaque-
mine  parish,  La.,  4  Jan.,  1831.  He  entered  Har
vard,  but  left  in  1849  before  gradual  ion.  His  degree
of  A.  B.  was  sent  to  him  in  1858.  He  was  educated
in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  but,  having
adopted  Baptist  views,  was  ordained  to  the  minis
try  in  that  denomination.  After  holding  pastor
ates  in  Flushing.  L.  I.,  anil  in  New  York  city,  he
was  in  1808  called  to  the  professorship  of  Hebrew
in  Crozer  theological  seminary,  Pa.  In  1875  he  was
elected  to  the  same  chair  in  Rochester  theological
seminary.  He  was  a  member  of  the  American  com
mittee  for  the  revision  of  the  Old  Testament.  The
degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Brown  in
1808.  Dr.  Osgood  has  made  three  visits  to  Europe,
and  has  contributed  to  periodicals  numerous  ar
ticles  that  are  marked  by  great  research.

OSMOOI),  Kate  Putnam,  author,  b.  in  Frye-
burg,  Me.,  in  1841.  She  began  to  write  early,  and
has  contributed  both  in  prose  and  poetry  to  the
magazines.  In  1809  she  went  abroad,  spending
several  years  in  France,  Germany,  and  Switzerland,
returning  to  the  United  States  in  1874.  Her  best-
known  poem,  "Driving  Home  the  Cows;'  published
anonymously  in  "  Harper's  Magazine,"  in  March,
1865,  was  copied  by  nearly  every  journal  in  the
United  States,  and  was  one  of  the  few  poems  of
merit  that  were  suggested  by  the  civil  war. — James
Ripley  Osgood,  the  publisher,  is  her  brother.

OSGOOD,  Samuel,  statesman,  b.  in  Andover,
Mass.,  14  Feb.,  1748 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  12  Aug.,
1813.  John  Osgood,  from  whom  he  was  fifth  in
descent,  came  from  Andover,  England,  to  this
country  about  1630,  and  was  the  second  settler
in  Andover,  Mass.,  to  which  he  gave  its  name.
Samuel  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1770,  and
began  to  study  theology,  but  abandoned  it  for
commerce  on  account  of  impaired  health.  He  was
often  in  the  legislature,  a  delegate  to  the  Essex
county  convention  in  September,  1774,  and  served
on  many  important  committees  in  the  Provincial
congress.  He  commanded  a  company  of  minute-
men  at  Lexington  and  Concord  in  1775,  and  soon
after  the  gathering  of  the  troops  at  Cambridge  was


made  major  of  brigade.  He  was  then  aide  to  Gen.
Artemas  Ward,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  till  Feb
ruary,  1770,  when  he  refused  the  command  of  a
regiment,  and  left  the  army  to  enter  the  Mas
sachusetts  Provincial
congress.  lie  was  ap
pointed  by  that  body
a  member  of  the  board
of  war,  and  served  till
1780,  when  he  was
elected  a  state  sena
tor  under  the  new
constitution  that  he
had  helped  to  frame.
He  was  a  member  of
the  Continental  con
gress  in  1780-'4,  and
in  1782  headed  a  dele
gation  that  was  sent
to  urge  the  assent  of
Rhode  Island  to  Alex
ander  Hamilton's  res
olution  concerning
the  duty  on  imports
and  prizes.  On  the  expiration  of  his  term  he  was
again  elected  to  the  Massachusetts  legislature,  and
on  31  Jan.,  1785,  he  was  appointed  a  judge  by  the
governor,  but  a  few  months  later  he  became  first
commissioner  of  the  U.  S.  treasury,  which  office  he
held  till  1789.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  made  post
master-general,  but  he  resigned  in  1791,  on  the  re
moval  of  the  government  to  Philadelphia,  and  con
tinued  to  reside  in  New  York  city.  He  was  afterward
a  member  of  the  New  York  legislature,  and  speaker
of  the  house,  supervisor  of  the  state  in  1801-'3,  and
from  the  latter  year  till  his  death  naval  officer  of
the  port  of  New  York.  Mr.  Osgood  devoted  much
of  his  time  to  literary  pursuits,  and  his  correspond
ence  with  eminent  men,  including  George  Wash
ington,  John  Adams,  Benjamin  Franklin,  and
Thomas  JeJlerson,  was  extensive.  He  was  an  origi
nal  member  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and
sciences,  and  a  founder  of  the  New  York  dispensary.
His  house  in  New  York,  which  stood  on  Franklin
square,  became  Washington's  headquarters  on  his
arrival  in  the  city.  Mr.  Osgood  was  buried  in  the
church  on  the  corner  of  Nassau  and  Beekman
streets,  of  which  he  had  been  an  elder.  His  pub
lications  include  "Letter  on  Episcopacy  "  (1807) ;
"  Remarks  on  Daniel  and  Revelation  "  ;  "  Chro
nology";  and  "  Theology  and  Metaphysics."

OSiiOOI),  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Charles-
town.  Mass.,  30  Aug.,  1812 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
14  April,  1880.  He
was  graduated  at  Har
vard  in  1832  and  at
the  divinity-school  in
1835.  For  two  years
following  he  was  edi
tor  of  the  "  Western
Messenger  "  at  Louis
ville,  Ky.  He  assumed
charge  of  a  Unita
rian  congregation  in
Nashua.  N.  II.,  in
1837.  He  was  called
to  the  Westminster
church  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  in  1841,  and
in  1849  went  to  the
Church  of  the  Mes
siah  (Unitarian)  in
New  York  city.  He
remained  in  charge  of  this  congregation  for
twenty  years,  but  resigned  in  1809  and  went  to


OSGOOD


OSMOND


601


Europe  for  rest  and  recreation.  On  his  return
he  took  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church
in  1870.  Not  caring  to  engage  in  parochial  work,
he  spent  most  of  his  time  during  the  last  ten
years  of  his  life  in  literary  labor,  writing  for  re
views  and  magazines,  giving  lectures,  and  making
addresses  at  colleges  and  institutions  of  science  and
art.  He  was  also  for  several  years  domestic  corre
sponding  secretary  of  the  New  York  historical  so
ciety.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Har
vard  in  1857,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Hobart  in
1872.  In  connection  with  Dr.  Henry  W.  Bellows
he  was  editor  of  the  "  Christian  Inquirer  "  in  New
York  in  1850-'4.  He  was  an  excellent  German
scholar,  and  translated  Hermann  Olshausen's  "  His
tory  of  the  Passion  "  (Boston,  1839),  and  Wilhelm
M.'L.  De  Wette's  "Human  Life"  (2  vpls.,  1842).
Dr.  Osgood's  chief  publications  were  "  Studies  in
Christian  Biography"  (New  York,  1851);  "God
with  Man.  or  Footprints  of  Providential  Leaders  "
(1853) ;  "  The  Hearth-Stone  :  Thoughts  upon  Home
Life  in  our  Cities "  (1854) ;  "  Mile-Stones  in  our
Life-Journey"  (1855);  "Student  Life"  (1860);
"American  Leaves"  (1867);  and  "  Address  before
the  New  York  Historical  Society  on  Thomas  Craw
ford  and  Art  in  America  "  (1875).

OSGOOD,  Thaddeus,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Me-
thuen,  Mass.,  24  Oct.,  1775 ;  d.  in  Glasgow,  Scot
land.  19  Jan.,  1852.  He  was  graduated  at  Dart
mouth  in  1803,  studied  divinity,  and  was  ordained
in  1806.  He  was  stated  supply  at  Southbury,
Conn.,  and  was  employed  as  a  missionary  in  New
York  and  in  Canada.  He  organized  the  first  church
in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  and  many  others,  in  1812  col
lected  money  in  England  for  a  school  in  Quebec,
and  in  1825  revisited  that  country  and  raised  a  sum
of  money  for  a  society  to  promote  education  and
industry.  In  1837  he'organized  a  society  in  Cana
da  to  supply  Bibles  for  seamen  and  emigrants,  and
was  for  many  years  a  distributer  of  tracts  and  a
founder  of  Sabbath-schools.

OSGOODE,  William,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
England  in  March,  1754;  d.  in  London,  England,
17  Jan.,  1824.  He  was  graduated  M.  A.  at  Oxford
in  1777,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
The  province  of  Upper  Canada  was  established  in
1791,  and  in  1792  Mr.  Osgoode  was  appointed  its
chief  justice.  In  1794  he  became  chief  justice  of
the  province  of  Quebec,  but  resigned  in  1801.  Os
goode  hall,  Toronto,  the  principal  seat  of  law  in
Upper  Canada,  is  named  for  him.  In  1801  he  re
turned  to  England,  where  he  lived  in  comparative
retirement  till  his  death.  With  Sir  William  Grant
<ind  others  he  was  engaged  on  various  legal  com
missions,  the  last  being  an  examination  into  the
fees  of  office  in  the  courts  of  law.  He  published  a
pamphlet  entitled  "  Remarks  on  the  Laws  of  De
scent  ''  (London,  1779).

OSLER,  William,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in
Tecumseh,  Ont.,  12  July,  1849.  He  was  educated
at  Trinity  college,  Toronto,  Toronto  school  of
medicine,  and  McGill  university,  where  he  was
graduated  as  a  physician  in  1872.  He  subsequent
ly  studied  at  University  college,  London,  and  at
Berlin  and  Vienna.  He  was  professor  of  the  in
stitutes  of  medicine  in  McGill  university  in
1874-'84,  of  clinical  medicine  in  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1884.  Galstonian  lecturer  in  the
Royal  college  of  physicians,  London,  in  1885,  and
Cartwright  lecturer  in  the  College  of  physicians
and  surgeons,  New  York,  in  1886.  Dr.  Osier  is
physician  to  various  hospitals,  and  is  the  author  of
"  Clinical  Notes  on  Small-pox  "  (Montreal,  1876) :
"  Pathological  Report,  Montreal  General  Hospital"
{1878) ;  and  "  Histology  Notes  "  (1882).  He  has  also


written  for  various  medical  journals  in  the  United
States,  Canada,  and  Great  Britain.

OSMA-JARAYCEJO,  Pedro  de  (os'-ma-hah-ri-
say'-ho).  Spanish  soldier,  lived  in  the  16th  century.
He  went  to  Peru  with  Almagro  and  took  part  in
the  conquest,  but,  as  a  man  of  education,  soon  tired
of  a  military  life,  and  studied  the  useful  and  me
dicinal  plants  of  the  country.  For  more  than  twenty
years  he  made  trips  into  the  interior  to  find  new
species,  and  cultivated  friendly  relations  with  the
natives  to  obtain  information  about  the  drugs
known  to  their  medicine-men.  But  he  could  not
induce  them  to  tell  where  they  obtained  the  bezoar-
stones,  an  antidote  for  poison  and  many  maladies.
At  last  an  Indian  boy  informed  him  they  were
found  in  the  stomach  of  the  vicunas  and  gua-
nacos,  and  he  soon  verified  the  fact  by  killing  sev
eral  of  these  animals,  in  which  he  found  stones
scarcely  inferior  to  those  obtained  from  the  Ango
ra  goats  in  Asia,  which  are  said  to  be  produced  by
the  animal's  feeding  on  certain  shrubs.  He  wrote,
on  26  March,  1568,  a  Latin  letter  about  his  dis
covery  to  the  famous  physician,  Nicolas  Menardes.
of  Seville,  who  published  it  in  his  "  Drogas  de  las
Indias"  (Seville,  1574).  The  chronicler  Antonio
de  Herrera  also  mentions  the  fact.

OSMOND,  Desire  Gaston  Ren6,  Viscount  d',
French  explorer,  b.  near  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  in  1763  ;
d.  in  Moulins,  France,  in  1819.  He  was  descended
from  early  settlers  in  Louisiana,  received  his
education  in  Paris,  and  served  afterward  in  the
body-guard  of  Louis  XVI.  After  the  riots  in  the
palace  of  Versailles  on  5  and  6  Oct.,  1789,  he  re
signed,  and,  returning  to  Louisiana,  lived  on  his
estate  for  several  years,  dividing  his  time  between
hunting,  fishing,  farming,  and  cattle-breeding.  He
accepted  in  1798  a  mission  from  the  French  Direc
tory  to  visit  citizens  of  the  country,  ascertain  their
feelings  toward  a  retrocession  of  the  colony  to
France,  and,  if  possible,  to  organize  a  movement
to  that  end.  Osmond  reported  a  few  months  later
that  public  sentiment  was  on  the  whole  favorable
to  France,  but  that  the  citizens  would  oppose  an
nexation  unless  the  Directory  should  give  pledges
for  the  maintenance  of  slavery.  This  report  caused
a  sensation  in  Paris.  It  was  well  received  by  the
authorities,  who  had  already  decided  to  re-establish
slavery  throughout  the  French  possessions,  and
consequently  the  pledges  were  readily  given.  In
the  spring  of  1803  Osmond,  being  summoned  by
his  old  friend,  Gen.  Rochambeau,  went  to  Santo
Domingo  and  opened  negotiations  with  the  princi
pal  negro  chiefs  for  their  submission  to  France.
Dessalines  and  Christophe  were  willing  to  come  to
an  agreement  on  the  promise  of  the  enfranchise
ment  of  the  slaves  and  a  general  amnesty,  but
Petion  claimed  absolute  independence  for  the
country,  and  the  negotiations  failed  through  his
efforts."  Osmond  then  returned  to  Louisiana,  and
afterward  travelled  in  California  and  Mexico  in
1806-'10.  After  visiting  Oregon.  Texas,  Florida,
both  Carolinas,  Virginia,  and  Pennsylvania,  he
went  to  France  in  1814,  on  the  restoration  of  Louis
XVIII.,  and  became  a  gentleman  of  the  private
chamber  of  the  king.  He  died  near  Moulins,  where
he  had  gone  to  restore  his  health,  which  had  been
impaired  by  the  hardships  of  his  travels.  He  pub
lished  •'  Memoire  sur  1'etat  de  1'opinion  publique
en  Louisiane,  et  de  la  necessite  du  maintien  de
1'esclavage  dans  le  cas  d'un  retour  eventuel  de  la
colonie  a  la  France"  (Paris,  1799);  "  Dix  ans  de
voyages  a  travers  I'Amerique  du  Nord  "  (2  vols.,
1817);  "Voyage  a  travers  la  Calif  ornie  "  (1818);
and  "  Cinq  rnois  de  negociations  avec  les  chefs
noirs  rebelles  de  Saint  Domingue  ''  (1819).


602


OSMOND


OSTAADE


OSMOND,  Rene:  Eustache,  Marquis  de  (os-
mong),  French  diplomatist,  b.  in  Port  an  Prince,
Hayti,  in  1731;  d.  in  Paris  in  1838.  He  entered
the"  military  service  in  1767,  was  transferred  in  1776
as  colonel  of  cavalry  to  France,  and  in  1788  was
minister  to  the  Hague.  After  the  revolution  of
1791  he  was  appointed  by  the  Constitutionalists
ambassador  to  St.  Petersburg,  but  declined  and
emigrated  to  Italy,  and  Napoleon  afterward  made
fruitless  attempts  to  attract  him  into  his  service.
After  the  return  of  Louis  XVIII.,  Osmond  was  ap
pointed  ambassador  in  Turin,  and  in  1815  a  peer
of  France  and  ambassador  to  London.  He  retired
from  service  in  1819,  and  continued  in  the  chamber
of  peers  till  the  revolution  of  1830.— His  brother,
Antoiiie  Eustache,  French  bishop,  b.  in  Port  au
Prince  in  1754;  d.  in  Nancy  in  1823,  studied  in
his  native  city,  was  graduated  in  the  Sorbonne  of
Paris,  ordained  priest,  and  afterward  became  vicar-
general  of  Toulouse  and  bishop  of  Comminges.
During  the  revolution  he  emigrated  to  Spain,  and
afterward  to  England,  but  returned  to  France  in
1801,  became  bishop  of  Nancy  in  1802,  and  in  1810
archbishop  of  Florence,  but  resigned  in  1814  to  re
sume  his  see  of  Nancy,  where  he  did  much  good.
— Another  brother,  Marie  Joseph  Eustaehe,  Vis
count  d',  b.  in  Port  au  Prince  in  1756;  d.  in  Pont-
chartrain  in  1839,  was  colonel  of  the  regiment  of
Normandy  when  the  revolution  began,  and  emi-

f-ated  with  his  family.  After  the  return  of  Louis
VIII.  he  was  promoted  to  major-general,  became
lieutenant-general  in  1818.  and  retired  in  1819.

OSMUN,  Thomas  Embly,  author,  b.  in  Sum
mit  county,  Ohio,  26  Feb.,  1826.  He  was  educated
at  Oberlin  college  and  in  Germany  and  Paris,
spending  six  years  in  Europe.  He'  has  devoted
himself  to  orthoepy  and  the  art  of  elocution.  By
criticising  in  the  public  press  the  mispronuncia
tions  of  actors,  he  has  induced  the  dramatic  pro
fession  to  observe  a  severer  standard  of  orthoepy.
He  has  written  in  condemnation  of  artificial  meth
ods  of  elocution.  His  books,  published  under  the
pen-name  of  "  Alfred  Ayres,"  comprise  "  The  Or-
thoepist"  (New  York,"  1880);  "The  Verbalist"
(1881) ;  "  The  Mentor,"  a  manual  of  social  usages
(1884) :  and  "  The  Essentials  of  Elocution  "  (1886).

OSORIO,  Manuel  (os-o'-re-o),  Spanish  soldier,
b.  in  Seville  in  1770;  d.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  about
1830.  He  studied  in  the  artillery  college  of  Sego
via,  and  entered  the  army,  serving  as  captain  in  the
first  siege  of  Saragossa  in  1807.  On  19  Aug..  1812,
he  arrived  in  Lima  as  commander  of  artillery  and
director  of  the  powder-factory,  with  the  rank  of
colonel.  When  the  viceroy,  Abascal,  repudiated
the  treaty  that  Gen.  Gainza  (q.  c.)  had  made  with
the  Independents  of  Chili  in  Lircay,  3  May,  1814,
he  superseded  Gainza  by  Osorio.  who  left  Lima  on
19  July  with  an  expedition  of  about  600  men,  and
totally  defeated  the  Republicans  at  Rancagua  on
2  Oct.  He  occupied  Santiago  on  9  Oct..  and  sullied
his  victory  by  arbitrary  measures,  notably  the
banishment  of  more  than  thirty  of  the  principal
citizens  to  the  island  of  Juan  Fernandez.  He  sent
two  agents  to  Spain  to  solicit  his  confirmation  as
president  of  Chili,  but,  although  he  was  promoted
brigadier,  he  was  superseded  in  the  presidency  by
Gen.  Marco  del  Pont,  to  whom  he  delivered"  the
government  in  December,  1815,  returning  to  Lima
in  June,  1816.  Meanwhile  Gen.  San  Martin  with
the  Argentine  army  had  passed  the  Andes  and  in
vaded  Chili,  defeating  Marco  in  Chacabuco,  12  Feb.,
1817.  The  viceroy,  Pezuela,  now  sent  Osorio  to  re
conquer  Chili,  and  the  latter  left  Lima  with  ten
vessels  and  about  2,600  men,  and  landed  at  Tal-
cahuano,  18  Jan.,  1818.  San  Martin  encamped


with  a  superior  force  at  Cancha-Rayada,  where  he
was  surprised  in  the  night  of  19  March  by  the
Spanish  army  and  totally  routed,  but  Osorio,  in
stead  of  marching  immediately  on  the  capital,  lost
time  by  inactivity,  notwithstanding  the  advice  of
his  lieutenants.  This  had  given  the  patriot  general
time  to  reorganize  his  army,  and  he  defeated
Osorio  on  the  march  to  Santiago  in  the  plain  of
Maipn  on  4  April.  Osorio  fled  to  Concepcion,  and,
after  disarming  the  fortifications  of  Talcahuano,
left  the  command  to  Gen.  Sanchez,  and  arrived  in
Lima  in  September,  1818.  He  did  not  again  enter
active  service  in  Peru,  and  went  in  1819  to  Spain,
where  he  was  promoted  major-general  in  1822,  and
sent  later  to  serve  in  Havana,  where  he  died.

OSPINA,  Manuel  (os-pe'-nah),  Colombian
statesman,  b.  in  Guasca  in  1803 ;  d.  in  Medellin  in
1885.  He  studied  jurisprudence  and  political  sci
ence  in  the  College  of  San  Bartolome  in  Bogota,  and
was  graduated  in  1825  in  the  College  of  Tunja.  He
began  early  to  take  part  in  politics,  and  was  an  ac
tive  member  of  the  party  that  opposed  the  govern
ment  of  Gen.  Simon  Bolivar.  When  Bolivar  was
proclaimed  dictator,  Ospina  was  among  the  most
strenuous  opponents  of  that  measure,  and  he  took
part  in  the  rebellion  of  Gen.  Jose  M.  Cordova  in
1830.  After  the  dissolution  of  Colombia,  Ospina
sustained  the  party  of  the  new  president  of  New
Granada.  Francisco  de  P.  Santander,  and  his  suc
cessor,  Jose  J.  de  Marquez.  He  was  in  congress  in
1838-'4().  in  1841  became  secretary  of  the  interior
and  foreign  relations,  and  later  was  made  governor
of  the  province  of  Bogota.  When  the  Conserva
tive  party  went  out  of  power  in  1849.  Ospina,  with
Jose  E.  Caro,  edited  "  La  Civilazacion,"  which  was
in  violent  opposition  to  the  government.  When
the  reform  in  the  constitution  in  1853  gave  the
election  of  provincial  governors  to  popular  vote,
Ospina  was  unanimously  elected  to  the  executive  of
his  native  state  of  Medellin,  and  he  contributed  to
the  re-establishment  of  order  in  1854,  when  Gen.
Melo  attempted  to  assume  the  military  dictator
ship.  In  1855-'6  he  was  a  senator,  and  in  the  lat
ter  year  he  was  elected  president  of  the  republic.
The  first  two  years  of  his  administration  were
peaceable,  and  he  made  many  reforms,  but  when,
toward  the  end  of  1858,  the  central  system  of  gov
ernment  was  changed  into  a  federation,  Ospina,
who  did  not  sympathize  with  the  latter  form  of
government,  refused  to  execute  the  law.  The  newly
created  states  violently  attacked  the  executive,  and
Gen.  Mosquera,  governor  of  the  state  of  Cauca,
rose  in  arms  against  the  central  government  in  the
beginning  of  I860.  When  Ospina's  term  of  office
closed,  in  April,  1861,  Mosquera's  army  threatened
the  capital,  and  the  former  left  for  Medellin,  but
when  the  city  fell  on  16  July  he  was  arrested  and
taken  to  the  fortress  of  Cart'hagena.  After  a  few
months  he  escaped  and  went  to  Guatemala,  whore
he  resided  till  1872.  On  his  return  to  Colombia  he
went  to  live  in  Medellin,  devoting  himself  to  the
education  of  youth  and  to  journalism,  defending
with  unabated  energy  his  conservative  principles
in  opposition  to  the  Liberal  government.  He  was
one  of  the  greatest  statesmen  of  Colombia,  an  emi
nent  scholar  and  scientist,  and  of  unswerving  recti-
|  tude.  He  had  a  haughty  and  reserved  manner.
but,  if  he  was  not  beloved,  he  was  generally  es
teemed  by  his  countrymen.

OSTAADE,  Piet  Van,  Dutch  navigator,  b.  in
Muyden,  near  Amsterdam,  about  1670;  d.  in  Am
sterdam  in  1711.  He  had  gained  reputation  as  a
successful  pilot,  when  he  was  chosen  by  the  states-
general  in  1709  as  commander  of  an  expedition  to
the  arctic  regions.  Sailing  from  Amsterdam,  21


OSTERIIAUS


OSWALD


603


April,  1709,  he  reached  Davis  island,  25  June,  and
fifteen  days  later  landed  on  the  site  of  the  present
Danish  establishment  of  Holsteinborg,  where  he
remained  nearly  a  month  occupied  in  astronomical
observations.  Resuming  his  journey  northward
on  3  Aug.,  he  coasted  Greenland  to  Baffin  bay
and  tried  to  double  Cape  Warrender.  but  was  pre
vented  by  ice.  Finding  a  convenient  fjord  in  the
Strait  of  Lancaster,  he  resolved  to  winter  there,
and  named  it  Van  Ostaade  Winterhaven.  Land
ing  on  2  Oct.,  he  built  a  large  snow-house  and  two
barns  for  the  storage  of  provisions  and  ammuni
tion.  Sailing  again  on  11  June,  1710,  he  doubled
Cape  York,  explored  Adolphus  island,  and  saw  the
peninsula  of  Boothia,  but  mistook  it  for  a  large
island.  He  advanced  as  far  as  latitude  70°  20'  X.
when  want  of  provisions  compelled  him  to  make
sail  for  Amsterdam,  where  he  arrived,  26  Oct.,  1710.
lie  published  "  Beschry  ving  van  de  expedition  naar
den  Xoord  Pool  in  de  Yaaven  1709-1710,  ouder
command  van  Piet  van  Ostaade,  loots  in  dienst  van
de  Edele  Heeren  dor  General  Staten  van  Holland ''
(Amsterdam.  1711).

OSTERHAUS,  Peter  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in
C'oblentz.  Germany,  about  1820.  He  became  an
officer  in  the  Prussian  army,  and  subsequently  emi
grated  to  the  United  States,  settling  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered
the  National  service  as  major  of  the  2d  Missouri
volunteers.  He  took  part  in  the  actions  at  Dug
Springs  and  Wilson's  Creek,  was  made  colonel  of
the  12th  Missouri  regiment,  commanded  a  brigade
under  Gen.  John  C.  Fremont,  and  took  part  in  the
expedition  of  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis  into  Arkansas
in  pursuit  of  Gen.  Sterling  Price,  leading  a  division
at  Pea  Ridge.  He  was  commissioned  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  on  9  June,  1862,  and  com
manded  a  division  at  Helena,  Ark.,  with  which  he
participated  in  the  capture  of  Arkansas  Post,  and
subsequently  in  the  siege  of  Vicksburg.  He  was
engaged  in  the  operations  at  Chattanooga  and  the
battle  of  Mission  Ridge  as  commander  of  the  1st
division  of  the  15th  corps,  and  in  the  Atlanta  cam
paign,  the  march  through  Georgia,  and  the  cam
paign  of  the  Carolinas  he  commanded  that  corps,
being  promoted  major-general  on  23  July,  1864.  At
the  surrender  of  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith  he  acted  as
chief  of  staff  to  Gen.  Edward  R.  S.  Canby.  He  was
mustered  out  on  15  Jan.,  1866,  and  in  the  same
year  went  to  Lyons,  France,  as  U.  S.  consul.  He
now  (1888)  resides  at  Mannheim,  Germany,  where
he  is  director  of  a  manufacturing  association.

OSTRANDER,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Marl-
borough  (now  Plattekill).'  X.  Y.,'  11  March,  1781:
d.  near  Saugerties,  X.  Y.,  22  Xov.,  1872.  He  was
graduated  at  Union  in  1799,  studied  theology,
was  licensed  in  1800,  and  in  1801  was  settled  as
pastor  of  the  Reformed  church  at  Coxsackie,  X.  Y.
He  took  charge  of  the  church  at  Catskill  in  1810.
and  two  years  later  of  the  one  at  Caatsban,  Ulster
co.,  of  which  he  was  pastor  until  1862.  when  he  re
tired.  He  preached  both  in  Dutch  and  in  English,
was  a  powerful  orator,  a  vigorous  writer,  and  a  mas
ter  of  theological  polemics.  The  degree  of  D.  D.
was  given  him  by  Rutgers  in  1844.  Dr.  Ostrander
was  the  author  of  several  biographies  in  William
B.  Sprague's  "  Annals  of  the  American  Pulpit."
Rev.  William  R.  Gordon  published  his  "  Life,"  with
extracts  from  an  autobiography,  selections  from
his  letters,  and  fifteen  of  his  sermons  (1875).

OSAVALD,  Felix  Leopold,  writer,  b.  in  Bel
gium  in  1845.  He  was  educated  as  a  physician,
but  soon  turned  his  attention  to  natural  history.
In  the  pursuit  of  his  favorite  studies  he  has  trav
elled  extensively  over  the  globe.  Besides  large


contributions  to  scientific  and  popular  magazines,
he  has  published  "  Suinmerland  Sketches,  or  Ram
bles  in  Backwoods  of  Mexico  and  Central  Ameri
ca"  (Philadelphia,  1880):  "Zoological  Sketches"
(1882);  "Physical  Education"  (Xew  York,  1882);
and  "Household  Remedies"  (1886).

OSWALD,  Richard,  British  diplomatist,  b.  in
Scotland  in  1705:  d.  6  Xov.,  1784. He  married
Mary  Ramsay,  who  is  celebrated in  one  of  the
song's  of  Robert  Burns,  passed  many  years  in  this
country,  and  at  the  time  of  the  Revolution  was  a
merchant  of  the  city  of  London. In  1781  he  gave
bail  in  the  sum  of  £50,000  for  Henry  Laurens,  se-
curin'g  his  release  from  the  Tower  prison. Lord
Shelburne,  in  April,  1782,  selected  Oswald  as  his
diplomatic  agent  to  treat  for  peace  with  the  Ameri
can  commissioners  in  Paris,  describing  him  in  a
letter  to  Benjamin  Franklin  as  "a  pacifical  man,
and  conversant  in  those  negotiations  which  are  most
interesting  to  mankind."  for  which  reasons  the  Brit
ish  minister  preferred  him  to  "any  of  our  specula
tive  friends,  or  to  any  person  of  higher  rank." On
learning  in  his  conferences  with  Franklin  that  the
United  States  was  unwilling  to  treat  independently
of  France,  he  returned  to  London  and  received  a
fresh  commission  to  negotiate  a  general  peace,  con
ceding  American  independence. Subsequently  the
American commissioners acceded  to a separate
treaty. The  greater  part  of  the  negotiations  were
carried  on  by  Oswald,  whose  instructions  were  sev
eral times  changed  and  his  commission  renewed.
Henry  Strachey  was  sent  as  his  colleague  because
the  ministers  complained  of  Oswald  for  yielding
everything. With them was afterward joined
Alleyne  Fitzherbert,  the  British  minister  at  Paris,
and  "with  these three  plenipotentiaries  Franklin,
Jay.  Adams,  and  Laurens  finally  arranged  terms
of  "peace,  including  fishery rights  on the Xew-
foundland banks and reciprocity of  trade. On
30  Xov.,  1782,  preliminary  articles  of  peace  were
signed by Oswald  with  John Adams,  Benjamin
Franklin,  Henry  Laurens,  and  John  Jay. The  de
finitive  treaty,  which  was  signed  on  3  Sept.,  1783,
was  identical  with  the  provisional  articles. — His
kinsman.  Eleazer.  soldier,  was  b.  in  England  about
1755;  d.  in  Xew  York  city,  30  Sept.,  1795. When
disputes arose between Great Britain and the
American  colonies  his  sympathies  became  enlisted
in the American
cause,  and  he  came
to this country
about 1770. He
served  under  Ben
edict Arnold at
Ticonderoga. and
became his secre
tary. At Quebec-
he commanded a
forlorn  hope  after
Arnold  was  wound
ed. He  was  made
lieutenant  -  colonel
ofCol.JohnLamb's
regiment  of  artil
lery on 1 Jan.,
1777, had  a high
reputation  for  skill
as an artillerist,
distinguished  him
self  under  Arnold  at  Compo,  and  was  praised  for  his
gallantry  in  the  official  reports  of  the  battle  of  Mon-
mouth.  "Leaving  the  service  in  July,  1778,  he  joined
William  Goddard  in  the  publication  of  the  "  Mary-
,  land  Journal." The  publication  of  strictures  by
i  Gen.  Charles  Lee  on  the  military  capacity  of  Gen.


(504


OTERO


OTIS


Washington  led  to  a  popular  demonstration  against
Oswald  in  Baltimore,  and  to  the  issuance  of  a  chal
lenge  by  the  latter  to  Col.  Samuel  Smith,  who  de
clined  to  fight  a  duel.  Oswald  removed  to  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  and  in  April,  1782,  began  the  publi
cation  of  the  "  Independent  Gazetteer,  or  the
Chronicle  of  Freedom,"  which  he  made  the  vehicle
of  violent  partisan  attacks.  lie  reopened  William
Bradford's  London  coffee-house  in  1783,  and  while
conducting  it  published  the  monthly  "  Price  Cur
rent,"  the  earliest  commercial  paper  in  the  United
States.  In  August,  1786,  he  offered  to  lead  a  vol
unteer  company  of  infantry,  of  which  he  was  cap
tain,  to  the  northern  frontier  in  order  to  capture
from  the  British  the  posts  that  they  occupied  in
violation  of  the  articles  of  peace.  From  1782  till
1787  he  published  in  New  York  city  the  "Inde
pendent  Gazette,  or  New  York  Journal  Revived,"
which  had  formerly  been  conducted  by  John  Holt,
a  kinsman  of  his  wife.  He  was  a  strong  opponent
of  the  political  principles  of  Alexander  Hamilton,
and  challenged  the  latter  to  a  duel,  but  their
friends  adjusted  the  matter.  In  1792  lie  went  to
England,  and  shortly  afterward  to  France,  where
he  joined  the  Republican  army,  was  commissioned
as  a  colonel  of  artillery,  and  commanded  a  regiment
under  Gen.  Charles  F.  Dumouriez,  at  Jemmapes.
The  government  sent  him  on  a  secret  mission  to
Ireland  to  report  on  the  political  condition  of  that
country  and  the  feasibility  of  the  projected  French
invasion.  He  reached  Ireland  by  a  journey  through
Norway  and  Scotland,  reported  to  the  minister  of
foreign  affairs  in  France,  and,  not  receiving  further
instructions,  returned  to  the  United  States,  where
he  died  of  yellow  fever  shortly  after  his  arrival.

OTERO,"  Rafael  (o-tay'-ro),  Cuban  author,  b.  in
Havana  in  1827;  d.  there  in  187(5.  He  began  to
write  for  the  theatre  when  he  was  a  mere  boy,  his
first  comedy  being  performed  when  he  was  only
fifteen  years  old.  From  that  time,  and  in  spite  of
poverty  and  unfavorable  circumstances,  he  gave  a
great  deal  of  time  to  literature,  and  wrote  several
comedies,  including  "  Un  novio  del  dia,"  "  El  Co-
burgo,"  "  Mi  hijo  el  Frances,"  "  Del  agua  mansa,"
and  "  El  muerto  lo  manda,"  which  were  performed
in  the  theatres  of  Havana  and  Matanzas.  He  also
published  the  novel  "  Laperla  de  la  Diaria"  (I860).
and  "  Cantos  Sociales  "  (1868),  but  a  great  part  of
his  writings  remain  uncollected.

OTEY.  James  Kerrey,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Liberty,  Bedford  co.,  Va.,  27  Jan.,  1800;  d.  in
Memphis,  Tenn.,  23  April,  1863.  His  father,  Isaac

Otey,  was  a  fann
er  in  easy  circum
stances,  and  fre
quently  represent
ed  his  county  in
the  house  of  bur
gesses.  James  was
one  of  the  young
er  children  in  a
family  of  twelve.
He  early  evinced
a  love  of  study
and  of  general
reading,and,  after
attending  an  ex
cellent  school  in
his  native  coun
ty,  was  sent  in  his
seventeenth  year
to  the  University
of  North  Carolina,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1820.
He  received  honors  in  belles-lettres,  and  was  imme
diately  appointed  tutor  in  Latin  and  Greek.  In


1823  he  took  charge  of  a  school  in  Warrenton,
N.  C.  There  his  attention  was  turned  to  the  min
istry,  and  he  was  ordained  both  deacon  and  priest
in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  by  Bishop
Ravenscroft.  In  1827  he  removed  to  Tennessee
and  settled  in  the  town  of  Franklin,  but  he  changed
his  residence  to  Columbia  in  1835,  and  finally  to
Memphis.  On  14  Jan.,  1834,  lie  was  consecrated
bishop  of  Tennessee.  Next  to  the  duties  of  his  epis
copate  the  bishop's  heart  was  most  engaged  with  the
work  of  Christian  education.  It  seemed  to  be  a  pas
sionate  desire  with  him  to  establish  in  the  south
west  a  large  institution  in  which  religion  should  go
hand-in-hand  with  every  lesson  of  a  secular  char
acter,  and  young  men  be  prepared  for  the  ministry.
Accordingly,  after  establishing,  with  the  assistance
of  Rev.  Leonidas  Polk,  a  school  for  girls,  called
the  "Columbia  Institute,"  he  devoted  a  great  part
of  his  laborious  life  to  the  realization  of  his  ideal.
For  full  thirty  years  (1827-'57)  he  failed  not,  in
public  and  in  private,  by  night  and  by  day,  to  keep
this  subject  before  the  people  of  the  southern
states,  until  the  successful  establishment  of  the
University  of  the  south  atSuwanee,  Tenn.,  in  which
he  was  also  aided  by  Bishop  Leonidas  Polk.  The
life  of  Bishop  Otey  was  one  of  hard  and  unceasing
labor.  He  lived  to  see  the  few  scattered  members
of  his  church  in  Arkansas,  Louisiana,  Mississippi,
and  Florida,  as  well  as  Tennessee,  organized  into
dioceses  and  in  successful  operation.  He  was
known  throughout  the  south  and  southwest  as  the
Good  Bishop.  Though  he  was  strongly  opposed  to
secession,  he  wrote  a  letter  to  the  secretary  of  state,
remonstrating  against  coercion.  The  reply  to  this
letter  changed  his  views  on  the  subject,  and  lie  de
clined  to  attend  the  general  convention  of  his
church  in  the  seceding  states  that  was  held  in
Georgia  soon  afterward.  In  person  the  bishop  was
of  a  commanding  stature,  being  six  feet  and  two
inches  in  height,  and  of  fitting  proportions.  He
published  many  addresses,  sermons,  and  charges,
and  a  volume  containing  the  "  Unity  of  the
Church  "  and  other  discourses  (Vicksburg,  1852).

OTIS,  Bass,  artist,  b.  in  New  England  in  1784;
d.  in  Philadelphia,  3  Nov.,  1861.  As  a  youth  lie
was  apprenticed  to  a  scythe-maker,  and  his  only
known  composition  is  a  large  picture  of  the  interior
of  a  smithy,  which  was  first  exhibited  at  the  Penn
sylvania  academy  of  the  fine  arts  in  1819,  and  pre
sented  by  the  artists  to  that  institution,  where  it
now  is.  It  is  hard  in  its  technique,  but  the  group
ing  and  management  of  light  are  nicely  treated.
It  is  not  known  from  whom  Mr.  Otis  gleaned  any
instruction  in  art,  but  in  1808  he  was  painting
portraits  in  New  York,  and  in  1812  he  had  settled
as  a  portrait-painter  in  Philadelphia.  His  portrait
of  President  Jefferson  was  engraved  for  Dela-
plaine's  "  Portrait  Gallery,"  and  in  the  exhibition  of
original  historical  portraits  at  the  Pennsylvania
academy  of  the  fine  arts  in  1887-'8  there  were  a
dozen  of  his  works,  including  likenesses  of  Alex
ander  Lawson,  the  engraver,  John  Neagle,  the
painter,  and  Dr.  Philip  Syng  Physick,  which  last
Otis  reproduced  in  a  crude  mezzotint  engraving.
A  portrait  of  himself,  which  he  painted  shortly
before  his  death,  is  a  fine  piece  of  work.  In  1815
Otis  invented  the  perspective  protractor,  which  was
well  received  by  many  of  his  co-workers,  and  he
produced  what  is  said  to  lie  the  earliest  lithograph
that  was  made  in  the  United  States.  It  appeared
in  the  "  Analectic  Magazine  "  for  July,  1819.  Otis
made  the  design  upon  a  stone  that  was  brought
from  Munich,  and  did  the  printing  himself.  The
print  has  little  resemblance  to  the  modern  litho
graph,  the  lines  being  incised  or  corroded,  and


OTIS


OTIS


605


therefore  it  has  more  the  character  of  a  coarse
etching,  but  it  is  interesting  in  the  history  of  art.

OTIS,  Klislia  Graves,  inventor,  b.  in  Halifax,
Windham  co.,  Vt.,  3  Aug.,  1811  ;  d.  in  Yonkers,
X.  Y.,  8  April,  1801.  At  an  early  age  he  invented
several  new  and  ingenious  machines  that  proved
successful,  lie  afterward  held  the  post  of  su
perintendent  of  machinery  in  a  furniture  manufac
tory  in  Hudson  city,  X.  J.,  and  Yonkers,  X".  Y.  In
designing  machinery  for  new  works  in  Yonkers
Mr.  Otis  put  into  practical  operation  a  hoisting-
machine  that  embodied  some  novel  features  calcu
lated  to  automatically  prevent  loss  of  life  in  case  of
the  breaking  of  the  lifting-cable.  Other  machines
had  been  constructed,  in  which  the  means  of  se
curing  the  car  in  case  of  accident  was  placed  under
the  control  of  the  attendant,  but  Mr.  Otis  claimed
that  this  method  was  wrong  in  principle,  as  in  the
moment  of  danger  the  operator  would  become  con
fused,  and  his  views  were  soon  proved  correct  by
the  fall  of  an  elevator  in  the  Xew  York  factory  of
his  firm.  This  was  replaced  by  one  of  Mr.  Otis's
invention,  and,  the  machine  proving  satisfactory
to  the  owners,  other  orders  soon  followed.  At  the
opening  of  the  World's  fair  in  the  Crystal  palace
in  Xew  York,  Mr.  Otis  placed  therein  a  small  work
ing  machine,  and  by  exhibitions  of  its  safety  feat
ures  by  practical  tests  considerable  attention  was
attracted  to  his  inventions.  At  the  end  of  eight
years  he  had  succeeded  in  introducing  his  elevators
very  extensively  through  the  eastern,  middle,  and
southern  states.  In  1867  Mr.  Otis's  sons  organized
a  stock  company  to  carry  on  the  manufacture  of
his  inventions,  and  its  business  now  amounts  to
about  &2.000.000  per  annum.

OTIS.  Elwell  Stephen,  soldier,  b.  in  Frederick
city.  Md.,  25  March,  1838.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Rochester,  X.  Y.,  in  1858,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Xew  York  in  1859,
and  was  subsequently  graduated  at  Cambridge  law-
school  in  1861.  He  entered  the  volunteer  service
of  the  United  States  as  a  captain  in  the  140th  Xew
York  infantry  on  13  Sept.,  1862,  was  promoted
lieutenant-colonel  of  that  regiment  on  23  Dec.,
1863,  and  made  colonel  in  1864,  participating  in  all
the  principal  engagements  of  the  Army  of  the
Potomac  after  Antietam,  in  the  capacity  of  captain,
field-officer,  and  brigade  commander.  In  1864  he
commanded  the  regular  brigade  in  the  Army  of
the  Potomac,  and  was  severely  wounded  in  the
vicinity  of  Petersburg,  Va.,  in  consequence  of
which  he  was  discharged  on  24  Jan.,  1865,  and  bre-
vetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  He  was  ap
pointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  22d  infantry  in  the
regular  army  in  February,  1867,  and  colonel  of  the
20th  infantry  in  February,  1880.  From  1867  till
1881  he  served  on  the  frontier  against  the  Indians,
and  then  organized  the  U.  S.  infantry  and  cavalry
school  in  Leavenworth,  Kansas,  which  he  conducted
until  1885.  Since  then  he  has  served  with  his  regi
ment  in  northwestern  Montana,  and  has  also  been
on  duty  in  Washington,  D.  C.  He  is  the  author
of  '•  The  Indian  Question  "  (Xew  York,  1878).

OTIS,  Fessenden  Nott,  physician,  b.  in  Ball-
ston,  X.  Y.,  6  May,  1825.  He  was  educated  at  the
academies  of  Fail-field  and  Amsterdam,  X.  Y.,  and
studied  medicine  in  the  University  of  the  city  of
Xew  York  and  in  Xew  York  medical  college,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1852.  He  was  a  surgeon  on
the  U.  S.  mail  and  Pacific  mail  steamers  till  1861,
and  then  a  police  surgeon  in  X"ew  York  city  till
1872,  serving  as  president  of  the  medical  board  of
the  police  department  in  1870-'2.  From  1862  till
1870  he  was  attending  physician  to  the  Demilt  dis
pensary.  He  was  clinical  lecturer  at  the  College


1  of  physicians  and  surgeons  from  1862  till  1871,  and
since  1871  has  been  clinical  professor  of  genito
urinary  diseases. He  was  president  of  the  medical
board  of  Strangers'  hospital  in  1871-'3,  has  been
visiting  surgeon  to Charity  hospital  since  1874,
and  twice  president  of  the  medical  board,  and  is
,  consulting  surgeon  to  various  hospitals. He  was
i  president  of  the  American  dermatological  society
1  in  1872. Dr.  Otis  invented  in  1871  the  urethrome-
I  ter,  and  the  dilating  urethrotome.  which  he  per
fected  in  1872  and  1875,  respectively. He  is  the
inventor  also  of  the  dilating  catheter  introduced  in
1874,  the  prostatic  catheter  and  prostatic guide,
the  cold-water  coil,  the  ready  aspirator,  which  was
introduced  in  1875,  and  a  simplified  evacuator  for
removing  stone  from  the  bladder  after  lithotrity,
introduced  in  1883  and  perfected  in  1888. He  has
published  "  Lessons  in  Drawing,  Studies  of  Ani
mals  and  Landscape  "  (2  vols.,  Xew  York,  1849-'50) :
1  "Tropical  Journeyings"  (1856);  and  "History  of
i  the  Panama  Railroad  and  its  Commercial  Connec
tions  "  (1860). His  contributions  to  medical  litera-
'  ture comprise, besides numerous articles and
pamphlets,  "  Stricture of the Male Urethra,  its
Radical  Cure  "  (Xew  York,  1878 ;  2d  ed.,  Xew  York
and  London,  1882) ;  "  Physiology  of  Syphilitic  In
fection  "  (1881) ; and "  Genito-Urinary Diseases
and  Syphilis  "  (1883  ;  students'  ed.,  1886).

OTIS,  George  Alexander,  surgeon,  b.  in  Bos-
;  ton,  Mass.,  12  Nov.,  1830 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,
23  Feb.,  1881. He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1849,  and  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Univer-
,  sity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1851,  continued his  surgi
cal"  studies  in  London  and  Paris,  and  in  1854  began
|  practice  in Springfield, Mass. During  the  civil
!  war  he  served  as  a  field  surgeon with  the  27th
Massachusetts  volunteers. In  February.  1866,  he
j  was  appointed  assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army,
j  and  assigned  to  duty  in  the  office  of  the  surgeon-
,  general  at  Washington. He  received  the  brevets
of  captain,  major,  and  lieutenant-colonel,  and  was
a member of the principal American medical
societies  and  a  corresponding  member  of  various
'  European  societies. He  was  advanced  to  the  rank
j  of  major  on  17  March,  1880. He  wrote  for  medi-
I  cal  journals,  and  published  in  the  form  of  reports
monographs  on  "  Amputation  at  the Hip-Joint"
(Washington.  1867) :  "  Excisions  of  the  Head  of
the Femur"  (1869);  "A Plan  for  transporting
Wounded  Soldiers  by  Railway  " ;  and  "  Transport
of  Sick  and  Wounded  by  Pack  Animals  " ;  also  a
"  Report  of  Surgical  Cases  treated  in  the  Army  of
•  the  United  States  from  1867  to  1871." Dr.  Otis
]  was  for  several  years  curator  of  the  Army  medical
j  museum  in  Washington,  and  compiled  the  surgical
,  part  of  the  "  Medical  and  Surgical  History  of  the
War  of  the  Rebellion  "  (Washington.  1870-'9).

OTIS,  James,  statesman,  b.  in  West  Barnstable.
Mass.,  5  Feb.,  1725;  d.  in  Andover,  Mass.,  23  May,
1783.  He  was  descended  in  the  fifth  generation
from  John  Otis,  one  of  the  first  settlers  of  Hingham.
This  John  Otis  came  with  his  family  from  Hing-
|  ham,  in  Xorfolk.  England,  in  June,  1635.  His
grandson,  John,  born  in  Hingham,  Mass..  in  1657,
removed  to  Barnstable.  where  he  died,  30  Xov.,
1727.  He  was  for  eighteen  years  colonel  of  militia,
for  twenty  years  representative,  for  twenty-one
years  member  of  the  council,  for  thirteen  chief
justice  of  common  pleas,  and  judge  of  probate.
Two  of  his  sons,  John  and  James,  were  known  in
public  life.  John  was  representative  for  Barnsta
ble,  and  afterward  for  several  years  a  member  of
the  council  until  his  death  in  1756.  James,  born  in
Barnstable  in  1702.  became  eminent  at  the  bar.
Like  his  father,  he  was  colonel  of  militia,  justice  of


606


OTIS


OTIS


common  pleas,  and  judge  of  probate,  and  was  for
some  time  a  member  of  the  council.  He  married
Mary  Allyne,  or  Alleyne,  of  Wethersfield.  Conn.,
daughter  of  Joseph  Allyne,  of  Plymouth.  Of  their
thirteen  children,  sev
eral  died  in  infancy.
The  eldest  son,  James,
the  subject  of  this
sketch,  was  fitted  for
college  under  the  care
of  the  Rev.  Jonathan
Russell,  of  Barnstable,
and  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1748.  Af
ter  two  years  spent  in
the  study  of  general
literature  he  began  the
study  of  law  in  1745
in  the  office  of  Jere
miah  Gridley,  who  was
then  one  of  the  most
distinguished  lawyers
in  this  country.  In
1748  he  began  tin-
practice  of  law  at

Plymouth,  but  soon  found  that  the  scanty  busi
ness  of  such  a  place  did  not  afford  sufficient  scope
for  his  powers.  He  removed  to  Boston  in  1750,
and  soon  rose  to  the  foremost  rank  in  his  profes
sion.  His  business  became  very  lucrative,  and  lie
won  a  reputation  for  extraordinary  eloquence,
while  his  learning  and  integrity  were  held  in  high
and  well-deserved  esteem.  It  was  in  those  days
noted  as  remarkable  that  he  was  once  called  as  far
as  Halifax  in  the  dead  of  winter  to  act  as  counsel
for  three  men  accused  of  piracy.  He  procured  the
acquittal  of  his  clients,  and  received  the  largest  fee
that  had  ever  been  paid  to  a  Massachusetts  lawyer.
Until  this  time  he  continued  his  literary  studies,
and  in  1760  published  ''Rudiments  of  Latin  Pros
ody,"  which  was  used  as  a  text-book  at  Harvard.
A  similar  work  on  Greek  prosody  remained  in
manuscript  until  it  was  lost,  along  with  many
others  of  his  papers.  Early  in  1755  Mr.  Otis  mar
ried  Miss  Ruth  Cunningham,  daughter  of  a  Boston
merchant.  Of  their  three  children,  the  only  son,
James,  died  at  the  age  of  eighteen :  the  elder
daughter,  Elizabeth,  married  Capt.  Brown,  of  the
British  army,  and  ended  her  days  in  England  :  the
younger,  Mary,  married  Benjamin,  eldest  son  of
the  distinguished  Gen.  Lincoln.  Mr.  Otis  seems
always  to  have  lived  happily  with  his  wife,  but  she
failed  to  sympathize  with-  him  in  his  political
career,  and"  remained  herself  a  stanch  loyalist
until  her  death,  15  Nov.,  1789.

His  public  career  began  in  1761.  On  the  death
of  Chief-Justice  Sewall  in  1760,  Gov.  Bernard  ap
pointed  Thomas  Hutchinson  to  succeed  him.  James
Otis,  the  father,  had  set  his  heart  upon  obtaining
this  place,  and  both  father  and  son  were  extremely
angry  at  the  appointment  of  Hutchinson.  The
latter,  who  was  a  very  fair-minded  man  and  seldom
attributed  unworthy  motives  to  political  opponents,
nevertheless  declares  in  his  "  History  of  Massachu
setts  Bay  "  that  chagrin  and  disappointment  had
much  to  do  with  the  course  of  opposition  to  gov
ernment  which  the  Otises  soon  followed.  The
charge  deserves  to  be  mentioned,  because  it  is  re
iterated  by  Gordon,  who  sided  with  the  patriots,
but  it  is  easy  to  push  such  personal  explanations
altogether  too  far.  No  doubt  the  feeling  may  have
served  to  give  an  edge  to  the  eloquence  with  which
Mr.  Otis  attacked  the  ministry  ;  but  his  political
attitude  was  too  plainly  based  on  common  sense,
and  on  a  perception  of  the  real  merits  of  the  ques-


tions  then  at  issue,  to  need  any  other  explanation.
On  the  accession  of  George  lit.  it  was  decided  to
enforce  the  navigation  acts,  which  for  a  long  time
American  shipmasters  and  merchants  had  habitu
ally  evaded.  One  of  the  revenue  officers  in  Boston
petitioned  the  superior  court  for  "  writs  of  assist
ance."  which  were  general  search-warrants,  allow
ing  officials  of  the  custom-house  to  enter  houses  or
shops  in  quest  of  smuggled  goods,  but  without
specifying  either  houses  or  goods.  There  can  be
little  doubt  that  the  issue  of  such  search-warrants
was  strictly  legal.  They  had  been  authorized  by  a
statute  of  Charles  II.,  and  two  statutes  of  William
III.  had  expressly  extended  to  custom-house  officers
in  America  the  same  privileges  that  they  enjoyed
in  England.  On  the  other  hand,  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  the  issue  of  such  warrants  in  general
terms  and  without  most  sedulous  provisions  against
arbitrary  abuse  was  liable  to  result  in  a  most  odious
form  of  oppression.  It  contravened  the  great
principle  that  an  Englishman's  house  is  his  castle,
and  it  was  not  difficult  to  show  that  men  of  Eng
lish  blood  and  speech  could  be  counted  on  to  resist
such  a  measure.  The  conduct  of  Mr.  Otis  on  this
occasion  is  an  adequate  answer  to  the  charge  that
his  conduct  was  determined  by  personal  considera
tions.  He  then  held  the  crown  office  of  advocate-
general,  with  an  ample  salary  and  prospects  of  high
favor  from  government.  When  the  revenue  officers
called  upon  him,  in  view  of  his  position,  to  defend
their  cause,  he  resigned  his  office  and  at  once  un
dertook  to  act  as  counsel  for  the  merchants  of
Boston  in  their  protest  against  the  issue  of  the
writs.  A  large  fee  was  offered  him.  but  he  refused
it.  "  In  such  a  cause,''  said  he,  "  1  despise  all  fees."
The  case  was  tried  in  the  council  chamber  at  the
east  end  of  the  old  town-hall,  or  what  is  now
known  as  the  "  Old  State-House."  at  the  head  of
State  street,  in  Boston.  Chief- Justice  Hutchinson
presided,  and  Gridley  argued  the  case  for  the  writs
in  a  most  powerful  and  learned  speech.  The  reply
of  Otis,  which  took  five  hours  in  the  delivery,  was
probably  one  of  the  greatest  speeches  of  modern
times.  It  went  beyond  the  particular  legal  ques
tion  immediately  at  issue,  and  took  up  the  whole
question  of  the  constitutional  relations  between
the  colonies  and  the  mother  country.  At  the  bot
tom  of  this,  as  of  all  the  disputes  that  led  to  the
Revolution,  lay  the  ultimate  question  whether
Americans  were  bound  to  yield  obedience  to  laws
that  they  had  no  share  in  making.  This  question,
and  the  spirit  that  answered  it  flatly  and  doggedly
in  the  negative,  were  heard  like  an  undertone  per
vading  all  the  arguments  in  Otis's  wonderful
speech,  and  it  was  because  of  this  that  John
Adams,  who  was  present,  afterward  declared  that
on  that  day  "  the  child  Independence  was  born."
No  doubt  the  argument  must  have  gone  far  in
furnishing  weapons  for  the  popular  leaders  in  the
contest  that  was  impending.  Hutchinson  reserved
his  decision  until  advice  could  be  had  from  the
law-officers  of  the  crown  in  London :  and  when
next  term  he  was  instructed  by  them  to  grant  the
writs,  this  result  added  fresh  impetus  to  the  spirit
that  Otis's  eloquence  had  aroused.  At  the  ensuing
election,  in  May,  1761,  Mr.  Otis  was  chosen  repre
sentative,  and  in  the  following  year  he  opposed  the
motion  for  granting  a  sum  of  money  to  make  good
the  expenses  of  a  naval  expedition  to  the  north
east,  which  Gov.  Bernard  had  made  upon  his  own
responsibility.  When  taken  to  task  for  this  con-
duet,  Mr.  Otis  justified  himself  in  a  pamphlet  en
titled  "The  Rights  of  the  Colonies  Vindicated"
(1764).  In  this  masterly  argument  the  author
planted  himself  squarely  upon  the  ground  that  in


OTIS


OTIS


607


all  questions  relating  to  the  expenditure  of  public
money  the  rights  of  a  colonial  legislature  were  as
sacred  as  the  rights  of  the  house  of  commons.  In
June,  1765,  Mr.  Otis  moved  that  a  congress  of  dele
gates  from  all  the  colonies  be  called  together  to
consider  what  should  be  done  about  the  stamp-act.
In  that  famous  congress  which  met  in  October  in
New  York  he  was  a  delegate  and  one  of  the  com
mittee  for  preparing  an  address  to  parliament.  In
17C7,  when  elected  speaker  of  the  Massachusetts
assembly,  he  was  negatived  by  Gov.  Bernard.  On
the  news  of  Charles  Townshend's  revenue  acts,  the
assembly  prepared  a  circular  letter  to  be  sent  to
all  the  colonies,  inviting  concerted  resistance.  The
king  was  greatly  offended  at  this,  and  instructions
were  sent  to  Bernard  to  dismiss  the  assembly  unless
it  should  rescind  its  circular  letter.  In  the  debate
upon  this  royal  order  Otis  made  a  fiery  speech,  in
which  he  used  the  expression :  "  We  are  asked  to
rescind,  are  we?  Let  Great  Britain  rescind  her
measures,  or  the  colonies  are  lost  to  her  forever/'
In  the  summer  of  1769  he  got  into  a  controversy
with  some  revenue  officers,  and  attacked  them
in  the  Boston  "  Gazette.''  A  few  evenings  after
ward,  while  sitting  in  the  British  coffee-house,  he
was  assaulted  by  one  Robinson,  a  commissioner
of  customs,  supported  by  several  army  or  navy
officers.  Mr.  Otis  was  savagely  beaten,  and  received
a  sword-cut  in  the  head,  from  the  effects  of  which
he  never  recovered.  He  had  already  shown  some
symptoms  of  mental  disease,  but  from  this  time  he
rapidly  grew  worse  until  his  reason  forsook  him.
He  brought  suit  against  Robinson,  who  was  assessed
in  £2,000  damages  for  the  assault ;  but  when  the
penitent  officer  made  a  written  apology  and  begged
pardon  for  his  irreparable  offence,  Mr.  Otis  refused
to  take  a  penny.  With  this  lamentable  affair  his
public  career  may  be  said  to  have  ended,  for.  al
though  in  1771  he  was  again  chosen  to  the  legisla
ture,  and  was  sometimes  afterward  seen  in  court  or
in  town-meeting,  he  was  unable  to  take  part  in
public  business.  In  June,  1775,  he  was  living,
harmlessly  insane,  at  the  house  of  his  sister,  Mercy
Warren,  at  Watertown.  When  he  heai'd  the  rumor
of  battle  on  the  17th,  he  stole  quietly  away,  bor
rowed  a  musket  at  some  farm-house  by  the'  road
side,  and  joined  the  minute-men,  who  were  march
ing  to  the  aid  of  the  troops  on  Bunker  Hill.  He
took  an  active  part  in  that  battle,  and  after  it  was
over  made  his  way  home  again  toward  midnight.
The  last  years  of  his  life  were  spent  in  Andover.
Early  in  1778,  in  a  lucid  interval,  he  went  to  Bos
ton  and  argued  a  case  in  the  common  pleas,  but
found  himself  unequal  to  such  exertion,  and  after
a  short  interval  returned  to  Andover.  Six  weeks
after  his  return,  as  lie  was  standing  in  his  front
doorway  in  a  thunder-shower,  leaning  on  his  cane
and  talking  to  his  family,  he  was  struck  by  light
ning  and  instantly  killed.  It  was  afterward  re
marked  that  he  had  been  heard  to  express  a  wish
that  he  might  die  in  such  a  way.  He  was  a  man
of  powerful  intelligence,  with  great  command,  of
language  and  a  most  impressive  delivery,  but  his
judgment  was  often  unsound,  and  his  mental  work
ings  were  so  fitful  and  spasmodic  that  it  was  not
always  easy  to  tell  what  course  he  was  likely  to
pursue.  For  such  prolonged,  systematic,  and  cool-
headed  work  as  that  of  Samuel  Adams  he  was  by
nature  unfit,  but  the  impulse  that  he  gave  to  the
current  of  events  cannot  be  regarded  as  other  than
powerful.  His  fame  will  rest  chiefly  upon  the
single  tremendous  speech  of  1761,  followed  by  the
admirable  pamphlet  of  1764.  His  biography  has
been  ably  written  by  William  Tudor  (Boston,  1823).
— His  brother,  Samuel  Alloy ne,  statesman,  b.  in


Barnstable,  Mass.,  24  Nov.,  1740;  d.  in  "Washing
ton,  D.  C.,  22  April,  1814.  was  graduated  at  Har
vard  in  1759.  He  studied  law,  but  turned  his  at
tention  to  mercantile  business.  He  was  chosen  a
representative  in  1776,  and  in  1784  was  speaker  of
the  house.  He  was  a  member  of  the  board  of  war.
and  in  1780  was  a  member  of  the  convention  that
framed  the  constitution  of  Massachusetts.  In  1787
he  was  one  of  the  commissioners  sent  to  negotiate
with  Daniel  Shays  and  his  insurgents,  and  in  the
following  year  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Continental
congress  in  its  last  session.  After  the  adoption  of
the  Federal  constitution  he  was  secretary  of  the
U.  S.  senate.  He  married  Elizabeth,  daughter
of  Harrison  Gray,  receiver-general  of  Massachu
setts. — Their  son,  Harrison  Gray,  statesman,  b.
in  Boston,  8  Oct.,  1765;  d.  there,  28  Oct.,  1848,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1783.  He  was  admit
ted  to  the  bar  in  1786,  and  two  years  afterward  de
livered  the  Fourth-of-July  oration  in  Boston.  In
1787  he  was  captain  in  the  militia,  and  served  as
aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Brooks  in  the  campaign
against  the  Shays  insurgents.  He  soon  rose  to  dis
tinction  at  the  bar.  His  courtly  manners  and
winning  address  made  him  a  favorite  in  society,
and  his  style  of  oratory  was  much  admired.  In
1796  he  wa's  chosen  to  the  state  legislature,  and  in
1797-1801  was  a  member  of  congress,  and  promi
nent  among  the  Federalist  leaders.  Returning  to
Massachusetts,  he  was  district  attorney  in  1801,
speaker  of  the  house  in  1803-'5,  and  president  of
the  state  senate  in  1805-'!!.  In  1814  he  was  ap
pointed  justice  of  common  pleas,  and  held  that
office  for  four  years.  In  the  Hartford  convention,
1814,  he  took  a  prominent  part,  and  thus  laid  him
self  open  to  imputations  of  disloyalty,  which  to
some  extent  diminished  his  popularity.  He  was
nevertheless  chosen  U.  S.  senator  in  1817,  and
j  retained  that  place  until  1822,  when  he  resigned
his  seat  to  become  a  candidate  for  the  office  of
mayor  of  Boston.  Up  to  that  time  Boston  had  re
tained  its  old  town  government  by  town-meetings
and  selectmen,  and  to  be  chosen  first  mayor  of
Boston  was  felt  by  many  of  its  citizens  to  be  an
honor  for  which  one  might  willingly  exchange  a
very  high  office.  The  war  record  of  Mr.  Otis  is
thought  to  have  redounded  to  his  disadvantage.
Before  election-day  his  name  was  withdrawn  from
the  canvass,  and  John  Phillips  was  elected  with  a
near  approach  to  unanimity.  In  1829  Mr.  Otis
was  elected  mayor,  and  in  his  inaugural  address
took  occasion  to  repel  the  charge  of  disloyalty  to
the  Union,  which  had  been  repeatedly  brought
against  the  members  of  the  Hartford  convention.
"  At  no  time  in  the  course  of  my  life,"  said  he,
"  have  I  been  present  at  any  meeting  of  individuals,
public  or  private,  of  the  many  or  the  few,  or  privy
to  any  correspondence  of  whatever  description,  in
which  any  proposition  having  for  its  object  the
dissolution  of  the  Union,  or  its  dismemberment  in
any  shape,  or  a  separate  confederacy,  or  a  forcible
resistance  to  the  government  or  laws,  was  ever
made  or  debated,  and  I  have  no  reason  to  believe
that  any  such  scheme  was  ever  meditated  by  dis
tinguished  individuals  of  the  old  Federal  party."
Such  a  declaration  may  serve  to  show  that  the
dangerous  tendencies  latent  in  such  movements  as
that  of  the  Hartford  convention  were  not  always
comprehended  even  by  the  leading  actors,  and  it
may  be  instructively  compared  with  statements
often  made  on  the  eve  of  the  Declaration  of  Inde
pendence,  to  the  effect  that  the  American  colonies
had  no  intention  of  breaking  off  their  connection
with  the  British  empire.  Among  the  other  note
worthy  speeches  of  Mr.  Otis  may  be  mentioned


608


OTT


OTTER


especially  his  eulogy  on  Alexander  Hamilton  in
1804,  and  his  argument  in  the  U.  S.  senate  on  the
question  of  the  admission  of  Missouri  to  the  Union
in  1820.  See  James  S.  Loring's  "The  Hundred
Boston  Orators"  (Boston,  1852).— His  son,  George,
educator,  b.  in  1797;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  in
1828.  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1815,  studied
for  the  ministry,  and  became  a  clergyman  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church.  From  1820  till  182(5
he  was  tutor  at  Harvard  and  in  1820-'7  he  was
professor  of  Latin.  On  leaving  the  college  he  be
came  rector  of  Christ  church,  Cambridge.  Mass.,
where  he  remained  until  his  death.  lie  published
"Perfectibility,"  "An  Address  to  the  Humane
Society  at  Newburyport  in  1818."  and  a  "  Ser
mon,"  delivered  at  Cambridge  in  1826. — The  second
Harrison  Gray's  wife,  Eliza  Henderson,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  27  July,  1796;  d.  there,  21  Jan.,
1873,  was  the  daughter  of  William  Bordman,  a

Boston  merchant,
and  on  6  May,
1817,  married  Mr.
Otis,  after  whose
death  she  went  to
Europe,  residing
there  for  several
years  to  educate
her  children.  Up
on  her  return  to

;»\.,  - -.,  . ~%  ">•  Boston she be-

•^ -*^fe»KJ'*''t^ ^j^**  -. came  a  leader  in
>  •  ^bt<?.,T^.,  ^*t  social  circles,  and

was  active  in
works  of  char
ity.  She  was  the
first  to  celebrate
George  Washing
ton's  birthday  reg
ularly,  and  finally
induced  the  legis
lature  to  make  the  22d  of  February  a  legal  holi
day.  During  the  civil  war  she  was  interested  in
the  relief  of  soldiers  and  was  a  leader  in  the  Evans
house  aid  committee,  receiving  a  vote  of  thanks
from  the  mayor  and  council.  Her  portrait,  by
George  P.  A.  Healy,  is  possessed  by  the  Bostonian
society,  in  the  old  South  church.  She  wyas  the  au
thor  of  "  The  Barclays  of  Boston,"  a  novel  (Boston,
1854) ;  and  contributed  to  the  Boston  "  Transcript "
under  the  signature  of  "  One  of  the  Barclays."

OTT,  Isaac,  physician,  b.  in  Northampton
county,  Pa.,  30  Nov.,  1847.  He  studied  in  Lafay
ette  college,  was  graduated  at  the  medical  depart
ment  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1809,
and  studied  medicine  in  Germany  and  London.
In  1878  he  organized  a  physiological  laboratory  in
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  lectured  for
a  year  on  experimental  physiology.  He  was  made
a  fellow  in  biology  at  Johns  Hopkins  in  1878.  Dr.
Ott  has  devoted  considerable  study  to  the  physio
logical  action  of  drugs,  and  discovered  the  path
and  decussation  of  the  sudorific,  sphincter-inhibi
tory,  and  thermo-inhibitory  fibres  in  the  spinal
cord,  the  innervation  of  sphincters,  and  the  loca
tion  of  the  fever-centres  in  the  brain.  He  has
published  "  Cocaine,  Veratria.  and  Gelseminum  "
(Philadelphia,  1874) ;  "  Action  of  Medicines  "  (1878) :
and  "  Contributions  to  Physiology  and  Pathology  of
the  Nervous  System  "  (Easton,  1879-'87).

OTTENDORFER,  Oswald,  journalist,  b.  in
Zwittau,  Moravia,  26  Feb.,  1826.  He  was  the  son
of  a  manufacturer,  went  through  the  course  of
classical  studies,  and  devoted  himself  to  jurispru
dence  at  the  University  of  Vienna.  He  was  active
in  the  movement  to  overthrow  the  Metternich


government  in  1848,  and  joined  the  Von  der  Tann
volunteer  corps,  which,  in  the  first  Schleswig-Hol-
stein  war,  participated  in  several  engagements
with  the  Danish  forces.  During  the  uprising  in
Vienna  he  was  1st  lieutenant  in  the  battalion
that  was  commanded  by  Robert  Blum.  He  sub
sequently  joined  in  the  popular  revolution  in  Sax
ony  and*  Baden,  after  the  failure  of  which,  to  es
cape  capital  punishment,  he  fled  to  Switzerland,
and  from  there  came  to  the  United  States.  In
New  York  he  found  employment  in  the  counting-
room  of  the  "Staats-Zeitung."  When,  after  the
death  of  Jacob  Uhl,  its  proprietor,  the  management
of  the  paper  devolved  upon  his  widow,  the  services
of  Mr.  Ottendorfer  became  gradually  more  im
portant,  and  the  acquaintance  thus  formed  led  to
his  marriage  with  Mrs.  Uhl  in  1859.  As  the  Ger
man-born  population  of  New  York  city  increased,
his  journal,  in  which  he  endeavored  to  reflect  the
sentiments  of  the  German-Americans,  became  one
of  the  most  widely  circulated  and  influential  in
New  York.  He  adhered  to  the  principles  of  the
Democratic  party,  but  joined  no  political  organiza
tion,  and  maintained  an  independent  position.  He
has  been  an  advocate  of  reform  in  the  civil  service
and  active  in  promoting  improvements  in  the
public-school  system.  In  1872-'4  he  was  an  alder
man,  and  in  1874  a  candidate  for  mayor  of  New
York  city.  Besides  other  charitable  gifts,  Mr.
Ottendorfer  gave  $300,000  to  build  and  endow  an
educational  institution  in  his  native  town  in  Aus
tria,  founded  on  Long  Island  a  home  for  aged  and
indigent  men,  and  established  the  Ottendorfer  free
library  in  Second  avenue.  New  York  city,  at  an
original  cost  of  $50,000.  which  has  been  augmented
by  annual  gifts.  He  has  retired,  on  account  of
failing  health,  from  active  journalism,  and  spends
most  of  his  time  in  Europe. — His  wife,  Anna,
philanthropist,  b.  in  Wurzburg,  Bavaria,  13  Feb.,
1815;  d.  in  New  York  city,  1  April,  1884,  was  the
daughter  of  a  poor  man  named  Behr.  She  came
to  the  United  States  in  1837,  and  in  the  following
year  married  Jacob  Uhl,  a  printer.  In  1845  her
husband  purchased  the  "  New  Yorker  Staats-
Zeitung,"  then  a  small  weekly  paper,  which,  after
a  brief  period,  he  changed  to  a  daily.  When,  in
1852,  Mr.  Uhl  died,  his  widow  assumed  the  man
agement  of  the  paper.  Yet  she  declined  several
offers  for  the  "  Staats-Zeitung,"  and,  by  her  own
energy  and  sagacity  and  the  co-operation  of  Mr.
Ottendorfer,  made  it  one  of  the  chief  journals  in
the  United  States.  She  took  an  active  part  in  the
management  of  the  paper  until  almost  the  time  of
her  death.  She  also  devoted  much  attention  to
charitable  enterprises.  In  1875  she  established  in
Astoria,  L.  I.,  the  Isabella  home  for  aged  women,
named  in  memory  of  a  deceased  daughter,  expend
ing  $150,000  on  the  building  and  endowment.  She
contributed  $40,000  to  an  educational  fund,  built
the  women's  pavilion  of  the  German  hospital.  New
York  city,  at  a  cost  of  $75,000,  and  gave  $100,000
for  a  German  dispensary.  Mrs.  Ottendorfer  re
ceived  in  1883  a  gold  medal  from  the  empress  of
Germany,  in  recognition  of  her  many  acts  of  char
ity.  In' her  will  she  left  additional  sums  for  her
charitable  foundations,  and  bequeathed  $25,000  to
the  employes  of  the  "  Staats-Zeitung."

OTTER,  William  Dillon,  Canadian  officer,  b.
in  Clinton,  Ont..  3  Dec.,  1843.  He  joined  the  Ca
nadian  volunteer  militia  force  in  1862,  was  ap
pointed  lieutenant  -  colonel  of  the  Queen's  Own
regiment  in  1875,  and  commanded  the  Wimbledon
Canadian  team  in  1883.  He  had  charge  of  the
school  of  infantry  at  Toronto  in  1883,  led  a  brigade
during  the  northwest  campaign  in  1885,  and  was


OTTERBEIN


OTTONI


609


appointed  deputy  adjutant -general  of  militia  at
Toronto  in  1886. "  He  is  the  author  of  "  A  Manual
for  the  Canadian  Militia  "  (Toronto,  1885).

OTTERBEIN,  Philip  William,  clergyman,  b.
in  Dillenburg,  Germany.  4  June,  1726 ;  d.  in  Balti
more,  Md.,  17  Nov.,  1813.  He  was  ordained  as  a
minister  of  the  German  Reformed  church  at  Her-
born,  Germany,  in  1749,  and  was  one  of  the  clergy
men  that  were  brought  over  in  1752  by  Michael
Schlatter  under  the  auspices  of  the  synod  of  North
and  South  Holland  to  preach  to  the  Germans  of
Pennsylvania.  He  was  first  settled  at  Lancaster,
Pa.  Otterbein  was  possessed  of  an  ardent  mission
ary  spirit,  and  was  a  powerful  orator.  He  made
extensive  tours,  associated  himself  with  revival
ists  of  other  churches,  and  adopted  prayer-meet
ings,  class-meetings,  and  open-air  meetings  in
groves.  He  also  encouraged  eloquent  laymen  to
pray  and  exhort,  some  of  whom  became  regular
preachers  of  various  denominations.  These  new
measures,  borrowed  in  part  from  the  practices  of
the  Methodists,  aroused  opposition  among  the  con
servative  members  of  his  own  and  other  churches.
He  left  Lancaster  for  Tulpehocken  in  1758,  in  1760
went  to  Frederick.  Md.,  and  in  1765  was  settled  at
York.  Pa.  In  all  his  pastorates  his  novel  methods
excited  antagonism.  He  was  in  Europe  in  1770-'!,
and  after  his  return  preached  again  at  York  until
1774,  when  he  removed  to  Baltimore.  His  numer
ous  disciples  desired  to  form  a  new  religious  so
ciety,  while  he  wished  them  to  continue  their  church
connections  and  labor  for  a  revival  of  religion  in
the  existing  religious  bodies.  They  could  not  in
duce  him  to  sever  his  relations  with  the  Reformed
church,  though  a  few  weeks  before  his  death  he
ordained  a  preacher  for  the  new  sect,  which  as
sumed  the  name  of  United  Brethren  of  Christ.

OTTIGM,  Charles  d',  French  soldier,  b.  in
Cholet  in  1524;  d.  in  Florida  in  September,  1565.
Entering  the  army  in  1542,  he  served  with  credit
in  Italy,  but  later  he  became  a  Protestant  and  left
the  royal  service.  In  1562  he  accompanied  Jean
Ribaut  in  his  first  voyage  to  Florida,  and  in  1564
he  became  lieutenant  of  Gov.  Laudonniere,  who  had
been  commissioned  by  Admiral  Coligny  to  found
a  French  colony  in  Florida.  They  landed  on  25
June,  1564,  off  the  mouth  of  the  river  May,  and,
after  an  exploration  in  the  interior  by  Ottigny,  they
began  to  build  Fort  Caroline.  Ottigny  afterward
sailed  up  the  river  May  (now  St.  John's  river),
for  more  than  100  miles,  and  opened  intercourse
with  Outina,  a  chief,  whom  later  he  aided  in  a  raid
on  the  villages  of  Potanou.  During  the  ensuing
mutinies  he  several  times  saved  Laudonniere's  life.
When  the  latter  was  removed  by  Jean  Ribaut  in
August,  1565,  Ottigny  retained  his  office  of  deputy
commander,  and  after  the  capture  of  Ribaut  he
refused  to  surrender  to  Pedro  Menendez,  but,  tak
ing  refuge  in  the  hills  with  a  few  followers,  for
several  days  waged  a  bloody  war  against  the  Span
iards.  He  was  captured  at  last  and  slain,  it  is  said,
by  Menendez.  Laudonniere  in  his  narrative  ac
knowledges  his  indebtedness  to  Ottigny,  whose  fate
was  regretted  by  the  French  Protestants.

OTTO,  Charles,  Danish  physician,  b.  in  St.
Thomas,  W.  I.,  20  May.  1795;  d.  in  Copenhagen,
13  May,  1879.  He  received  his  early  education  in
St.  Thomas,  but  finished  his  studies  in  Copen
hagen,  where  he  was  graduated  in  medicine  in
1819.  He  visited  South  America  in  1825,  1829,
1S34,  and  1848,  and  published  "  Phrenologien,"  in
which  the  author  made  a  particular  study  of  the
crania  of  the  South  American  Indians  (Copenha
gen,  1825)  ;  "  Om  Bra?ndevinens  fordaervelige
Yirkninger  paa  menneskens  Legeme  og  Aand,"
VOL.  iv. — 39


in  which  the  author  narrates  the  terrible  effects  of
liquor  on  the  Indian  races  of  North  and  South
America ;  and  other  works.

OTTO,  John  Conrad,  physician,  b.  near  Wood-
bridge,  N.  J.,  15  March,  1774;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
26  June,  1844.  His  great-grandfather,  grandfather,
and  father  were  physicians.  His  grandfather  came
to  this  country  from  Germany  in  1752,  settled  in
Philadelphia,  where  he  engaged  in  the  practice  of
medicine,  and  during  the  winter  of  1778  had
charge  of  the  hospital  of  the  Continental  army
at  Valley  Forge.  His  father,  Dr.  Bodo  Otto,
was  warmly  attached  to  the  patriot  cause,  sat
in  the  senate  of  New  Jersey,  and  served  during
the  war  as  an  officer  in  the  Revolutionary  army.
The  son  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1 792,  and
in  medicine  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1796.  In  1798  he  was  elected  one  of  the  physicians
of  the  Philadelphia  dispensary,  and  in  1813,  on  the
death  of  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush,  he  was  chosen  to
succeed  the  latter  as  one  of  the  physicians  and
clinical  lecturer  of  the  Pennsylvania  hospital,
which  post  he  held  twenty-one  years,  and  in  con
nection  with  which  he  became  extensively  known
throughout  the  United  States.  He  was  physician
to  the  Orphan  asylum  for  twenty  years,  and  during
many  years  to  the  Magdalen  asylum.  In  the
cholera  epidemic  of  1833  he  was  one  of  the  twelve
physicians  that  were  chosen  by  the  public  authori
ties  of  Philadelphia  to  adopt  sanitary  measures
and  establish  and  conduct  hospitals  in  the  city,
and  at  the  organization  of  the  sanitary  board  he
was  chosen  its  president.  He  was  a  fellow  of  the
College  of  physicians,  in  which  he  held  the  office
of  censor,  and  from  1840  until  his  death  that  of
vice-president,  and  was  for  many  years  a  member
of  the  American  philosophical  society.  He  pub
lished  "  An  Account  of  an  Hemorrhagic  Disposition
in  certain  Families ''  in  the  "  New  York  Medical
Repository  "  (1803),  and  another  paper  on  the  same
subject  in  "  Coxe's  Medical  Museum  "  (1805).  It  is
said  that  these  papers  are  the  first  that  appeared  on
this  subject.  He  was  also  the  author  of  other  medi
cal  papers. — His  son,  William  Tod,  lawyer,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  19  Jan.,  1817,  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1833,  read  law  with
Joseph  R.  Ingersoll,  and  removed  to  Indiana,
where  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  followed
his  profession  until  1844,  and  then  held  the  office
of  judge  of  the  district  court  of  Indiana  for  six
years,  also  serving  for  several  years  as  professor  of
law  in  the  University  of  Indiana,  from  which  in
stitution  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  In
1863  he  was  appointed  assistant  secretary  of  the
interior  of  the  ignited  States,  and  he  held  the  office
until  1871,  when  he  was  appointed  arbitrator  on
the  part  of  the  United  States  under  the  convention
with  Spain  for  settlement  of  claims  of  citizens  of
this  country.  In  1875-?82  he  was  reporter  of  the
United  States  supreme  court,  in  which  capacity  he
published  sixteen  volumes.

OTTONI,  Theophilo  Benedicts  (ot-to'-nee),
Brazilian  journalist,  b.  in  Do  Serro,  27  Nov..  1807 ;
d.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  17  Oct.,  1869.  At  the  age  of  fif
teen  he  composed  sundry  patriotic  poems,  which
revealed  a  precocious  talent.  He  began  his  studies
in  1823  in  Do  Serro.  in  1826  went  to  Rio  Janeiro
to  finish  them,  and  in  1828  entered  the  navy  as  a
midshipman.  While  at  the  university  he  had  be
came  affiliated  with  the  Liberal  party,  wrote  in
the  "  Astrea  "  under  the  pen  -  name  of  O  joven
pernambucano,  and  was  a  correspondent  for  the
"  Astro  de  Minas  "  and  the  "  Echo  do  Serro,"  and
a  member  and  secretary  of  the  secret  "  Club  dos
Amigos  Unidos."  In  1830  he  resigned  from  the


610


OTTS


OURAY


navy  and  retired  to  his  native  province  of  Minas
Geraes,  where  he  engaged  in  commerce,  and  was
editor  of  the  "  Sentinella  do  Serro,"  a  republican  op
position  paper.  In  1838  he  was  elected  to  congress,
and  in  1841  he  ardently  opposed  the  creation  of
the  new  council  of  state.  When  in  1842  the
chamber  was  dissolved,  the  Liberal  party  in  Sao
Paulo  and  Minds  Geraes  rose  in  arms.  Ottoni
placed  himself  at  the  head  of  the  insurgents,  and
after  the  rout  of  Santa  Luzia  was  captured,  but
the  jury  of  Ouro  Preto  acquitted  him,  and  he  was
included  in  the  amnesty  that  was  granted  by  the
emperor  in  1844.  In  1846  he  was  vice-president  of
the  chamber  of  deputies,  and  as  such  represented
congress  at  the  baptism  of  the  imperial  princess.
In  1847  he  founded  the  Mucury  company,  which
seemed  to  offer  a  great  future  to  the  north  of  Mi
nas,  and  he  lost  all  his  fortune  and  ruined  his
health  in  this  scheme.  In  1801  he  was  elected  to
the  senate,  where  he  sat  until  his  death.

OTTS,  John  Martin  Philip,  clergyman,  b.  in
Union,  S.  C.,  7  June,  1838.  He  was  graduated  at
Davidson  college,  N.  C.,  in  1859,  and  at  the  theo
logical  seminary  at  Columbia,  S.  C.,  in  1802,  and
was  ordained  in  the  spring  of  1803  to  the  ministry
of  the  Presbyterian  church.  He  was  pastor  at
Greensborough,  Ala.,  till  1807,  then  at  Columbia,
Tenn.,  till  1873,  and  next  at  Wilmington,  Del.,  till
1878.  when  he  was  called  to  the  Chambers  memo
rial  church  at  Philadelphia,  Pa.  There  he  remained
till  1885,  when  he  took  charge  of  a  church  at  Tal-
ladega,  Ala.  He  has  received  the  degree  of  I).  1).
Dr.  Otts  has  contributed  largely  to  the  ''Southern
Presbyterian  Review,"  the  •'  Princeton  Review."
and  other  religious  magazines  and  church  papers,
and  is  the  author  of  •'  Xicodemus  with  Jesus,"
discussing  the  functions  and  mission  of  Christ
(Philadelphia,  1807) ;  "  Light  and  Life  for  a  Dead
World  "  (1808) ;  "  The  Southern  Pen  and  Pulpit  "
(Columbia,  Tenn..  18G9-'70);  "  Inter- Denomina
tional  Literature  "  (Xew  York,  1872) ;  and  "  The
Gospel  of  Honesty"  (Wilmington,  1877).  A  col
lected  edition  of  his  works  is  in  preparation.

OUDIN,  Christian  Jnles  (oo-dang),  West,  In
dian  missionary,  b.  near  Fort  Royal,  Martinique,
in  1081 ;  d.  in  Naples,  Italy,  in  1741.  He  was  de
scended  on  his  mother's  side  from  a  Carib  cacique.
Oudin  received  his  education  in  Paris,  became  a
Jesuit,  and  was  employed  in  missionary  work  in
Santo  Domingo  for  several  years.  In  1723  he  came
to  Louisiana  in  answer  to  an  invitation  from  the
Mississippi  company,  and  sailed  up  the  river  for
several  hundred  miles.  He  founded  in  1724  a  mis
sion  among  the  Natchez  Indians  in  southern  Ar
kansas,  which  prospered,  but  he  claimed  that  the
French  and  Spanish  traders  demoralized  the  Indi
ans  by  selling  them  spirits,  and  forbade  them  ac
cess  to  his  missions  unless  he  were  present.  The
traders  complained,  and  Oudin  was  summoned  to
New  Orleans  in  1729.  He  easily  justified  himself,
but,  the  policy  of  the  French  authorities  being  to
promote  trade  with  the  Indians  at  any  cost,  he  was
sent  to  labor  among  the  Tonicas.  Here  he  not  only
succeeded  for  some  time  in  keeping  the  traders
from  the  Indians,  but  even  organized  parties  to
chase  them  when  they  came  in  sight.  He  was
recalled  again,  but  refused  to  leave  his  mission,
although  his  ecclcsiatical  superiors  urged  him  to
obey.  A  detachment  of  soldiers  was  despatched  to
capture  him  in  1735.  but  he  eluded  them  for  several
months,  and  when  at  last  he  was  taken  he  appealed
to  the  Indians  to  defend  him.  Negotiations  con
tinued  for  several  hours  with  the  chiefs,  but,  Oudin
taking  advantage  of  the  respite  to  excite  the  In
dians,  the  commander  of  the  detachment  seized


him  and  carried  him  off.  A  short  but  bloody
engagement  followed  with  the  Indians,  in  which
three  soldiers  and  a  far  greater  number  of  In
dians  were  either  killed  or  wounded.  Oudin  was
carried  in  chains  to  New  Orleans,  and  placed  in  the
city  dungeon,  but  the  Jesuits  claimed  jurisdiction
over  him,  and,  despite  the  governor's  protest,  se-
sured  a  decree  from  the  king's  council  that  sus
tained  their  pretensions.  Oudin  embarked  for
France  in  1730,  and  upon  his  arrival  in  Bordeaux
went  immediately  to  Rome  and  presented  his
justification  to  the  general  of  the  order,  who  only
censured  him.  He  was  not  allowed  to  return  to
Louisiana,  but  was  attached  to  the  college  of  the
Jesuits  in  Naples.  He  published  "Memoire  justi-
ficatif  sur  ma  mission  parmi  les  Indiens  Natchez
et  Tonicas"  (Rome,  1730).

OUIMET,  dr6d6on,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Sainte  Rose,  Quebec,  3  June,  1823.  He  was  edu
cated  at  St.  Hyacinthe  and  Montreal  colleges,  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1844,  and  appointed  a  queen's
counsel  in  1807.  He  entered  parliament  in  1857,
became  a  member  of  the  executive  council  of  his
province  in  1807,  attorney-general  in  1807,  and
premier  of  Quebec  in  1873.  He  has  been  superin
tendent  of  public  instruction  since  1870,  and  was
commissioner  from  Canada  to  the  Colonial  and
Indian  exhibition  at  London  in  1880.  He  has  been
batonnier-gcneral  of  the  bar  of  Quebec,  received
the  decoration  of  the  palms  from  the  Academy  of
Paris,  was  named  by  the  French  government  of-
ficier  de  1'instruction  publique  in  1878,  and  was
made  a  knight  commander  of  the  order  of  St.
Gregoire  le  Grand  in  1880.  He  has  received  the
degree  of  D.  C.  L.  from  Laval  and  Bishop's  colleges.

OUIMET,  Joseph  Alderic,  Canadian  member
of  parliament,  b.  in  Sainte  Rose,  Quebec.  20  May,
1848.  He  was  educated  at  the  seminary  of  St.
Therese  de  Blainville,  and  graduated  in  law  at  Vic
toria  college,  Cobourg,  in  1809.  He  was  admitted
to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in  1870.  and  appointed
queen's  counsel  in  1880.  Mr.  Ouimet  was  first
elected  to  the  Dominion  parliament  in  November,
1873,  re-elected  in  1874,  1878,  1882,  and  1887,  and
appointed  speaker  of  the  house  on  13  April  of  the
last-named  year.  He  is  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
05th  battalion  of  volunteer  rifles,  and  commanded
it  in  the  Northwest  rebellion  campaign  in  1885.

OURAY,  Indian  chief,  b.  in  Colorado  in  1820;
d.  in  Los  Pinos  agency,  Col.,  27  Aug.,  1880.  He
was  the  chief  of  the  Uncompahgre  Utes,  whose
specific  title  is  probably  a  corruption  of  the  Spanish
"  u  n  com  pad  re."
Ouray  was  known
as  the  "  White
man's  friend,"  and
his  services  were
almost  indispen
sable  to  the  gov
ernment  in  nego
tiating  with  his
tribe,  who  kept
in  good  faith  all
treaties  that  were
madebyhim.  He
protected  their  in
terests  as  far  as
possible,  and  set
them  the  example

of  living  in  a  measure  a  civilized  life.  He  spoke
Spanish  and  wrote  in  that  language  in  his  corre
spondence  with  the  president  and  the  Indian  depart
ment.  He  visited  Washington  several  times  to  rep
resent  the  grievances  of  his  people,  and  his  appeals
in  their  behalf  were  touching  and  dignified.  He


OUREOUHARE


OUVRIER


611


was  a  famous  warrior  during  his  youth,  but  loved
peace  in  his  old  age,  and  at  the  time  of  the  murder
of  Nathan  C.  Meeker,  29  Sept.,  1879,  restrained  the
Indians  from  beginning  hostilities.  His  last  visit
to  Washington  was  to  effect  the  sale  of  the  Ute
reservation  in  Colorado.  At  the  time  of  his  death
he  resided  in  a  comfortable  house  on  a  farm  which
he  owned  and  cultivated,  and  he  took  much  pleas
ure  and  pride  in  driving  a  carriage  that  had  been
given  him  by  the  governor  of  Colorado.  His  only
son  was  captured  by  the  Sioux  in  the  boy's  youth,
and  Ouray  made  many  appeals  to  the  "great  father
in  Washington"  to  assist  in  his  recovery.

OUREOUHARE,  Cayuga  chief,  d.  'in  Quebec,
Canada,  in  1697.  He  was  one  of  the  Iroquois
chiefs  that  were  seized  treacherously  and  sent  to  the
galleys  in  France  in  1687,  after  being  invited  to  a
conference  at  Fort  Frontenac  by  Denonville,  the
Canadian  governor.  He  was  allowed  to  return
with  Frontenac  to  Canada  in  1689,  became  at
tached  to  the  new  governor,  accompanied  him  to
Montreal,  and  advised  him  to  release  the  other
Indian  captives  that  were  then  in  Canada.  His
advice  was  followed ;  the  Indians  were  sent  back
to  their  tribes,  and  were  exhorted  by  Oureouhare
to  persuade  the  latter  to  send  an  embassy  to
Montreal.  This  was  done  on  9  March,  1690,  and
the  envoy  said  that  the  French  prisoners  that  had
been  scattered  in  the  other  cantons  were  now  all
at  Onondaga,  and  would  be  disposed  of  as  Oureou
hare  should  direct.  The  efforts  of  the  latter  to
reconcile  the  Iroquois  to  French  rule  were  iinsuc-
cessful,  and  Frontenac  began  to  have  doubts  of  his
fidelity.  His  conduct  in  1691,  when  the  Iroquois
invaded  the  French  colony,  dispelled  all  doubts,
and  his  bravery  at  Repentigny  contributed  greatly
to  the  defeat  of  the  savages.  He  commanded  the
Christian  Hurons  in  an  engagement  at  La  Prairie
in  the  same  year,  and  afterward  pursued  a  body  of
Iroquois  and  recaptured  several  French  prisoners.
He  then  went  to  Quebec  and  received  the  thanks
of  Frontenac,  as  well  as  numerous  presents.  Several
tribes  offered  to  make  him  their  chief,  but  he  re
plied  that  he  would  never  leave  Ononthio  (Fronte
nac),  for  whom  he  seems  to  have  felt  a  sincere  affec
tion.  He  retired  among  the  Christian  Iroquois  of
the  mountain  in  1692,  but  made  frequent  excur
sions  among  the  Cayugas  and  other  tribes  in  the
interest  of  the  French,  persuading  the  Cayugas  to
release  their  French  prisoners,  and  keeping  them
firm  in  their  allegiance.  He  visited  Quebec  in  1697,
and  fell  sick  after  his  arrival.  He  was  a  sincere
Christian,  and  when  the  missionary  who  attended
him  spoke  of  the  crucifixion,  it  is  said  that  he
cried  out:  "  Why  was  I  not  there?  I  would  have
prevented  them  from  so  treating  my  God."  He
was  buried  with  pomp.  Frontenac  regretted  him
all  the  more  that  he  relied  on  him  principally  for
bringing  about  a  treaty  with  the  Iroquois.

OURLAC,  Jean  Nicolas,  artist,  b.  in  New  Or
leans,  La.,  in  1789;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  in  1821.
He  went  to  Paris  in  early  youth  to  study  under
Jacques  Louis  David,  and  acquired  reputation  as  a
landscape-painter.  In  1815  he  made  a  journey  to
this  country,  and  travelled  for  two  years  through
the  principal  states.  His  subjects  are  mostly  taken
from  American  scenery.  Among  his  works  are
"La  rue  Broadway  a  New- York  "  (1817);  "  Une
place  publique  a  Baltimore"  (1818);  "La  maison
blanche  a  Washington  "  (1818) ;  "  Groupe  d'Indiens
a  une  auberge  "  (1820) :  "  Scenes  du  marche  a  la
Nouvelle  Orleans  "  (1820) ;  "  Debardeurs  au  travail
sur  le  port  de  Boston  "  (1821) ;  "  La  moisson  en
Pennsylvanie  "  (1821) ;  and  "  Une  vue  du  Mississipi
pres  de  la  Nouvelle  Orleans  "  (1821).


OUSLEY,  Sir  William  Gore,  English  diploma
tist,  b.  in  London  in  1791 ;  d.  there,  6  March,  1866.
He  entered  the  diplomatic  service  at  an  early  age,
and  served  in  many  countries.  He  was  long  at
Rio  Janeiro,  Buenos  Ayres,  and  Monte  Video  dur
ing  an  eventful  period  in  the  history  of  the  South
American  states,  and  in  1857  was  sent  on  a  mission
to  the  United  States.  His  wife  was  a  daughter
of  Gov.  Cornelius  P.  Van  Ness,  of  Vermont.  Sir
William  was  a  ripe  scholar  and  a  pleasing  writer.
The  University  of  Oxford  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  C.  L.  in  1855.

OUTERBRIDGE,  Albert  Albony,  lawyer,  b.
in  Bermuda,  20  April,  1841.  He  studied  law  with
William  Rawle,  graduated  at  the  law-school  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1862  was  ad
mitted  to  the  Philadelphia  bar.  Since  1874  he  has
been  the  editor-in-chief  of  the  "  Weekly  Notes  of
Cases,"  of  which  seventeen  volumes  have  been
published  in  Philadelphia.  He  was  appointed  re
porter  to  the  supreme  court  of  Pennsylvania  in
1881,  and  edited  several  volumes  of  reports.  This
office  he  resigned,  1  Jan.,  1885,  to  become  the  trust
officer  of  the  Land  title  and  trust  company  of
Philadelphia,  which  post  he  now  (1888)  holds.

OUVRARD,  L6on  Francois  (oov-rar),  West
Indian  scientist,  b.  in  St.  Martin  in  1767;  d.  in
Coppet,  near  Geneva,  Switzerland,  in  1826.  He
was  descended  from  early  French  settlers,  received
his  education  in  Paris,  and,  enlisting  in  the  army
in  1791,  served  in  Germany  and  Italy.  He  was
dangerously  wounded  in  the  attack  on  Arcole
bridge,  15  Nov.,  1796,  and  promoted  captain  on  the
spot  by  Napoleon  Bonaparte.  Resigning  a  few
months  later,  he  fixed  his  residence  at  Coppet,  near
Geneva,  and  devoted  the  remainder  of  his  life  to
science.  He  became  one  of  the  founders  of  eth
nography  and  ethnology,  which  were  almost  entire
ly  ignored  up  to  the  beginning  of  the  19th  century.
He  made  extensive  journeys  through  Europe  and
America,  and  his  works  have  been  used  by  modern
laborers  in  the  same  line,  including  Charles  Dar
win  and  Alfred  R.  Wallace.  They  include  "  Pro-
domes  d'ethnographie  et  d'ethnologie  "  (Paris,  1811) ;
"De  la  distribution  geographique  des  races  hu-
maines  dans  1'Europe  centrale  "  (2  vols.,  1814,  with
atlas);  "Analyse  de  la  distribution  geographique
de  la  race  jaune  dans  ses  branches  Mongole,  Oce-
anique,  et  Sud  Americaine  "  (1820) :  "  Etudes  sur  la
race  rouge,  dans  ses  deux  varietes,  Indiens  du  Nord
de  FAmerique  et  Caraibe  "  (1821) ;  "  Des  differentes
especes  du  genre  homo  "  (1823) ;  and  "  Histoire  na-
turelle  descriptive  des  varietes  de  I'homme  "  (1825).

OUVRIER,  Pierre  tUistave,  French  historian,
b.  in  Calais  in  1765 ;  d.  there  in  1822.  After  finish
ing  his  studies,  he  was  for  some  time  a  clerk  in  a
Calais  shipping-house,  and  in  1789  came  to  Phila
delphia  as  agent  of  his  firm.  But  the  French  revo
lution  and  the  war  with  Great  Britain  ruined  his
employers,  and  he  became  a  teacher  of  languages.
In  1795  Pierre  Adet,  then  French  charge  d'affaires
in  Philadelphia,  appointed  him  chancellor  to  the
French  consulate,  and  afterward  sent  him  to  ex
plore  the  southern  and  central  states,  while  Palis-
sot  (q.  v.)  visited  the  northern  states.  Ouvrier  de
scended  the  Mississippi  to  New  Orleans,  sailed  up
Missouri  and  Arkansas  rivers,  and  took  the  baro
metrical  level  of  points  along  their  banks,  travelled
for  two  months  through  the  Indian  reservations,
and  explored  Louisiana,  Missouri,  northern  Texas,
Georgia,  both  Carolinas,  Ohio,  Delaware,  Mary
land,  Pennsylvania,  and  southern  Illinois,  during
1796-1804,  forming  a  valuable  collection  of  his
torical  documents.  On  his  return  to  Philadelphia
he  resumed  his  labors  as  teacher,  but,  through  the


612


OVALLE


OVERTON


aid  of  wealthy  citizens  who  had  become  interested
in  his  works,  he  was  afterward  afforded  the  means
to  devote  himself  exclusively  to  historical  re
searches.  Obtaining  access  to  the  Federal  archives
and  to  those  of  several  states,  he  made  copies  of
important  documents,  and  also  explored  the  prin
cipal  libraries  of  the  country  in  1808-14.  Return
ing  to  France  after  the  restoration  of  Louis  XVIII.,
he  secured  employment  in  the  department  of  taxes
of  his  native  city,'  which  he  held  to  the  time  of  his
death.  His  valuable  collections  were  afterward
bought  at  auction  by  the  National  library  of  Ber
lin,  where  they  still  remain.  He  published,  among
other  works,  "  Histoire  politiqueet  civile  des  Etats-
Unis  de  1'Amerique  du  Nord"  (3  vols.,  Calais.
1819).  and  "Etudes  critiques  sur  la  constitution
politique  des  Etats-Unis  de  1'Amerique  du  Nord,
et  des  contradictions  qui  existent  entre  elle  et  les
lois  civiles  des  divers  etats  de  1'union  "  (1822).

OVALLE,  Alfonso  de  (o-val'-yeh),  Chilian  cler
gyman,  b.  in  Santiago,  Chili,  in  1601 ;  d.  in  Lima,
Peru,  11  March,  1651.  He  belonged  to  a  noble  fam
ily  and  abandoned  brilliant  prospects  to  become  a
Jesuit.  After  teaching  philosophy  for  some  time,
he  was  made  director  of  the  novitiate  of  Santiago.
He  was  next  raised  to  the  rank  of  procurator  of
his  order  throughout  Chili,  and  was  appointed
deputy  to  the  general  congregation  of  Jesuits  held
in  Rome  in  1640.  Several  priests,  attracted  by  his
gentle  manners,  followed  him  to  Chili  from  Eu
rope.  He  stationed  them  at  various  points  in  Peru
where  pastors  were  wanted.  He  then  devoted
himself  so  zealously  to  his  missionary  duties  that
his  health  failed  rapidly.  His  principal  works  are
"  Epistola  ad  Pra-positum  Generalem  Societal  is
Jesu  qua  statum  in  Provincia  Chilensis  exponit "
(Madrid,  1642,  in  fol.) ;  "Historica  relacion  del
Reyno  de  Chile,  y  de  las  misiones,  y  ministerios
que  ejercita  en  el  la  compa  nia  de  Jesus  "  (Rome,
1646,  in  fol.,  with  maps  and  plates).  An  Italian
translation  appeared  in  1646  (Rome,  in  4to).  This
history  of  Chili  is  very  rare  and  much  sought  after.
It  was  translated  into  English  and  was  published  in
the  collection  of  "Travels"  edited  by  Ownsharn
and  John  Churchill  (London,  1704,  4  vol.  in  fol. ;
also  London,  1732,  1744-'6).

OVANDO,  Nicolds  de  (o-van'-do),  Spanish  sol
dier,  b.  in  Valladolid  in  1460 ;  d.  in  Madrid  in
1518.  He  was  of  a  noble  family  and  knight  of  the
order  of  Alcantara.  In  1501  he  was  chosen  to
supersede  Bobadilla  in  the  government  of  Hispa-
niola,  and  on  13  Feb.,  1502,  he  sailed  from  Spain
with  a  fleet  of  thirty  sail  and  2,500  people,  many
of  them  persons  of  rank.  He  arrived  at  the  city
of  Santo  Domingo  on  15  April,  and  immediately
assumed  the  government  of  the  island.  One  of  his
first  acts  was  to  refuse  to  let  Columbus  take  shel
ter  with  his  fleet  in  Santo  Domingo  to  avoid  the
dangers  of  an  approaching  hurricane;  and  when
the  admiral,  in  1503,  was  in  a  most  desperate  posi
tion  in  Jamaica,  Ovando,  though  Columbus  sent
a  messenger  to  him  asking  for  relief,  let  several
months  pass  without  rendering  aid.  The  adminis
tration  of  Ovando  in  Hispaniola  was  one  of  great
cruelty  toward  the  Indians.  Hearing  that  Queen
Anacaona  (q.  v.\  who  always  had  been  friendly  to
the  Spaniards,  was  secretly  meditating  a  massacre
of  himself  and  followers,  he  announced  his  intention
to  make  her  a  friendly  visit,  and  went  to  her  do
minions  of  Xaragua  accompanied  by  300  foot  sol
diers,  heavily  armed,  and  ten  horsemen.  They
were  received  with  joy  and  kindly  treated,  but  in
the  midst  of  the  festivities  that  were  held  in  his
honor  he  ordered  Anacaona  and  all  her  caciques
to  be  seized,  and  after  a  mock  trial  caused  the


latter,  eighty-four  in  number,  to  be  burned  alive
(1503).  Anacaona  was  taken  to  Santo  Domingo
city  and  hanged  some  time  afterward.  During  six
months  after  the  massacre  at  Xaragua  the  destruc
tion  of  the  inhabitants  continued.  When  the  coun
try  had  been  pacified  in  this  way,  Ovando,  in  com
memoration  of  his  atrocities,  founded  the  town  of
Santa  Maria  de  la  Verdadera  Paz.  In  1504  he
waged  war  against  the  natives  of  the  province  of
Higuey  and  caused  many  of  the  natives  to  be
slaughtered  and  their  chieftains  to  be  burned
alive.  On  one  occasion  he  imprisoned  600  Indians
of  Saona  in  a  dwelling  and  [tut  them  to  the  sword.
The  death  of  their  cacique,  Cotabanama.  was  fol
lowed  by  the  complete  subjugation  of  his  people
and  ended  the  last  struggle  of  the  natives  against
foreign  rule.  By  these  persecutions  the  number
of  natives,  which  at  the  arrival  of  the  Spaniards
was  said  to  be  500.000,  was  reduced,  according  to  a
census  taken  in  1507,  to  60,000 ;  and  to  provide  la
bor  for  the  mines,  Ovando  sent  expeditions  to  the
Bahamas  to  kidnap  Indians  into  slavery.  Apart
from  his  cruel  treatment  of  the  Indians,  Ovando's
administration  was  beneficial  to  the  island.  lie
founded  several  cities,  fostered  the  mining  indus
try,  introduced  the  cultivation  of  sugar-cane  with
plants  that  he  brought  from  the  Canary  islands,
and  sent  out  expeditions  of  discovery.  Ovando
was  recalled  in  1509  by  King  Ferdinand,  in  per
formance  of  a  promise  that  he  had  made  to  Queen
Isabella  on  her  death-bed.  He  was  succeeded  by
Diego  Columbus,  but  was  permitted  to  retain  pos
session  of  all  his  property.

OVERMAN,  Frederick,  mining  engineer,  b.
in  Cologne,  Germany,  about  1810  ;  d.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  in  1852.  lie  came  to  the  United  States
and  prepared  numerous  works  on  technology,  es
pecially  on  metallurgy.  These  include  "  The  Manu
facture  of  Iron  " (Philadelphia  1850);  "The  Manu
facture  of  Steel"  (1851):  "Practical  Mineralogy,
Assaying  and  Mining  "  (1851) ;  "  The  Moulder's  and
Founder's  Pocket  Guide  "  (1851) ;  "  Mechanics  for
the  Millwright,  Machinist,  Civil  Engineer,  Archi
tect,  and  Student "  (1852) ;  and  "  Treatise  on  Metal
lurgy;  Embracing  the  Elements  of  Mining  Opera
tions  and  Analyses  of  Ores "  (New  York  1852).
Most  of  these  works  were  published  at  a  time  when
it  was  difficult  to  obtain  scientific  information  on
such  subjects,  and  they  were  accepted  as  authority
and  passed  through  several  editions.

OVERTON,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Louisa  county,
Va.,  9  April,  1766;  d.  near  Nashville,  Tenn.,  12
April,  1833.  As  his  family  were  in  moderate  cir
cumstances,  he  received  only  a  meagre  education,
but  he  supplied  this  deficiency  by  private  study.
He  removed  to  Kentucky  before  he  was  of  age,
studied  law,  and.  being  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1787,
began  to  practise  soon  afterward  in  Nashville,
where  he  had  for  an  associate  Andrew  Jackson,
then  district  attorney.  Much  confusion  existed  in
regard  to  the  titles  to  land  in  the  district,  and  giv
ing  his  attention  to  this  branch,  Overton  soon  had
an  extensive  practice,  and  in  process  of  time  be
came  the  acknowledged  authority  on  the  subject.
A  body  of  laws  based  upon  the  North  Carolina  acts
of  1777  and  1783  had  to  be  formed,  and  he  set
himself  to  mould  a  system  to  suit  the  condition
and  necessities  of  the  new  community.  Being  ap
pointed  by  Gov.  Sevier  in  1804  to  succeed  Andrew
Jackson  as  judge  of  the  superior  court  of  law  and
equity,  his  decisions  on  these  points  soon  came  to
be  established  law.  and  have  never  since  been  con
troverted.  He  held  this  post  till  1810,  and  in  181 1
was  elected  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  the
state,  which  office  he  filled  till  his  resignation  in


OVIEDO


OWEN


613


1816.  During  this  period  he  wrote  "  Overtoil's
Reports,"  which  include  the  time  from  1791  to  1817.
and  are  of  great  value  as  a  repository  of  the  land
laws  of  Tennessee.  After  his  retirement  from  the
bench  he  devoted  himself  principally  to  the  care
of  his  estate,  which  at  the  time  of  his  death  was
the  largest  in  the  state.  Judge  Overton  and  Gen.
Jackson  were  warm  personal  friends,  and  the  lat
ter  held  the  judge's  opinion  in  such  high  regard
that  he  seldom  took  any  important  step  without
consulting  him.  Overtoil's  large  landed  interests
often  brought  him  in  conflict  with  others,  but  no
suspicion  ever  sullied  his  integrity.

OVIEDO,  Juan  Antonio  (o-ve-ay'-do),  South
American  clergyman,  b.  in  New  Granada,  25  June.
1670;  d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico.  2  April,  1757.  He
studied  in  the  University  of  Guatemala,  where  he
was  graduated  with  the  degree  of  doctor  in  theolo
gy,  and  shortly  afterward  appointed  professor  of
philosophy.  He  became  a  member  of  the  Society
of  Jesus  in  Tepozatlan  on  7  Jan.,  1690.  He  taught
philosophy  in  Mexico  and  theology  in  Guatemala,
was  procurator  at  Rome  and  Madrid,  visitor  of
Manila,  rector  of  Mexico,  and  twice  provincial  of
the  Jesuits  of  Mexico.  Oviedo  was  a  very  volumi
nous  writer  on  religious  and  theological  subjects
both  in  Spanish  and  Latin,  and  he  left  a  great  num
ber  of  unpublished  manuscripts,  which  are  in  the
library  of  the  University  of  Mexico.  His  principal
works  bearing  on  the  ecclesiastical  history  of
Mexico  and  California  are  "  Vida  y  virtudes  hero-
icas  del  Apostolico  y  Yen.  P.  Antonio  Nunez "
(Mexico.  1702);  "Menologio  de  los  Varones  ilustres
en  Santidad  de  la  Provincia  de  la  Compania  de
Jesus  de  la  Nueva  Espana  "  (1727) ;  "  Vida  admir
able  del  Ven.  P.  Jose  Vidal "  (1753) ;  "  Vida  y  afanes
Apostolicos  del  Ven.  P.  Juan  de  Ugarte,  Misionero
Apostolico  de  las  Californias  "  (1753) ;  "  El  Apostol
Mariano  :  Vida  del  Ven.  P.  Juan  Maria  Salvatierra
de  la  Compania  de  Jesus.  Conquistador  espiritual
de  las  Californias  "  (1754) ;  "  Elogios  de  muchos  Her-
manos  Coadjutores  de  la  Compania  de  Jesus,  que
han  florecido  en  las  cuatro  partes  del  Mundo  "  (2
vols.,  1755);  and  "Vida  y  virtudes  del  P.  Pedro
Speciali,  Jesuita  de  la  Provincia  de  Mexico  "  (1727).

OVIEDO  T  VALDEZ,  Gonzalo  Fernandez
de  (o-ve-ay'-do).  Spanish  historian,  b.  in  Madrid  in
1478  ;  d.  in  Valladolid  in  1557.  In  early  life  he  was
a  page  of  John,  the  son  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,
and  as  such  accompanied  the  monarchs  to  the  siege
of  Granada.  After  the  infante's  death  in  1497  he
entered  the  service  of  Frederic  of  Aragon,  king  pf
Naples,  and  in  1513  was  appointed  royal  warden
of  the  gold-mines  of  Castilla  de  Oro  on  the  isth
mus.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  council  of
Santa  Maria  la  Antigua,  but  in  1515  returned  to
Spain  to  give  the  government  information  about
the  political  and  economical  conditions  of  the
American  colonies,  and.  although  he  was  appointed
in  1526  governor  of  La  Antigua,  he  returned  soon
again  to  Spain,  where  he  continued  to  labor  on  the
great  historical  work  that  he  had  begun  in  1515.
In  1535  he  was  appointed  commander  of  the  castle
of  Santo  Domingo,  which  place  he  occupied  till
1545.  when  he  returned  to  Spain  with  the  appoint
ment  of  historian  of  the  Spanish  Indies.  He  now
gave  himself  to  the  completion  of  his  history,  of
which  a  summary  had  appeared  under  the  title  of
'•  La  Historia  de  las  cosas  sucedidas  en  mi  tiempo
en  America ''  (Toledo,  1526).  and  its  first  part  ap
peared  as  "  Historia  general  y  natural  de  la.s  Indias
Occidentals  "  (Seville,  1535).  while  the  revision  of
the  entire  work  was  finished  in  1548.  Its  publica
tion,  begun  in  Valladolid  in  1550.  was  interrupted
by  the  author's  death,  and  the  first  complete  edi


tion  was  printed  by  order  of  the  Royal  historical
academy  (Madrid,  1851).  This  work  has  not  gen
erally  been  judged  correctly,  on  account  of  many
inaccuracies  in  the  historical  part,  and  a  strong
prejudice  against  Columbus.  But  since  its  recent
publication  it  became  evident  that  it  is  one  of  the
profoundest,  and  certainly  the  first,  work  on  the
natural  history  of  America,  for  the  treatment  of
which  the  author  was  specially  qualified.  It  is
embellished  by  illustrations  that  were  drawn  by
the  author,  and  some  of  his  descriptions  might
serve  as  an  example  to  modern  naturalists.  Par
tial  translations  of  this  work  appeared  in  Italian
by  Giovanni  Battista  Ramusio  (1550),  and  in  Eng
lish  by  Richard  Eden  (1577).  Two  works,  also
translated  by  Ramusio  without  giving  the  author's
name, "  Tratado  del  palo  Guayacan  y  del  palo  Santo
como  antidote  contra  la  sifilis  "  and  "  Navegacion
del  rio  Maranon.''  are  also  attributed  to  Oviedo.

0>VEN,  Abraham,  soldier,  b.  in  Prince  Edward
county,  Va.,  in  1769  ;  d.  in  Tippecanoe  county,  Ind.,
7  Nov.,  1811.  He  emigrated  to  Kentucky  in  1785,
served  in  the  Indian  campaigns  under  Gen.  James
Wilkinson  and  Gen.  Arthur  St.  Clair  in  1791,  and
was  with  Col.  John  Hardin  on  the  expedition  to
White  river.  He  was  surveyor  of  Shelby  county
in  1796.  subsequently  a  magistrate,  and  colonel  of
the  first  militia  regiment  raised  in  Kentucky.  He
was  in  the  legislature  in  1798,  a  member  of  the
State  constitutional  convention  the  next  year,  and
state  senator  in  1810.  He  was  the  first  to  join
Gen.  William  H.  Harrison  at  Vincennes  to  resist
the  Indians  under  Tecumseh,  was  aide-de-camp  to
that  officer,  and  was  killed  at  Tippecanoe.  A
county  in  Kentucky  is  named  in  his  honor.

OWEN7,  Goronwy,  poet,  b.  in  Llanfair  Matha-
farn  Eithaf,  Anglesea,  North  Wales,  13  Jan.,  1722  ;
d.  at  St.  Andrews  parish.  Brunswick  co.,  Va.,  be
tween  1770  and  1780.  His  father,  Owen  Gronow,
had  some  poetic  taste,  and  his  mother,  Sian  Parri,
trained  her  son  in  his  childhood.  He  was  sent
to  a  school  not  far  from  his  home,  and  the  cele
brated  Lewis  Morris,  having  met  him,  sent  him
to  Beaumaris,  where  he  was  a  zealous  scholar.
When  he  was  nineteen  years  of  age  his  mother
died,  and,  leaving  home,  he  became  one  of  the
masters  of  the  grammar-school  at  Pwllheli,  in
Caernarvonshire.  Soon  after  this  Mr.  Morris  and
his  brothers  sent  him  to  Jesus  college,  Oxford,
where  he  made  rapid  progress  in  Greek  and  Latin
and  gave  proof  of  poetical  talent  in  Welsh  to  such
a  degree  that  he  was  even  then  regarded  as  a  rising
Welsh  bard.  In  1745  he  was  ordained  as  a  minis
ter  in  the  Church  of  England  and  obtained  a  small
curacy  in  his  native  parish,  but  soon  had  to  give
way  to  a  favorite  of  the  bishop  of  Bangor.  The
next  seven  years  of  his  life  were  full  of  cruel  dis
appointments.  His  grand  wish  was  to  obtain  a
parish  in  Wales,  but  he  was  unsuccessful,  and  took
a  place  at  Oswestry,  and  then  at  Uppington  in
Shropshire.  While  there  he  wrote  his  celebrated
poem,  called  "Cywydd  y  Farn"  (the  Day  of  Judg
ment),  which  is  regarded  as  his  masterpiece.  Sub
sequently  he  served  as  curate  at  Walton  in  Lanca
shire,  and  then  at  Northolt  near  London.  But  his
salary  was  so  small  that  he  could  scarcely  supply
the  wants  of  his  family.  Still  he  continued  to
write  poems  full  of  genius,  which  he  sent  to  his
generous  patrons,  the  Morris  brothel's.  While  he
was  at  Northolt  he  accepted  an  offer  to  go  to  the
College  of  William  and  Mary  in  Virginia  at  a  sal
ary  of  £200  a  year,  and  in  the  latter  part  of  1757
he  sailed  for  this  country.  He  married  for  his
second  wife  Mrs.  Clayton,  a  sister  of  Rev.  Thomas
Dawson,  president  of  the  college.  Of  his  career


614


OWEN


OWEN


•  here  little  is  known  except  that  after  about  three
years  he  was  compelled  to  leave,  and  became  rec
tor  of  a  church  in  St.  Andrews  parish,  Bruns
wick  co.,  where  he  died.  Mr.  Owen  is  described  as
the  last  of  the  great  poets  of  Wales,  and,  with  the
exception  of  Ab  Gwilym,  the  greatest  that  princi
pality  has  produced.  His  bardic  title  was  "Go-
ronwy  Ddhu  o  Fon,"  that  is,  Black  Goronwy  of
Anglesea.  His  poems  for  a  long  time  had  circu
lated  through  Wales  in  manuscript,  but  it  was  not
until  1763,  five  years  after  Goronwy's  departure
for  America,  that  his  collected  works  were  pub
lished  in  "Y  Diddanwch  Teuluaidd,"  and  suc
ceeding  editions  were  printed  in  1819  and  1860.
In  addition  to  the  Welsh,  Mr.  Owen  had  a  knowl
edge  of  Latin,  Greek,  Hebrew,  Arabic.  Gaelic,  Chal-
dee,  and  English.  His  countrymen  in  1831  erected
a  tablet  to  his  memory  in  the  cathedral  church  of
Bangor.  See  "  The  Poetical  Works  of  the  Rev.
Goronwy  Owen,  with  his  Life  and  Correspondence,"
edited  by  Rev.  Robert  Jones  (London,  1876).

OWEN,  Griffith,  colonist,  b.  in  Wales;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1717.  He  was  liberally  edu
cated,  and  became  a  physician.  When  William
Penn  received  his  charter  for  the  province  of
Pennsylvania,  Owen,  then  a  Quaker,  took  an  active
part  in  promoting  the  emigration  of  his  Welsh  co
religionists,  and,  being  desirous  of  retaining  their
language,  laws,  and  customs  in  the  New  World,  he,
with  others,  induced  Penn  to  set  apart  40,000  acres
as  a  Welsh  tract,  in  which  the  Welsh  alone  should
have  the  right  of  purchase,  and  within  the  limits
of  which  the  language  of  ancient  Britain  should
prevail.  On  securing  this,  Owen  emigrated  with
his  family,  arriving  in  Pennsylvania  in  September,
1684,  and  settled  on  this  tract,  which  was  called
Merion.  He  acquired  an  extensive  practice,  both
here  and  in  Philadelphia,  to  which  place  he  subse
quently  removed,  and  performed  the  first  surgical
operation,  it  is  thought,  in  Pennsylvania.  He  be-
eame  coroner  in  1685,  and  the  next  year  was  chosen
to  the  assembly,  in  which  body  he  served  many
years.  In  1690  he  was  made  a  provincial  council
lor  for  a  term  of  three  years,  and  in  1700  was  again
chosen  to  this  body,  of  which  he  remained  a  mem
ber  until  his  death.  Among  the  other  offices  that
he  held  were  those  of  an  alderman  under  the  char
ter  of  1691,  a  justice  of  the  peace,  a  judge  of  the
court  of  common  pleas,  and  one  of  Penn's  commis
sioners  of  property.  In  the  church  affairs  of  the
Society  of  Friends  he  bore  a  useful  part,  not  only
as  a  layman,  but  as  a  minister,  and  in  the  perform
ance  of  religious  work  travelled  frequently  into
the  other  colonies  and  to  England  and  Wales.  In
1689,  with  others,  he  drew  up  a  paper  "  to  incite
the  quarterly  meetings  to  keep  up  a  godly  disci
pline,  and  a  tender  inspection  over  the  youth."  He
attended  the  historical  meeting  of  Quaker  ministers
at  Burlington,  N.  J.,  in  1692,  where  George  Keith
declared :  "  There  is  not  more  damnable  heresies
and  doctrines  of  devils  amongst  any  Protestant
professions  than  among  the  Quakers,"  and  was  at
the  head  of  the  committee  of  three  that  was  ap
pointed  "  to  admonish  Keith."  Owen  was  one  of
those  who  prepared  the  testimony  of  the  "  Public
Friends  "  against  Keith,  and  he  was  the  first  to
sign  the  noted  Quaker  document  "  Our  Antient
Testimony  renewed,  concerning  our  Lord  and  Sa
viour,  Jesus  Christ,  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  the
Resurrection,"  of  which  paper  it  is  said  he  was
the  author.  He  was  frequently  employed  to  write
epistles  from  the  meeting  in  Philadelphia  to  the
meeting  in  other  places.  Dr.  Owen  was  one  of  the
"dear  friends"  to  whom  William  Penn,  in  1712,
addressed  a  letter  from  England  in  which  he  said :


"  Now  know  that  though  I  have  not  actually  sold
my  government  [Pennsylvania]  to  our  truly  good
queen,  yet  her  able  lord  treasurer  and  I  have  agreed
it."  The  sale  was  not  consummated,  however,
owing  to  Penn's  illness.

OWEN,  James,  congressman,  b.  in  Bladen
county,  N.  C.,  in  December,  1784:  d.  in  Wilming
ton,  N.  C.,  4  Sept.,  1865.  He  was  educated  in  pri
vate  schools  in  Pittsburg,  N.  C.,  engaged  in  plant
ing,  was  in  the  legislature  in  1808-'!!,  and  in  1816
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  one
term.  He  was  subsequently  for  many  years  presi
dent  of  the  Wilmington  and  Raleigh  railroad,  and
a  major-general  of  militia. — His  brother,  John,
governor  of  North  Carolina,  b.  in  Bladen  county,
N.  C.,  in.  August,  1787 ;  d.  in  Pittsburg,  N.  C.,  12
Oct..  1841,  was  educated  at  the  University  of  North
Carolina,  engaged  in  planting,  was  in  the  legisla
ture  in  1812-'28,  and  was  elected  governor  in  the
latter  year.  He  exercised  a  wide  influence  in  state
politics,  did  much  for  education,  and  prison  and
other  reforms,  and  was  president  of  the  convention
that  nominated  William  H.  Harrison  for  president,
declining  the  nomination  for  vice-president.

OWEN,  John,  publisher,  b.  in  Portland,  Me.,
28  March,  1805 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  22  April,
1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1827,  and
at  Harvard  divinity-school  in  1829,  but  never  ac
cepted  a  charge.  He  settled  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
as  a  bookseller  in  1833,  and  published  the  early
works  of  his  friend  and  college  mate,  Henry  W.
Longfellow,  and  those  of  James  Russell  Lowell.
Mr.  Owen  failed  in  business  in  1848,  and  was  sub
sequently  interested  in  real  estate.  He  aided  Mr.
Longfellow  in  the  preparation  of  his  "  Poems  of
Places"  (Boston,  1876-'9),  especially  in  verifying
authorship.  He  was  also  the  friend  and  literary
adviser  of  Charles  Sumner,  and  induced  him  to  pub
lish  his  writings  in  a  uniform  edition.

OWEN,  John  Jason,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cole-
brook,  Conn.,  13  Aug.,  1803;  d.  in  New  York  city,
18  April,  1869.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury
in  1828,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in
1831,  and  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the
Presbyterian  church  in  1832.  He  then  became
secretary  of  the  educational  society  of  his  church,
and  was  principal  of  Cornelius  institute,  New
York,  in  1836-'48.  He  was  made  professor  of  Greek
and  Latin  language  and  literature  in  the  New
York  free  academy  in  1849,  becoming  its  vice-
principal  in  1853,  and  continuing  as  such  until
1866.  The  name  of  the  institution  was  then
changed  to  the  New  York  free  college,  and  he  was
its  vice-president  until  his  death.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  and  of  LL.  D.  Dr.  Owen  was  an
eminent  classical  scholar,  and  his  translations  were
highly  commended  and  met  with  a  large  sale  both
here  and  abroad.  They  include  Xenophon's  "  Ana
basis  "  (New  York,  1843) ;  Homer's  "  Odyssey "
(1844) ;  Xenophon's  "  Cyropa?dia  "  (1846) ;  and  the
works  of  Thucydides  (1847).  He  also  published
the  "  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  in  Greek,  with  a  Lexi
con"  (1850);  a  "Greek  Reader"  (1852);  and  a
"  Commentary,  Critical,  Expository,  and  Practical,
on  the  Gospels  "  (3  vols.,  1857,  1859,  and  1873).

OWEN,  Joseph,  missionary,  b.  in  Bedford,
N.  Y.,  14  June,  1814 ;  d.  in  Edinburgh,  Scotland,
4  Dec.,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1835,  and  at  the  theological  seminary  there  in  1838,
ordained  an  evangelist  in  the  Presbyterian  church
the  next  year,  and  in  1840-'68  was  a  missionary  at
Allahabed,  India.  His  ministry  in  that  field  was
signally  successful ;  he  became  president  of  Alla
habed  college,  and  professor  in  the  theological
seminary  there,  translated  several  books  of  the


OWEN


OWEN


615


Bible  into  the  native  language,  and  prepared
school-books  and  commentaries  for  native  students.
Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1864.

OWEN,  Joshua  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Caer-
marthen,  Wales,  29  March,  1821 :  d.  in  Chestnut
Hill,  Pa.,  7  Nov.,  1887.  He  emigrated  to  the  I
United  States  with  his  parents  in  1830,  settled  in  •
Baltimore,  Md.,  and  was  graduated  at  Jefferson
college  in  1845.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1852,  and  established,  with  his  brother  Robert,  the
Chestnut  Hill  academy  for  boys.  He  also  practised
his  profession,  was  in  the  legislature  in  1857-'9,  and
in  1801  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  1st  city  troop.
He  was  shortly  afterward  elected  colonel  of  the
24th  Pennsylvania  regiment,  and,  after  three
months'  service,  organized  and  was  placed  in  com
mand  of  the  69th  Pennsylvania.  With  this  regi
ment  he  participated  in  every  battle  that  was
fought  by  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  from  Fair
Oaks  to  Cold  Harbor,  and  he  was  promoted  briga
dier-general  of  volunteers  for  "gallant  and  meri
torious  conduct  at  the  battle  of  Glendale "  on  29
Nov.,  1862.  His  appointment  expired  on  4  March,
1863,  but  he  was  appointed  again  on  30  March.
He  was  mustered  out  of  service  in  1864,  returned
to  the  practice  of  law,  and  in  1866  was  elected  re
corder  of  deeds  of  Philadelphia.  He  founded  in
1871  the  "  New  York  Daily  Register,"  a  law  jour
nal,  which  became  the  official  organ  of  the  New
York  courts  in  1873,  and  he  continued  on  its  edi
torial  staff  until  his  death.

OWEN,  Robert,  social  reformer,  b.  in  Newtown,
Montgomeryshire,  North  Wales,  14  May,  1771 ;  d.
there,  19  Nov.,  1858.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  be
came  a  clerk,  and  four  years  later  acquired  an
interest  in  a  cotton-mill  near  London.  He  married
in  1797  Anne  Caroline,  daughter  of  David  Dale,
proprietor  of  the  New  Lanark  cotton-mills,  and
soon  afterward  became  business  manager  of  these
mills,  which  he  conducted  for  many  years  with
success.  While  holding  this  place  he  introduced
rules  for  the  working  people  which  had  for  their
object  the  perfection  of  good  behavior,  cleanliness,
comfort,  and  innocent  enjoyment.  He  published
his  '•  New  Views  of  Society,  in  Four  Essays,  on  the
Formation  of  Human  Character  "  (London,  1813 ;
New  York,  1825),  became  absorbed  in  these  ideas,
and  gave  up  his  interests  at  New  Lanark.  In  1824
he  came  to  the  United  States  and  purchased  from
Frederick  Rapp  20,000  acres  of  land,  with  dwellings
for  1.000  persons,  on  Wabash  river,  in  Posey
county,  Ind.,  intending  to  establish  a  community
there.  The  scheme,  after  a  test  of  nearly  three
years,  proved  a  failure,  and  early  in  1827  he  re
turned  to  Great  Britain,  where  experiments  of  a
similar  nature  were  made,  but  with  equally  un
fortunate  results.  In  1828  he  went  to  Mexico,  on
the  invitation  of  the  government,  to  carry  out  his
experiment  there,  but  effected  nothing,  because  the
government  insisted,  in  making  the  grant  of  land,
that  the  state  religion  should  be  Roman  Catholic.
Mr.  Owen  continued  to  advocate  his  views  both  as  a
writer  and  a  public  speaker,  and  his  followers  were
known  as  Owenites.  In  1827  they  were  leaders  in
the  labor  league,  out  of  which  sprang  the  chartist
movement.  He  visited  the  United  States  on  several
occasions,  and  in  May.  1828,  held  a  public  debate
with  the  Rev.  Alexander  Campbell,  at  Cincinnati,
on  the  ''  Evidences  of  Christianity,"  in  which  Mr.
Owen  took  agnostic  ground.  During  his  last
years  he  was  a  believer  in  spiritualism.  His  writ
ings  include  "  Observations  on  the  Effect  of  the
Manufacturing  System  "  (London,  1815) ;  "  Address
to  the  Inhabitants  of  New  Lanark  "  (1816) ;  "  Tracts
Relative  to  the  New  Society  "  (1817) ;  "  Two  Memo


rials  in  Behalf  of  the  Working  Classes"  (1818);
'•  Discourses  on  a  New  System  of  Society,  with  an
Account  of  the  Society  of  New  Lanark "  (Pitts-
burg,  1825) ;  "  The  Debate  on  the  Evidences  of
Christianity,  the  Social  System,  and  Scepticism,"
including  Mr.  Owen's  opening  speech  (2  vols..
Bethany,  1829) ;  "  Book  of  the  New  Moral  World  "
(London,  1836) :  "  The  Marriage  System  of  the  New
Moral  World  "  (Leeds.  1839) :  and '"  The  Revolution
in  the  Mind  and  Practice  of  the  Human  Race "
(London,  1849).  See  "  The  Life  of  Robert  Owen,
written  by  Himself"  (London.  1857-'8),  and  "Life
of  Robert  Owen,"  by  Frederick  A.  Packard  (Phila
delphia,  1866) ;  also  "  Robert  Owen  and  His  Social
Philosophy,"  by  William  L.  Sargent  (London,  1860).
— His  son,  Robert  Dale,  author,  b.  in  Glasgow,
Scotland,  9  Nov.,  1800 ;  d.  at  his  summer  residence
on  Lake  George,  N.  Y.,  17  June,  1877,  was  educated
under  private  tutors  at  home,  and  in  1820  was
sent  to  Emanuel
von  Fellenberg's
school  at  Hofwyl,
near  Berne,  Switz
erland,  where  he
remained  three
years.  In  1825  he
came  to  the  United
States  and  aided
his  father  in  his
efforts  to  found
the  colony  at  New
Harmony,  Ind.  On
the  failure  of  that
experiment  he  re
turned  to  Europe,
and  there  spent
some  time  in  study,
but  returned  to

this  country  in  1827  and  became  a  citizen.  In
November,  "1828,  he  began  in  New  York,  with
Frances  Wright,  the  publication  of  "  The  Free
Inquirer,"  a  weekly  paper,  devoted  to  the  promul
gation  of  pronounced  socialistic  ideas  and  the
denial  of  the  supernatural  origin  of  Christianity.
This  journal  was  continued  until  1832,  when  he
returned  to  New  Harmony.  He  was  elected  to
the  legislature  of  Indiana"  in  1835,  and  sat  for
three  terms,  during  which,  largely  owing  to  his
influence,  one  half  of  that  part  of  the  surplus  rev
enue  of  the  United  States  that  had  been  appro
priated  to  the  state  of  Indiana  was  devoted  to  the
support  of  public  schools.  He  was  sent  to  congress
as  a  Democrat  in  1843,  and  served  twice,  but  was
defeated  for  a  third  term.  Mr.  Owen,  in  January,
1844,  introduced  in  congress  a  joint  resolution  rela
tive  to  the  occupation  of  Oregon,  which,  though
it  failed  at  that  session,  passed  daring  the  next,
and  became  the  basis  of  the  settlement  of  the  north
western  boundary  that  was  effected  in  1846.  He
also  introduced  in  December,  1845,  the  bill  under
which  the  Smithsonian  institution  was  organized,
and  was  made  chairman  of  the  select  committee  on
that  subject,  having  as  a  colleague  John  Quincy
Adams,  who  had  made  two  unsuccessful  attempts
in  former  sessions  to  procure  action  in  the  matter.
He  was  afterward  appointed  one  of  the  regents  of
the  Smithsonian,  as  well  as  chairman  of  its  build
ing  committee.  His  speeches  in  congress  on  the
Oregon  question,  the  tariff,  and  the  annexation  of
Texas  had  a  wide  circulation.  In  1850  he  was
chosen  a  member  of  the  convention  that  assembled
to  remodel  the  constitution  of  Indiana,  and  was
made  chairman  of  its  committee  on  rights  and
privileges,  and  then  chairman  of  its  revision  com
mittee.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in


616


OWEN


OWEN


1851,  was  again  made  chairman  of  the  committee
on  revision,  and  was  the  author  of  a  bill  that  se
cured  to  widows  and  married  women  independent
rights  of  property.  On  the  enactment  of  this
measure,  the  women  of  Indiana  presented  him  with
a  testimonial  ''in  acknowledgment  of  his  true  and
noble  advocacy  of  their  independent  rights."  In
1853  he  was  appointed  charge  d'affaires  at
Naples,  and  he  was  raised  to  the  grade  of  minister
in  1855,  remaining  as  such  until  1858,  in  the  mean
while  negotiating  two  valuable  treaties  with  the
Neapolitan  government.  After  his  return  to  the
United  States  he  devoted  himself  to  various  pub
lic  interests,  and  in  1800  he  discussed  with  Horace
Greeley,  in  the  columns  of  the  New  York  "  Trib
une,"  the  subject  of  divorce.  This  discussion,  re
printed  in  pamphlet-form,  had  a  circulation  of
00,000  copies.  In  1862  he  served  on  a  commission
relative  to  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores,  and
audited  claims  that  amounted  to  $49,500,000,  and
in  1803  he  was  chairman  of  a  commission  that  was
appointed  by  the  secretary  of  war  to  examine  the
condition  of  the  recently  emancipated  freedmen  of
the  United  States.  The  results  of  his  observations
were  published  as  "The  Wrong  of  Slavery,  the
Right  of  Emancipation,  and  the  Future  of  the
African  Race  in  the  United  States"  (Philadelphia,
1864).  In  1863  he  published  an  address  to  the
citizens  of  Indiana,  showing  the  disastrous  conse
quence  that  would  follow  from  the  success  of  the
effort  of  certain  politicians  to  reconstruct  the
Union  with  New  England  left  out.  The  Union
league  of  New  York  published  50,000  copies  of  this
letter,  and  the  Union  league  of  Philadelphia  an
additional  25,000.  During  the  civil  war  he  further
wrote  and  published  a  letter  to  the  president,  one
to  the  secretary  of  war,  one  to  the  secretary  of  the
treasury,  and  another  to  the  secretary  of  state,  ad
vocating  the  policy  of  emancipation  as  a  measure
that  was  sanctioned  alike  by  the  laws  of  war  and
by  the  dictates  of  humanity.  Sec.  Chase  wrote  that
his  letter  to  Lincoln  "had  more  effect  in  deciding
the  president  to  make  his  proclamation  than  all
the  other  communications  combined."  Mr.  Owen
was  a  believer  in  spiritualism,  and  was  one  of  its
foremost  advocates  in  the  United  States.  In  1872
he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the  Univer
sity  of  Indiana.  He  published  "  Outlines  of  the
System  of  Education  at  New  Lanark  "  (Glasgow,
1824);  "Moral  Physiology"  (New  York,  1831);
"  Popular  Tracts  "  (i831) ;  "  Discussion  with  Origen
Bachelor  on  the  Personality  of  God  and  the  Au
thority  of  the  Bible"  (1832);  "  Pocahontas :  A
Drama"  (1837);  "Hints  on  Public  Architecture"
(1849):  "A  Treatise  on  the  Construction  of  Plank-
Roads"  (1856);  "Footprints  on  the  Boundary  of
Another  World"  (Philadelphia,  1859);  "Beyond
the  Breakers  "  (1870) ;  "  Debatable  Land  Between
this  World  and  the  Next "  (New  York,  1872) ;  and
"  Threading  My  Way,"  an  autobiography  (1874). —
Another  son,  David  Dale,  geologist,  b.  in  Lanark
shire,  Scotland,  24  June,  1807:  d.  in  New  Har
mony,  Ind.,  13  Nov.,  1860,  followed  his  elder
brother  to  Hofwyl,  and  then  studied  science  under
Dr.  Andrew  Ure  at  the  Andersonian  institution  in
Glasgow.  In  1828  he  went  with  his  father  to
New  Harmony,  Ind.,  but  he  subsequently  went
back  to  Europe,  and  spent  two  years  in  acquiring
a  knowledge  of  geology  and  natural  history.  He
returned  to  New  Harmony  in  1833,  and  was  gradu
ated  in  1835  at  Ohio  medical  college.  In  1837  the
legislature  of  Indiana  employed  him  to  conduct  a
geological  reconnoissance  of  'that  state,  the  results
of  which  are  given  in  his  "  Report  of  a  Geological
Reconnoissance  in  1837  "  (Indianapolis,  1838).  He


was  appointed  geologist  in  1839  by  the  U.  S.  gov
ernment,  under  instructions  from  the  general  land
office  to  make  a  minute  examination  of  the  mineral
lands  of  Iowa,  which  was  one  of  the  very  first  geo
logical  investigations  that  were  conducted  under
the  authority  of  the  National  government.  His
results  appeared  as  a  "  Report  of  a  Geological  Ex
ploration  of  a  Part  of  Iowa,  Wisconsin,  and  Illinois,
made  under  Instructions  from  the  Secretary  of  the
Treasury  in  1839,"  with  charts  and  illustrations
(Washington,  1844).  In  1849  the  National  govern
ment  employed  him  to  conduct  the  survey  of
Minnesota  territory,  and  appropriated  $40,000  for
that  purpose.  He  continued  engaged  in  this  work
for  three  years,  and  made  a  "  Report  of  a  Geologi
cal  Exploration  of  a  Part  of  Iowa,  Wisconsin,  and
Minnesota,  and.  Incidentally,  a  Portion  of  Nebraska
Territory  "  (Philadelphia,  1852),  containing  numer
ous  plates,  notably  several  on  the  gigantic  mammal
remains  in  Nebraska.  From  1854  till  1857  he  was
state  geologist  of  Kentucky,  and  prepared  four
"  Reports  of  the  Geological  Survey  in  Kentucky,"
with  an  atlas  (Frankfort,  1856-'61).  He  then  ire-
came  state  geologist  of  Arkansas,  and  the  results
of  his  work  in  that  state  are  given  in  his  "  Report
of  a  Geological  Reconnoissance  of  the  Northern
Counties  of  Arkansas "  (Little  Rock,  1858)  and
his  "  Report  of  the  Middle  and  Southern  Counties  "
(Philadelphia,  1860).  He  completed,  this  work  in
1859,  and  then  received  the  appointment  of  state
geologist  of  Indiana,  which  office  he  held  until  his
death,  when  its  completion  was  intrusted  to  his
brother  Richard  (q.  v.),  who  published  "  Report  of
a  Geological  Reconnoissance  of  Indiana"  (Indian
apolis,  1862).  Dr.  Owen's  extensive  scientific  knowl
edge  proved  of  assistance  to  him  in  the  accom
plishment  of  his  geological  work,  for  as  a  chemist
he  made  analyses  of  minerals  and  of  waters  that
are  included  in  his  reports;  as  a  naturalist  he  de
scribed  fossils  new  to  science  that  were  discovered
in  the  Bad  Lands  of  Nebraska;  and  as  an  artist  he
made  sketches  of  scenery,  diagrams,  sections  of
rock  strata,  and  maps,  which  were  engraved  to  ac
company  his  works.  His  museum  and  laboratory
were  regarded  as  among  the  best  in  the  United
States,  and  his  collection  of  specimens  was  sold  for
$20,000  to  Indiana  state  university. — Another  son,
Richard,  geologist,  b.  in  Lanarkshire,  Scotland,
6  Jan.,  1810,  received  his  early  education  in  the
Lanark  grammar-school,  after  which  he  studied  at
Hofwyl,  and  then  in  the  Andersonian  institute  of
Glasgow.  In  1828  he  came  to  New  Harmony,  Ind.,
and  began  to  teach,  but  soon  removed  to  Cincin
nati,  engaging  in  business.  Subsequently  he  re
turned  to  New  Harmony,  where  he  owned  a  steam
flour-mill,  and  also  managed  a  stock-farm.  In
1847  he  went  to  the  Mexican  war  as  captain  in  the
16th  U.  S.  infantry,  and  served  principally  under
Gen.  Zachary  Taylor  in  charge  of  provision-trains.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  aided  his  brother,  David
Dale  Owen,  in  making  preparations  for  the  geologi
cal  survey  of  Minnesota,  and  in  1849,  under  whose
direction  he  explored  the  north  shore  of  Lake  Su
perior.  In  1849  he  also  became  professor  of  natural
sciences  in  the  WTestern  military  institute  of  Ken
tucky,  and  he  continued  to  hold  that  chair,  after
the  institute  became  the  University  of  Nashville,
until  1858,  in  which  year  he  was  given  the  degree
of  M.  D.  by  Nashville  medical  college.  He  then
became  assistant  state  geologist  of  Indiana,  and
made  a  survey  of  the  state.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  loth  Indiana  volunteers,  and  he  became,  in
the  autumn  of  1861,  colonel  of  the  60th  Indiana.
Dr.  Owen  was  taken  prisoner  at  Mumfordsville,


OWENS


OXLEY


617


but  was  soon  exchanged,  after  which  he  served
under  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman,  was  at  the  cap
ture  of  Arkansas  Post  and  Vicksburg,  also  at  the
taking  of  Jackson,  Miss.,  and  in  1864  was  with
Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks  in  the  Red  river  expedi
tion.  In  1864  he  accepted  the  chair  of  natural
sciences  in  the  University  of  Indiana,  where  he  re
mained  until  the  close  of  the  session  of  1879.
Prof.  Owen's  scientific  work  has  been  chiefly  in  the
domain  of  geology.  He  has  contributed  largely  to
the  knowledge  of  that  science,  specially  as  relating
to  Indiana,  Minnesota,  New  Mexico,  Arizona,  and
North  Carolina.  Since  his  retirement  from  collegi
ate  work  he  has  devoted  much  attention  to  the
subject  of  meteorology  and  its  connection  with
terrestrial  magnetism,  publishing  numerous  papers
on  that  subject  and  on  seismology.  In  1871  he  re
ceived  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Wabash  college,
and  he  is  an  honorary  member  of  the  New  Orleans
and  of  the  St.  Louis  academies  of  sciences,  a  fellow
of  the  American  association  for  the  advancement
of  science,  and  a  member  of  other  scientific  organi
zations.  Besides  his  official  geological  reports  and
scientific  memoirs,  he  is  the  author  of  a  "  Key  to
the  Geology  of  the  Globe"  (Nashville,  1857).

OWENS,  John  Edward,  actor,  b.  in  Liverpool,
England,  4  May,  1824  ;  d.  near  Towson,  Baltimore
co.,  Md.,  6  Dec.,  1886. His  father,  a  shoemaker,
emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1834,  and  settled
in  Philadelphia. After  attending  private  school  in
that  city  for  a  few  years,  the  son  became  a  clerk  in
a  wholesale  drug-store,  and  while  holding  that  post
made  his  first  appearance  on  the  stage  at  the  old
National  theatre,  Philadelphia,  under  the  manage
ment  of William  E.  Burton. From  small  parts
and  no  pay  he  rose  rapidly  to  a  recognized  position
and  regular  salary. He  remained  in  Burton's  com-
ptiny  until  1843,  when  he  quarrelled  with  his  patron  [
and  went  to  Baltimore,  where  he  acted  at  the  Holli-
day  street  theatre. The  next  year  he  accepted  an  !
engagement  at  Peale's  museum  in  Baltimore,  where  ,
he  remained  until  1847,  when,  meeting  Burton,  he  j
became  reconciled  to  him. Frank  S.  Chanfrau  was  >
then  playing  Mose  in  "  A  Glance  at  New  York,"  j
which  was  a  great  success. Burton  had  the  play
adapted  to  suit  Philadelphia,  and  Owens  acted  the
part  of  Jakey.  corresponding  to  Chanfrau's  Mose.  j
The  piece  had  a  long  run,  during  which  Burton
made  his  first  and  Owens  laid  the  foundation  of  i
his  future  fortune  from  his  salary  of  $300  a  week,  j
The same play  was  acted in Baltimore,  Owens  j
being  the  chief  attraction  as  Jakey. In  1849  he  ;
became  one  of  the  proprietors  of  the  Baltimore
museum. In  1853  he  sold  this  interest  and  opened
the  Charles  street  theatre  with  "  Uncle  Tom's  Cab-  j
in,"  playing  the  title  role. In  1858  he  became  mana
ger  of  tho  Varieties,  in  New  Orleans,  and  continued  \
there  until  the  civil  war,  when  he  returned  to  Balti-  |
more. As  Solon  Shingle,  which  was  first  played
by  him  in  1864,  he  achieved  his  greatest  success.  !
It  was  played  in  almost  every  city  in  the  United
States  and  in  many  English  cities. Other  favorite
parts  were  Dr.  Oilapod,  Caleb  Plummer,  Aminadab
Sleek,  and  Dr.  Pangloss.  He  was  also  a  very  clever  j
burlesque  artist. "  The  Live  Indian  "  was  written  i
for  him.  and  proved  a  great  success. In  1880  he
went  to  California  to  play,  and.  engaging  in  mining
speculations,  lost  most  of  his  fortune. In  1882  he
accepted  an  engagement  of  §300  a  week  with  the
Madison  square  company,  and  played  in  "  Esmer-
alda  "  in  many  of  the  larger  American  cities. At
the  time  of  his  death he  was  the  owner  of  the
Academy  of  music,  Charleston,  S.  C. During  the
last  three  or  four  years  of  his  life  his  declining
health  prevented  him  from  appearing  on  the  stage.


OWSLEY,  William,  jurist,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1782;  d.  in  Danville,  Ky.,  in  December,  1862.  In
1783  he  removed  with  his  father  to  Lincoln  county,
Ky.,  and  he  afterward  became  a  teacher  and  lawyer
in  Garrard  county,  and  represented  it  several  years
in  the  legislature.  He  was  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  Kentucky  from  1812  till  1828.  when  he
resigned.  In  1824  he  maintained  with  great  cour
age  the  principle  of  anti-repudiation,  which  Henry
Clay  had  eloquently  advocated.  The  repudiation
party,  who  were  a  majority  in  the  legislature,  at
tempted  to  get  rid  of  the  judge  by  abolishing  the
supreme  court  and  establishing  a  new  one,  but  he
held  his  post,  and  the  act  of  the  legislature  was
declared  unconstitutional  by  the  supreme  court  of
the  United  States.  In  1844  he  was  elected  gover
nor  of  the  state  by  the  Whigs,  serving  two  terms.

OXENBRIDGE,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Daven-
try,  Northamptonshire,  England,  30  Jan.,  1609;  d.
in  Boston.  Mass.,  28  Dec.,  1674.  He  was  educated
at  Oxford  and  Cambridge,  and  was  graduated  at
the  latter  university  in  1631.  He  entered  the  min
istry  in  1633,  and  soon  afterward  went  to  Bermuda,
where  he  took  charge  of  a  church.  He  returned  to
England  about  1641,  and  in  1644  was  ordained
pastor  of  a  church  at  Beverley,  and  chosen  a  fellow
of  Eton  college.  He  afterward  took  charge  of  a
church  at  Berwick-on-Tweed,  where  he  was  ejected
from  his  living  in  1662  for  non-conformity.  Then
he  went  to  Surinam,  and  remained  there  till  1667,
when  he  removed  to  Barbadoes,  and  in  1669  came
to  New  England.  On  10  April,  1670,  Mr.  Oxen-
bridge  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  first  church,
"Boston,  as  colleague  with  the  Rev.  James  Allen.
While  preaching  in  the  church  on  23  Dec.,  1674,  he
had  a  fatal  attack  of  apoplexy.  He  was  a  popular
preacher,  and  published,  "  The  Duty  of  Watchful
ness  "  (1661) ;  "  Election  Sermon  "  (1671) ;  "  Season
able  Seeking  of  God  "  ;  and  "  Proposition  for  propa
gating  the  Gospel  by  Christian  Colonies  in  Guiana."

OXENDEN,  Asliton,  Canadian  Anglican  bishop,
b.  at  Broome  park,  near  Canterbury,  England,  in
1808.  He  was  graduated  at  University  college,
Oxford,  in  1831,  was  ordained  priest  in  1834,  and
from  1848  till  1869  was  rector  of  Pluckley-with-
Pivington.  in  Kent.  In  1864  he  became  honorary
canon  of  Canterbury  cathedral,  and  in  1869  he  was
consecrated  bishop  of  Montreal,  and  was  metro
politan  and  primate  of  all  Canada.  In  April,  1878,
he  resigned  and  returned  to  England,  and  in  May,
1879.  was  appointed  vicar  of  St.  Stephen,  near
Canterbury.  Among  other  works  he  has  written
"Plain  History  of  the  Christian  Church"  (London,
1847) :  "  Barbara  Tracts  "  (1859) ;  "  Baptism  and
the  Lord's  Supper  Simply  Explained  "  (1861) ;  "  Our
Church  and  Pier  Services"  (Boston,  1866);  "De
cision  "  (London,  1868) :  "  Parables  of  our  Lord "
(1869) ;  and  "  Portraits  from  the  Bible  "  (1871).

OXLEY,  James  Macdonald,  Canadian  author,
b.  in  Halifax,  N.  S.,  22  Oct.,  1855.  He  was  edu
cated  at  Halifax  grammar-school,  and  graduated  at
Dalhousie  university  in  1874,  studied  law  at  Har
vard  in  1876-7.  and"  in  1879  obtained  the  degree  of
LL.  B.  from  the  University  of  Halifax.  He  was
admitted  to  the  bar  of  Nova  Scotia  in  1878.  and
practised  in  Halifax  from  1879  till  1883.  He  acted
as  an  official  reporter  in  the  house  of  assembly  in
1881-?3,  and  in  the  latter  year  became  attached  to
the  Dominion  department  of  marine  and  fisheries.
Mr.  Oxley  has  written  extensively  for  magazines
and  periodicals  in  the  United  States  and  Canada.
He  was  joint  editor  of  a  series  of  "  Nova  Scotia  De
cisions  "  (Halifax,  1880-'3) ;  editor  of  Young's  "  Ad
miralty  Decisions"  (Toronto,  1882);  and  has  trans
lated  Eugene  Sue's  "  L'Orgueil "  (New  York,  1883).


618


PACA


PACKARD


PACA,  William,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  b.  in  Wyehall,  Harford  co.,  Md.,  31
Oct.,  1749  ;  d.  there  in  1799.  He  was  the  descend
ant  of  a  wealthy  planter  on  the  east  shore  of  Mary
land,  in  which  state  the
family  had  resided  for
several  generations.  He
was  graduated  at  Phila
delphia  college  in  1759,
entered  the  Middle  Tem
ple,  London,  as  a  student,
14  Jan.,  1762,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in
1704.  He  opposed  the
operation  of  the  stamp-
act  in  1765,  and  every
succeeding  measure  of  the
British  government  that
asserted  its  right  to  tax
the  colonies  without  their
consent.  He  was  a  mem-
ber  of  the  state  legisla-
ture  from  1771  to  1774,
and  was  active  in  his  op
position  to  the  royal  government.  He  was  a  member
of  the  committee  of  correspondence  in  1774,  a  dele
gate  to  congress  in  1774-'9,  and  signed  the  Declara
tion  of  independence.  During  the  earlier  part  of  Mr.
Paca's  congressional  career  he  was  embarrassed  by
the  opposition  of  his  constituents  to  a  separation
from  Great  Britain,  and  it  was  not  till  June,  1776,
that  the  Maryland  convention  withdrew  their  re
strictions  upon  the  votes  of  their  delegates  in  con
gress.  On  the  adoption  of  the  constitution  of  Mary
land  he  was  made  state  senator,  and  served  in
1777-'9.  He  was  chief  judge  of  the  superior  court  of
that  state  from  1778  till  1780,  and  then  became  chief
judge  of  the  court  of  appeals  in  prize  and  admiralty
cases,  which  place  he  retained  for  two  years.  He  was
governor  of  Maryland  in  1782-'6,  a  delegate  to  the
state  convention'that  ratified  the  U.  S.  constitution
in  1788,  and  was  U.  S.  district  judge  (to  which
office  he  had  been  nominated  by  President  Wash
ington)  from  1789  till  his  death.  He  contributed
from  his  private  wealth  to  the  patriot  cause,  and
served  upon  many  important  local  committees.  His
first  wife  was  a  daughter  of  Samuel  Chew.

PACHECO  Y  OSORIO,  Rodrigo  (pah-tchay  -
co),  Marquis  of  Cerralvo,  viceroy  of  Mexico,  b.  in
Spain  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  i6th  century ;  d.  in
Valladolid  about  1650.  When  the  court  at  Madrid
received  notice  of  the  deposition  by  a  popular
rising,  on  15  Jan.,  1624,  of  the  viceroy,  the  Marquis
de  Golves,  Pacheco,  possessing  the  full  confidence
of  King  Philip  IV.  and  his  ministers,  on  account
of  his  energy,  was  sent  out  in  haste,  and  took
charge  of  the  government,  3  Nov.,  1624.  He  soon
gained  the  affection  of  the  Mexicans  by  his  mod
eration  and  humanity,  and  took  measures  to  protect
Acapulco  against  the  repeated  attacks  by  Dutch
fleets  under  Prince  Nassau  and  Admiral  Spilberg.
In  1627  the  city  of  Mexico  suffered  a  partial  inun
dation,  and  measures  were  taken  to  repair  the  dikes,
but  they  were  soon  neglected,  and  in  1629  the  river
Aculhuacan  burst  them,  and  the  lagoons  rose,  so
that  for  more  than  a  year  there  was  nearly  six  feet
of  water  in  the  streets,  and  nearly  30,000  natives

Eerished. It  was  resolved  to  move  the  city  to  the
ills  of  Tacubaya,  but,  on  account  of  the  expense,
the  project  was  abandoned,  and  in  1630  the  pro
posal  of  Enrique  Martinez  (q.  v.)  was  accepted,  and


the  drainage-canal  of  Huehuetoca  was  begun.  In
1628  the  treasure  fleet  of  thirty-one  vessels,  carry
ing  $12,000.000  to  Spain,  was  captured  by  the
Dutch  admiral,  Piet  Hein  (q.  v.).  In  1635.  as  the
Indians  near  the  Rio  Grande  became  troublesome
again,  the  viceroy  ordered  a  fort  to  be  constructed
in  the  province  of  New  Leon,  which  was  named
Cerralvo,  after  him,  and  is  now  a  thriving  town.
Pacheco  had  repeatedly  resigned  on  account  of  his
health,  and  in  September,  1635,  he  was  relieved  by
the  Marquis  de  Cadereita,  and  soon  afterward  re
turned  with  great  riches  to  Spain.

PACKARD,  Frederick  Adolphus,  author,  b.
in  Marlborough,  Mass.,  25  Sept.,  1794;  d.  in  Phila
delphia,  11  Nov.,  1867.  His  father,  the  Rev.  Asa
Packard,  a  descendant  of  Samuel  Packard,  one  of
the  founders  of  Bridgewater,  Me.,  was  for  many
years  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  in  Marl-
borough.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1814,  studied  law  at  Northampton,  Mass.,  and
practised  at  Springfield,  in  that  state,  from  1817
till  1829.  He  edited  the  "  Hampden  Federalist  •'
in  Springfield  for  ten  years,  and  was  a  member
of  the  legislature  in  1828-'9.  In  1829  he  removed
to  Philadelphia,  and  from  that  time  till  his  death
he  edited  the  publications  of  the  American  Sunday-
school  union,  2,000  in  number,  more  than  forty  of
which  he  wrote  or  compiled.  In  July.  1849,  he
was  elected  president  of  Girard  college,  but  declined.
He  edited  the  "  Sundav-School  Magazine,"  the
'•  Sunday-School  Journal,''  and  the  "  Youth's  Penny
Gazette,"  afterward  known  as  the  "  Child's  World."
and  projected  the  first  child's  paper  in  the  United
States.  He  prepared  the  society's  annual  re
ports,  and  published  occasional  tracts  and  articles
on  Sunday-school,  educational,  and  other  subjects.
He  edited  eleven  volumes  of  the  "  Philadelphia
Journal  of  Prison  Discipline,"  and  contributed
largely  to  periodicals.  Among  his  publications
are  "  Union  Bible  Dictionary  "  (Philadelphia,  1837) ;
li  The  Teacher  Taught "  (1839) :  "  Visit  to  European
Hospitals  "  (1840) ;  "  Separation  of  Convicts  "  (1849) ;
"The  Relations  of  Religion  to  what  are  called  Dis
eases  of  the  Mind  "  (1850) :  "  The  Teacher  Teach
ing  "  (1851) ;  "  The  Rock  "  (1861) :  "  The  Only  Alter
native  "  (1866) ;  "  Life  of  Robert  Owen  "  (1866) ;  and
"  Daily  Public  School  of  the  United  States  "  (1866).
He  was  singularly  unobtrusive  in  his  manners,
and  never  permitted  his  name  to  appear  with  his
writings. — His  son,  John  Hooker,  surgeon,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  15  Aug.,  1832.  He  was  educated
at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  where  he  was
graduated  in  arts  in  1850,  and  in  medicine  in  1853.
He  was  surgeon  during  the  civil  war  to  the  Chris
tian  street  and  Satterlee  U.  S.  army  hospitals,  con
sulting  surgeon  to  the  hpspitals  at  Beverly,  N.  J.,
and  Haddington,  Pa.,  surgeon  to  the  Episcopal
hospital  at  Philadelphia  in  1863-'84,  and  has  held
a  similar  office  in  the  Pennsylvania  hospital  since
1884.  He  was  secretary  of  the  College  of  physicians
from  1862  till  1877,  of  which  body  he  was  chosen
vice-president  in  1886,  and  is  a  member  of  other
learned  bodies.  He  translated  "  Malgaigne  on
Fractures  "  (Philadelphia,  1859) ;  published  "  Phila
delphia  Medical  Directory  "  (1868,  1871.  and  1873);
and  is  the  author  of  "  Manual  of  Minor  Surgery  "
(1863) ;  "  Lectures  on  Inflammation  "  (1865) ; "  Hand
book  of  Operative  Surgery  "  (1870) ;  and  "  Sea-Air
and  Sea-Bathing"  (1881).  He  has  contributed
largely  on  medical  subjects  to  various  medical
journals,  to  the  "  Transactions  of  the  Pennsylvania


PACKARD


PACKARD


619


State  Medical  Society."  and  to  the  "  Pennsylvania
Hospital  Reports."  A  paper  on  "  Some  of  the  Sur
geons  of  the  Last  Century,"  read  before  the  On
tario  medical  association,  is  printed  in  the  "  Cana
dian  Practitioner  "  (February,  1888). — Another
son,  Lewis  Richard,  educator,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  22  Aug.,  1836 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  26
Oct.,  1884,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1854,  travelled
in  Europe,  and  pursued  an  extended  course  of  study
at  the  L  niversity  of  Berlin,  where  he  received  the
degree  of  Ph.  I)."  On  his  return  to  the  United  States
he  studied  theology,  and  in  1863  became  assistant
professor  of  the  Greek  language  and  literature  in
Yale  college,  and  in  18(56  professor.  In  1883  he  was
at  Athens,  Greece,  in  charge  of  the  archaeological
school  that  has  been  established  there  by  the  Ameri
can  colleges.  He  wrote  for  periodicals  and  reviews,
and,  as  a  memorial  of  him,  seven  of  his  essays  and
lectures  were  collected  and  published  under  the
title  of  "  Studies  in  Greek  Thought "  (Boston.  1886).
PACKARD.  Hezekiah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Xorth
Bridgewater,  Mass.,  6  Dec.,  1761 ;  d.  in  Salem,
Mass..  22  April,  1849.  He  served  in  the  Revolu
tionary  wftr,  became  a  farmer,  and  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1787.  He  was  principal  of  the
grammar-school  in  Cambridge  in  1788,  was  assist
ant  librarian  in  the  college  in  1789,  and  mathe
matical  tutor  there  in  1789-'93.  In  October,  1793,
he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Unitarian  church  in
Chelmsford.  Mass.,  where  he  remained  till  1802.
He  was  subsequently  minister  at  Wise-asset,  Me.,
in  1802-'30,  and  at  "Middlesex  Village,  Mass.,  in
1830-'6.  He  originated  the  Bible  society  of  Lincoln
county,  Me.,  the  Eastern  evangelical  society,  which
existed  for  a  few  years,  and  was  a  member  of  the
board  of  trustees  and  overseers  of  Bowdoin  college
for  more  than  twenty  years.  He  published  "The
Christian's  Manual "  (1801)  and  numerous  sermons,
including  two  on  '•  Federal  Republicanism  "  (1799)
and  two  on  "Infant  Baptism"  (1815). — His  son,
Alpheus  Spring,  educator,  b.  in  Chelmsford,
Mass.,  23  Dec.,  1798 ;  d.  on  Squirrel  island,  Me.,  13
July,  1884,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1816,
second  in  his  class,  and  subsequently  taught  in
Gorham  and  Hallowell  until  1819,  when  he  re
turned  to  Bowdoin  as  tutor.  In  1824  he  was
elected  to  the  chair  of  Latin  and  Greek,  which  he
then  filled  until  1865,  holding  also  in  1842-'5  that
of  rhetoric  and  oratory.  He  was  appointed  to  the
professorship  of  natural  and  revealed  religion  in
1864,  and  held  that  chair  until  his  death,  becoming
also  in  1883  acting  president  of  the  college.  His
college  career  of  sixty-five  years  was  longer  than
that  of  almost  any  other  college  officer  in  this
country.  Prof.  Packard  was  ordained  on  16  May,
1850.  as  a  Congregational  clergyman,  and  during
the  later  years  of  his  life  was  college  chaplain.  He
was  appointed  librarian  of  Bowdoin  in  1869,  and
held  that  office  during  the  remainder  of  his  life.
He  was  an  early  member  of  the  Maine  historical
society,  and  for  forty-eight  years  its  librarian  and
cabinet-keeper,  and  he  held  honorary  membership
in  the  historical  societies  of  London  and  New  York,
and  was  a  member  of  the  American  academy  of
arts  and  sciences.  In  1869  Bowdoin  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  His  many  writings  include
contributions  to  the  "  North  American  Review,"
the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra,"  and  to  the  "Collections
of  the  Maine  Historical  Society,"  and  in  book-
form  "Works  of  Rev.  Jesse  Appleton,  with  a  Me
moir  "  (2  vols.,  Andover,  1836-'7),  and  "  Xeno-
phon's  Memorabilia  of  Socrates,  with  English
.Notes  "  (1839).  He  edited  "  History  of  Bowdoin,
with  Biographical  Sketches  "  (Boston,  1882).  See
"  Memorial :  Alpheus  Spring  Packard,"  by  George


T.  Little  (Brunswick,  Me.,  1886).— Another  son,
Joseph,  educator,  b.  in  Wiscasset,  Me.,  23  Dec.,
1812,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1831.  and  stud
ied  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1833-'4.
He  was  professor  in  Bristol  college,  Pa.,  in  1835-'6,
took  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in
1836-'7.  and  since  1836  has  been  professor  of  bibli
cal  learning  in  the  Episcopal  theological  seminary
of  Virginia,  near  Alexandria,  of  which  he  has  been
dean  since  1876.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  con
ferred  on  him  by  Kenyon  college,  Gambier,  Ohio,
in  1847.  He  wrote  the  commentary  on  Malachi
that  appeared  in  the  American  edition  of  Lange's
commentaries  (New  York.  1874).  and  was  one  of  the
American  revisers  of  the  Old  Testament  in  1870-'85.
He  has  contributed  articles  to  the  Andover  "  Bib
lical  Repository,"  and  has  published  occasional
sermons  and  addresses,  including  "  Questions  on
the  Gospels"  (1855). — Alpheus  Spring's  son,  Al
pheus  Spring1,  naturalist,  b.  in  Brunswick,  Me.,
19  Feb.,  1839,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1861
and  at  Maine  medical  school  in  1864.  Mean
while  he  was  volunteer  assistant  in  1861-'2  on
the  Maine  geological  survey,  also  studying  natu
ral  history  for  three  years  under  Louis  Agassiz  in
Cambridge,  part  of  which  time  he  was  Agassiz's
assistant.  In  October.  1864,  he  was  commissioned
assistant  surgeon  of  the  1st  Maine  veteran  vol
unteers,  and  he  served  with  the  6th  corps  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac  until  July,  1865.  During
1865  he  was  acting  custodian  and  librarian  of  the
Boston  society  of  natural  history,  after  which  he
joined  Alphe'us  Hyatt.  Edward  S.  Morse,  and
Frederick  W.  Putnam  in  the  establishment  of  the
Peabody  academy  of  science  in  Salem,  of  which  he
was  one  of  the  curators  in  1868-'76,  also  serving  as
director  of  its  museum  in  1877-'8.  In  the  winter
of  1869-'70  he  made  zoological  collections  on  the
Florida  reefs  and  at  Beaufort,  N.  C.,  and  in  1871  at
Charleston,  S.  C.,  and  he  was  state  entomologist  of
Massachusetts  in  1871-'3.  Prof.  Packard  was  one
of  the  instructors  in  the  Agassiz  science  school
at  Penikese  in  1873-?4,  and  was  connected  with
the  U.  S.  geological  and  geographical  survey  of
the  territories  under  Ferdinand  V.  Hayden  in
1875-V7.  Meanwhile  he  delivered  lectures  on  en
tomology  at  Massachusetts  agricultural  college
in  1869-'77,  at  Maine  state  agricultural  college
in  1871,  at  Bowdoin  in  1873,  and  on  comparative
anatomy  at  Bowdoin  in  1876,  and  he  was  con
nected  with  the  U.  S.  fish  commission  in  1871-'4.
In  1878  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  zoology  and
geology  in  Brown  university,  which  he  has  since
filled.  He  was  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  entomologi
cal  commission  during  its  existence  in  1877-'82,
making  for  it  in  1877-'80  extensive  tours  in  the
western  and  Pacific  states  and  the  territories.  His
scientific  work  has  been  principally  in  the  direction
of  entomology.  In  1863  he  proposed  a  new  classi
fication  of  insects,  which  has  since  been  generally
adopted  both  in  Europe  and  in  this  country.  He
discovered  the  morphology  and  mode  of  develop
ment  of  the  ovipositor  and  sting  of  insects,  the
nature  of  the  trachea?  of  insects,  and  has  studied
their  external  anatomy.  His  contributions  to  the
natural  history  of  the  limulus,  including  the  devel
opment  and  anatomy  of  the  brain  and  nervous  sys
tem,  is  considered  of  great  value.  In  paleontology
he  has  collected  and  described  the  post-pliocene
fossils  of  Maine  and  Labrador,  and  the  merostomata
and  Crustacea  of  the  carboniferous  formations  of
Illinois  and  Pennsylvania:  and  shown  the  close  re
lationship  of  the  trilobites  to  limulus.  Prof.  Pack
ard's  writings  have  contributed  to  the  extension  of
'  the  evolution  theory,  and  he  advocates  a  modern


620


PACKARD


PACKER


form  of  Lamarckianism,  to  which  he  gives  the  term
of  neo-Larnarckianism.  In  studying  this  subject  he
has  made  observations  on  variations  in  insects  in
duced  by  climate,  on  salt-water  animals,  and  on
cave  or  blind  animals.  Prof.  Packard  is  a  member
of  many  scientific  societies  in  the  United  States  and
Europe",  and  in  1872  was  elected  to  membership  in
the  National  academy  of  sciences.  He  was  one  of
the  founders  of  the  "  American  Naturalist "  and  its
editor-in-chief  until  1886.  His  bibliography  in
cludes  upward  of  400  titles.  His  larger  scientific
memoirs  include  "  Glacial  Phenomena  of  Maine
and  Labrador "  (1866) ;  '•  Revision  of  the  Fosso-
rial  Hymenoptera  of  North  America "  (1866-'7) ;
"Structure  of  the  Ovipositor  of  Insects"  (1868);
"Development  and  Anatomy  of  Limulus  Polyphe
mus  ''  (1871-'8o) :  "  Monograph  of  the  Geometrid
Moths  "  (1876) ;  "  The  Brain  of  the  Locust  "  (1881) :
"  Monograph  of  North  American  Phyllopod  Crus
tacea"  (1883);  and  "The  Cave  Fauna  of  North
America"  (1888).  His  popular  works  and  text
books  comprise  "  A  Guide  to  the  Study  of  Insects  "
(Salem,  1869) ;  ''  Record  of  American  Entomology  "
(1868-'72);  "The  Mammoth  Cave  and  its  Inhabi
tants,"  with  Frederick  W.  Putnam  (1872) ;  "  Our
Common  Insects"  (Boston,  1876);  "Life  Histories
of  Animals,  including  Man,  or  Outlines  of  Com
parative  Embryology  "  (New  York,  1876) ;  "  Half-
Hours  with  Insects  "  (Boston,  1877) ;  "  Insects  of
the  West"  (Washington,  1877;  London,  1878);
"  Zoology  for  Students  and  General  Readers "
(New  York,  1879;  briefer  course,  1883);  "First
Lessons  in  Geology  "  (Providence,  1882) ;  "  First
Lessons  in  Zoology "  (New  York,  1886) ;  "  Ento
mology  for  Beginners  "  (1888) ;  "  A  Naturalist  on
the  Labrador  Coast"  (1888);  and  "Forest  and
Shade -Tree  Insects"  (Washington,  1888).  See
"The  P^ntomological  Writings  of  Dr.  Alpheus
Spring  Packard,"  by  Samuel  Henshaw  (1887).

PACKARD,  Jasper,  soldier,  b.  in  Austintown,
Mahoning  co.,  Ohio,  1  Feb.,  1832.  He  removed
with  his  father  to  Indiana  in  1835  and  studied  at
Oberlin  college,  Ohio,  and  afterward  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Michigan,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1855.  He  then  engaged  in  teaching,  settled  at
Laporte,  edited  "  The  Union  "  there,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1861.  He  en
tered  the  National  army  as  a  private  at  the  begin
ning  of  the  civil  war,  served  as  lieutenant  during
the  Vicksburg  campaign,  being  wounded  during
the  assault  on  that  place,  received  two  promotions
during  the  Atlanta  campaign,  and  on  13  March,
1865,  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
for  meritorious  services.  He  was  mustered  out  of
service  in  1866,  was  auditor  of  Laporte  county  in
1866-'8.  and  a  member  of  congress  from  Indiana
from  4  March,  1869,  till  3  March,  1875.  He  was
U.  S.  internal  revenue  agent  from  January,  1876,
till  July,  1884.  He  established  the  "  Laporte
Chronicle  "  in  July,  1874,  and  published  it  for  four
years,  and  has  been  proprietor  and  editor  of  the
"  Laporte  Daily  Public  Spirit "  since  1886.

PACKARD",  Silas  Sadler,  educator,  b.  in
Cummington,  Mass.,  28  April,  1826.  He  was  edu
cated  at  Gran vi lie  academy,  Ohio,  and  afterward
taught  at  the  age  of  seventeen  years.  He  published
a  newspaper  in  western  New  York  in  1853-'6,
and  "  Packard's  Monthly "  in  New  York  city  in
1868-'70.  In  1858  he  established  a  business  college
in  New  York  city,  and  he  has  contributed  much
to  the  advancement  of  business  education  in  the
United  States.  He  is  the  author  of  "  The  Bryant
and  Stratton  Book-keeping  Series"  (New  York,
1859);  "Complete  Course  of  Business  Training"
(1867) ;"  Commercial  Arithmetic"  (1882);  and  "New


Manual of Book-keeping  and Correspondence"
(1883).

PACKER,  Asa,  capitalist,  b.  in  Groton,  Conn.,
20  Dec.,  1806;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17  May,
1879.  He  received  a  common-school  education,
and  began  to  learn  the  tanner's  trade,  but  in  1822
went  to  Susquehanna  county,  Pa.,  and  served  an
apprenticeship  with  a  relative  who  was  a  carpen
ter.  He  worked  at  his  trade  in  New  York  city,
but  soon  returned  to  Pennsylvania,  and  when  Ihe
Lehigh  Valley  canal  was  opened  established  his
home  at  Mauch  Chunk,  in  1823,  became  the  owner
and  master  of  a  boat  that  carried  coal  to  Philadel
phia,  and  acquired  an  interest  in  others,  but  in
1831  gave  up  boating  in  order  to  carry  on  a  store
and  boat-yard.  He  took  a  contract  for  locks,
which  he  completed  in  1837,  became  well  known  as
a  contractor,  and  in  1838  began  to  build  boats  at
Potts ville  for  the  transportation  of  coal  to  New
York  by  way  of  the  new  canal,  which  soon  attracted
all  the  traffic  that  had  before  passed  through  Phila
delphia.  He  became  extensively  engaged  in  the
mining  and  transportation  of  coal,  working  the
mines  of  the  Lehigh  coal  and  navigation  company,
and  purchasing  and  operating  new  mines  at  llazle-
ton.  In  1844  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature,  and
secured  the  creation  of  the  separate  county  of  Car
bon,  with  Mauch  Chunk  for  its  county-seat,  after
which  he  filled  for  five  years  the  post  of  county
judge.  He  projected  the  Lehigh  Valley  railroad,
secured  the  necessary  subscriptions,  and  by  1855
had  the  line  completed  from  Mauch  Chunk  to
Easton,  with  branches  to  Hazleton  and  Mahanoy.
Subsequently  he  procured  its  extension  northward,
to  connect  with  the
Erie  railroad,  thus
opening  up  the  an
thracite  region.  Mr.
Packer  was  presi
dent  of  the  com
pany,  and,  though
financially  embar
rassed  before  the
completion  of  the
line,  shared  largely
in  the  profits  of  the
mining  and  trans
portation  business
that  was  developed,
and  became  the
richest  man  in
Pennsylvania.  In
1844  he  was  elected
to  the  state  legis
lature.  He  was  instrumental  in  forming  Carbon
county,  and  for  five  years  was  judge  of  the  county
court.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo
crat,  and  re-elected  as  a  Nebraska  Democrat,  serv
ing  from  5  Dec.,  1853,  till  3  March,  1857.  In  1868
he  received  the  votes  of  the  Pennsylvania  dele
gates  for  the  presidential  nomination  in  the  Na
tional  Democratic  convention,  and  in  1869  he  was
the  Democratic  candidate  for  governor.  In  1876
he  was  a  commissioner  for  the  Centennial  ex
hibition.  Mr.  Packer  in  1865  gave  $500,000  and
115  acres  of  land  to  found  Lehigh  university  at
Bethlehem,  Pa.  (see  illustration),  for  the  purpose  of
affording  young  men  of  the  Lehigh  valley  an  ad
vanced  technical  education  without  charge.  The
scheme  of  studies  embraces  civil,  mining,  and  me
chanical  engineering,  physics,  chemistry,  metallur
gy,  French,  and  German.  By  his  last  will  he  se
cured  an  endowment  of  $1,500,000  to  the  university
and  one  of  $500,000  to  the  library.  His  daughter,
Mrs.  Mary  Packer  Cummings,  gave  a  memorial


PACKER


PADILHA


621


church,  which  was  dedicated  on  13  Oct.,  1887,  the
anniversary  of  the  founding  of  the  university.

PACKER,  William  Fisher,  governor  of  Penn
sylvania,  b.  in  Howard,  Centre  co.,  Pa.,  2  April,
1807;  d.  in  Williarasport,  Pa.,  27  Sept.,  1870.  He
was  of  Quaker  ancestry.  At  the  age  of  thirteen  he
apprenticed  himself  to  a  relative,  who  published  a
newspaper  in  Sunbury.  After  completing  his  ap
prenticeship  in  Bellefonte,  he  worked  for  two  years
as  a  journeyman  in  the  office  of  Simon  Cameron,
then  public  printer  at  Harrisburg,  read  law  for  a
short  time  in  Williamsport,  and  in  1827  became
one  of  the  proprietors  and  editors  of  the  "  Lycom-
ing  Gazette,"  of  which  he  was  sole  manager  from
1829  till  1836.  He  was  the  author  of  an  ""Address
to  the  People  of  Philadelphia"  (1831),  urging  the
construction  of  the  West  branch  canal  as  a  part  of
the  system  of  internal  improvements  that  was  then
under  discussion,  and  was  superintendent  of  that
division  until  the  work  was  completed  in  1835.
He  was  one  of  the  founders  in  1836  of  the  "  Key
stone,"  at  Harrisburg.  which  became  the  organ  of
the  Democratic  party  in  the  state.  He  was  a  canal
commissioner  in  1839-'42.  In  1842  he  disposed  of
his  interest  in  the  '•  Keystone  "  and  became  auditor-
general  of  the  commonwealth,  which  office  he  held
till  1845.  In  1847  and  1848  he  was  elected  to  the
state  house  of  representatives,  and  was  chosen
speaker  for  both  terms.  In  1849  he  was  elected  a
state  senator,  and  while  in  that  body  he  secured,
against  strong  opposition,  the  incorporation  of  the
Susquehanna  railroad  company,  the  beginning  of
railroad  connections  with  Baltimore.  He  was  made
president  of  the  corporation  on  its  organization
in  1852,  and,  when  the  road  was  consolidated  with
others  to  form  the  Northern  central  railway,  be
came  a  director  in  the  latter  company.  As  a  mem-
borof  the  National  Democratic  convention  he  la
bored  for  the  nomination  of  James  Buchanan  for
the  presidency  in  1856.  In  1857  he  was  elected
governor  for  the  term  ending  in  January,  1861.
He  opposed  the  policy  of  President  Buchanan,  and
in  his  last  annual  message  denounced  the  secession
of  South  Carolina  as  an  act  of  rebellion.

PADDOCK,  Algernon  Sidney,  senator,  b.  in
Glenn's  Falls,  X.  Y.,  9  Nov.,  1830.  'He  was  educated
at  Glenn's  Falls  academy,  studied  law.  removed  in
1857  to  Omaha,  Nebraska  territory,  and  was  there
admitted  to  the  bar.  He  engaged  actively  in  poli
tics,  was  a  candidate  for  the  territorial  legislature
in  1858,  a  delegate  to  the  Republican  national  con
vention  in  1800,  and  afterward  secretary  of  the
territory,  holding  the  office  and  performing  the
duties  of  governor  during  much  of  the  time,  from
April,  1861,  till  the  admission  of  Nebraska  as  a
state  in  1867.  He  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of
hydraulic  cement  at  Beatrice,  was  a  delegate  to  the
Republican  national  convention  in  1864.  and  in
1866  an  Independent  Republican  candidate  for
congress.  In  1868  he  was  appointed  governor  of
Wyoming  territory,  but  declined.  He  was  after
ward  elected  a  U.  S.  senator  by  both  Republican
and  Democratic  votes,  and  served  from  3  March.
1875.  till  4  March,  1881.  He  was  a  candidate  for
re-election,  but  was  defeated  by  Charles  H.  Van
Wyck.  They  contended  again  for  the  nomination
at  the  conclusion  of  the  latter's  term,  and  Mr.
Paddock  was  victorious  in  the  Republican  caucus,
and  on  21  Jan.,  1887,  was  elected  senator  for  the
term  ending  3  March,  1893.

PADDOCK,  John  Adams,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Norwich.  Conn.,  19  Jan.,  1825.  He  is  the  eldest
son  of  Rev.  Seth  B.  Paddock,  for  twenty-two  years
rector  of  Christ  church,  Norwich.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Trinity  in  1845,  and  at  the  New  York


general  theological  seminary  in  1849,  made  deacon
in  the  following  July,  and  ordained  priest  in  1850.
He  served  as  rector  of  the  Episcopal  church  in
Stratford,  Conn.,  from  1849  until  1855,  when  he
accepted  a  call  to  St.  Peter's.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
There  he  remained  for  twenty-five  years,  until  his
elevation  to  the  episcopacy.  He  was  a  member  of
the  standing  committee  of  the  diocese  of  Long
Island  from  its  foundation  in  1868,  and  also  of  the
foreign  committee  of  the  board  of  missions.  In
1880  he  was  elected  missionary  bishop  of  Washing
ton  territory,  and  consecrated  on  15  Dec.  His  suc
cess  in  this  arduous  field  has  been  encouraging.  A
church  hospital  costing  about  $60.000  has  been
built,  and  an  endowment  of  $100.000  secured  for
it.  Several  church  schools  have  also  been  estab
lished  and  are  in  a  flourishing  condition.  Bishop
Paddock  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from
Trinity  in  1860.  His  publications  include  several
occasional  sermons  and  addresses,  and  a  "History
of  Christ  Church,  Stratford,  Conn."  (1854). — His
brother.  Benjamin  Henry,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Norwich,  Conn.,  28  Feb.,  1828,  was  graduated  at
Trinity  in  1848,  was  assistant  teacher  in  the  Epis
copal  academy,  Cheshire,  Conn.,  in  1848-'9.  and
entered  the  New  York  general  theological  seminary,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1852.  He  was  made
j  deacon,  29  June,  1852.  and  priest  in  Trinity  church,
!  Norwich.  Conn.,  27  Sept.,  1853,  by  Bishop  Will-
;  iams.  While  in  deacon's  orders  he  served  as  assist-
j  ant  minister  in  the  Church  of  the  Epiphany,  New
|  York  city.  In  the  spring  of  1853  he  became  rector
of  St.  Luke's  church,  Portland,  Me.,  but  finding
the  climate  too  severe  he  returned  to  Connecticut
the  same  year  and  became  rector  of  Trinity  church,
Norwich,  his  father's  former  parish.  In  1860  he
accepted  the  rectorship  of  Christ  church,  Detroit,
Mich.,  in  1868  he  was  nominated  missionary  bishop
of  Oregon  and  Washington  territory,  but  declined,
and  in  1869  he  removed  to  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  where
he  took  charge  of  Grace  church.  He  was  elected
bishop  of  Massachusetts,  and  consecrated  in  Grace
church,  Brooklyn,  17  Sept.,  1873.  He  received  the
degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Trinity  college,  Hartford,
in  1867.  Bishop  Paddock  has  written  freely,  for
reviews  and  other  periodicals,  canonical  digests
and  sermons  (1876-'80).  Among  these  may  be
mentioned  "Ten  Years  in  the  Episcopate"  (1883);
"  The  First  Century  of  the  Diocese  of  Massachu
setts  "  (1885) ;  and  :'  The  Pastoral  Relation."

PADILHA,  Francisco  (pah-deel-yah),  Brazil
ian  soldier,  d.  in  Bahia.  12  June,  1627.  In  1624  he
held  the  rank  of  captain.  He  served  with  credit  in
!  the  war  of  1624-'5  against  the  Dutch.  On  10  June,
!  1624,  Bahia  had  fallen  into  the  power  of  superior
forces  that  had  been  sent  to  conquer  it  by  the
states-general  of  Holland.  But  soon  afterward
Bishop  Marcos  Teixeira  organized  a  general  resist
ance,  and  among  the  first  that  volunteered  was
Capt.  Padilha.  Col.  Johan  A"an  Dorth  was  the
governor  of  the  conquered  city,  and,  knowing  that
the  Portuguese  had  begun  to  intrench  themselves
near  the  city,  went  on  a  reconnoitring  expedition.
In  a  spot  called  '•  Agua  dos  Meninos  "  he  fell  into
an  ambuscade  that  had  been  prepared  by  Padilha.
While  the  Indians  and  some  colonists  attacked  the
Dutch  soldiers.  Padilha  sought  out  Col.  Dorth  and
killed  him  after  a  short  hand-to-hand  combat.
Padilha  continued  to  serve  against  Bahia  till  its
recapture  by  the  squadrons  of  Spain  and  Portugal.
In  June,  1627,  the  Dutch  admiral.  Piet  Hein,  forced
the  entrance  of  Bahia.  seizing  the  ships  that  were
in  port,  and.  hearing  that  six  other  richly  laden
vessels  were  concealed  in  Pitanga  river,  he  pro
ceeded  with  part  of  his  fleet  to  capture  them  on  12


622


PAEZ


June.  They  were  defended  by  Capt.  Padilha  with
150  men.  but  after  an  heroic  resistance  the  vessels
were  captured.  Padilha  was  dangerously  wounded,
taken  prisoner,  and  executed  the  same  day.

PADILLA,  Diego  Francisco  (pah-deel'-yah),
Colombian  patriot,  b.  in  Bogota  in  1754;  d.  in
Boyaea  in  1829.  He  entered  the  order  of  St.
Austin  in  his  youth,  and  became  one  of  the  most
famous  preachers  of  his  time.  In  1785  he  was  sent
as  commissioner  to  the  general  chapter  of  his  order
in  Rome,  and  was  chosen  to  deliver  the  inaugural
address  before  Pope  Pius  VI.  Without  making
use  of  the  customary  license  to  read  his  address,
he  delivered  it  in  Latin  from  memory  with  such
eloquence  and  purity  of  language  that  the  pope
offered  him  any  mitre  he  should  choose,  but  Pa-
dilla  refused  all  honors.  He  returned  to  Bogota
and  gave  himself  entirely  to  his  studies,  preaching
and  writing  treatises  and  pamphlets  on  matters  of
public  interest,  of  which  he  published  forty-nine
before  1809.  By  the  liberal  principles  that  he  ad
vocated  therein  he  prepared  the  public  mind  for
liberty.  When  Gen.  Pablo  Morillo  (q.  v.)  conquered
Colombia,  Padilla  was  sent  as  a  prisoner  to  Spain
and  confined  for  a  long  time  in  Seville  and  Cadiz.
During  the  liberal  movement  of  1820  he  was  set  at
liberty  and  returned  to  his  country,  dying  in  Bo-
yaca.  "where  he  had  been  appointed  parish  priest.

PADILLA,  Juan  de,  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in
Andalusia  late  in  the  15th  century;  d.  in  Mexico
in  1539.  He  came  to  Mexico  in  1528  with  the  first
Franciscan  friars,  and  was  the  first  superior  of  the
convent  of  Tulancingo.  Afterward  he  went  to
Michoacan  and  Jalisco,  where  he  converted  nu
merous  Indians  and  became  superior  of  the  convent
of  Zapotlan.  In  1540  he  accompanied  his  provin
cial,  Marcos  de  Niza  (q. .  v.),  in  the  expedition  of
Francisco  Vasquez  de  Coronado  for  the  discovery
of  Cibola.  On  the  return  of  the  expedition,  Padil
la,  with  Friar  Juan  de  la  Cruz,  remained  in  Tiguex
to  preach  to  the  recently  conquered  tribes,  and
afterward  penetrated  farther  north  to  convert  the
wild  tribes,  by  whom  he  was  murdered.  He  wrote
under  date  of  17  Nov.,  1532,  a  letter  to  the  emperor
Charles  V.  about  the  results  of  the  missions  of  New
Spain  and  the  great  merits  of  Bishop  Juan  de
Zumarraga,  the  original  of  which  is  in  the  archives
of  the  council  of  the  Indies.  A  facsimile  was  pub
lished  in  the  "  Cartas  de  Indias,"  printed  by  order
of  the  Spanish  government  (Madrid,  1876).

PADILLA,  Jnan  Jose",  Central  American  scien
tist,  b.  in  Guatemala  late  in  the  17th  century ;  d.
there  about  1750.  At  an  early  age  he  was  or
dained  priest  and  became  canon  of  the  cathedral
of  his  native  city,  but,  being  inclined  to  mathemati
cal  pursuits,  he  gave  all  his  spare  time  to  that
science  and  applied  mechanics,  in  which  he  soon
became  proficient.  He  was.  fond  of  physical  ex
periments  and  constructed  various  machines,  es
pecially  tower-clocks,  of  which  he  made  several  for
the  convents  of  the  Jesuits  and  Recollets  of  Gua
temala  and  for  the  churches  of  Comayagua.  He
wrote  "  Arte  de  Arittnetica  practica"  (Guatemala,
1732);  "  Ortografia  Latina  y  Castellana"  (1733);
and  left  in  manuscript  •'  Baratillo  matematico,  6
Miscelanea  de  experimentos  fisicos,  de  maquinas,"
"  Tratado  de  hacer  y  componer  Relojes,"  "  Arte  de
Perspectiva,"  "  Arte  para  saber  las  Lunaciones  y
Eclipses,  con  solo  el  uso  de  Aritmetica,"  "  Almana-
ques  para  85  afios  desde  el  de  1735,  arreglados  al
Hemisferio  de  Guatemala,"  "  Cronicon  de  Guate
mala,"  and  others,  which  are  preserved  in  the  ar
chives  of  the  cathedral.

PADILLA  Y  ESTRADA,  Jos6  Antonio  de,
Mexican  archbishop,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in


1696;  d.  in  Merida,  Yucatan,  20  July,  1760.  He
was  of  noble  birth,  but  entered  the  order  of  San
Augustine  and  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Mexico  as  doctor  in  theology.  He  was  professor
of  philosophy  and  theology  and  rector  of  the  Col
lege  of  San  Pablo,  visiting  secretary  of  the  con
vents  of  Guadalajara  and  Habana,  and  prior  of
the  main  convent  of  Mexico.  On  account  of  some
misunderstanding  with  his  provincial,  he  resolved
to  go  to  Rome,  but  he  was  detained  at  Campeche
and  obliged  to  return  to  Mexico,  where  he  was  ap
pointed  procurator  for  the  courts  of  Rome  and
Madrid.  In  1749,  while  at  Madrid,  he  was  pre
sented  with  the  archbishopric  of  Santo  Domingo,
of  which  he  took  possession  the  following  year.
He  introduced  several  reforms  and  repaired  many
churches.  Afterward  he  was  appointed  to  the  see
of  Guatemala,  but  resigned,  asking  instead  for  that
of  Yucatan,  which  he  obtained,  taking  possession
on  7  Nov.,  1753.  There  he  repaired  and  reorgan
ized  the  seminary,  founded  a  vice-rectory,  imported
two  teachers  for  philosophy  and  theology,  and  did
many  charitable  deeds.

PAE/,  Jose"  Antonio  (pah'-eth).  Venezuelan
soldier,  b.  near  Acarigua,  province  of  Barinas,  13
June,  1790 ;  d.  in  New  York  city  6  May,  1873.  He
received  a  common-school  education,  and  during
his  youth  was  em
ployed  in  menial
pursuits  by  some
of  his  relatives.
At  the  age  of  sev
enteen,  during  a
trip  to  deliver
some  money,  he
was  waylaid  in  a
wild  region  by
four  robbers,  one
of  whom  he  killed
on  the  spot.  Be
ing  afraid  of  the
consequences,  he
fled  to  the  llanos
of  Barinas  and
obtained  employ
ment  on  a  cattle
estate,  where  he

became  inured  to  a  life  of  hardship.  Two  years  later
he  entered  the  cattle-trade  on  his  own  account,  and
when  independence  was  declared  in  1810  he  joined
the  patriot  troops,  serving  till  the  beginning  of  1813
in  the  province  of  Barinas.  When  Bolivar  occupied
Cucuta,  Paez  was  called  by  the  Spanish  department-
commander  to  collect  a  drove  of  horses,  and  was
appointed  captain ;  but,  unwilling  to  serve  against
his  country,  he  fled  across  the  mountains,  and  was
given  the  same  commission  by  the  patriot  govern
ment.  When  fresh  Spanish  forces  arrived  under  Gen.
Francisco  Lopez,  Paez  refused  to  abandon  Vene
zuela,  and  with  only  500  cavalry  routed  Lopez  at
Mata  de  la  Miel,  16  Feb.,  1816.  with  the  loss  of  400
killed  and  500  prisoners.  For  this  he  was  promoted
lieutenant-colonel  by  the  Granadian  government.
At  a  meeting  of  the  patriot  officers  several  months
later,  Francisco  Santander,  the  commander-in-chief,
was  asked  to  resign,  and  subsequently  Paez  was  elect
ed  supremepoliticalandmilitarychief.and  promoted
to  brigadier-general.  His  force'consisted  of  700  cav
alry,  destitute  of  clothing,  provisions,  ammunition,
and  even  regular  arms,  poles  of  bamboo  and  slender
palm-stems,  pointed  at  one  end,  serving  them  as
lances.  They  were  hampered  by  a  great  number  of
old  people,  women,  and  children,  who  had  been
driven  from  their  homes  by  the  Spaniards,  and  by
the  condition  of  the  country,  which  was  converted


PlEZ


PAGE


623


during  the  rainy  season  into  an  immense  swamp.
Notwithstanding  these  obstacles,  Paez  resolved
upon  an  aggressive  war,  and,  leaving  the  non-com
batants  in  charge  of  a  troop  of  cavalry,  defeated
Lopez  at  Yagual,  and  on  13  Oct.  occupied  Achaguas.
Meanwhile  Gen.  Pablo  Morillo  (q.  r.)  sent  Latorre
with  3.000  infantry  and  1,700  cavalry  against  Paez,
whose  force  had  increased  to  1,100.  The  two  armies
met  at  Mucuritas.  28  Jan.,  1817,  and  Latorre's
cavalry  was  dispersed  and  nearly  destroyed  at  the
first  charge.  When  the  infantry  formed  squares
for  the  defence,  the  high  grass  surrounding  them
was  lighted,  and  they  were  forced  to  beat  a  retreat,
during  which  they  were  charged  on  all  sides  by  the
llaneros.  whose  horses  were  accustomed  to  prairie
fires.  Toward  the  close  of  1817  Paez  recognized
the  authority  of  Bolivar  as  supreme  chief  of  Vene
zuela,  and  the  latter  promoted  Paez  major-general
in  January,  1819.  After  the  armistice  of  Trujillo,
Paez  continued  to  organize  the  army,  and  his  vic
tory  over  Latorre  at  Carabobo,  24  June.  1821,  where
he  was  raised  by  Bolivar  to  the  rank  of  general-in-
chief,  and  his  surprise  and  capture  of  Puerto  Ca-
bello,  in  the  night  of  7  Nov.,  1823.  finally  secured
the  independence  of  Colombia.  On  the  formation  of
the  new  government,  Paez  was  appointed  com
mander-general  of  the  department  of  Venezuela  ;
nut  his  strict  execution  of  an  order  from  Bogota,
requiring  the  enlistment  of  all  citizens  between  the
ages  of  sixteen  and  fifty  years,  gave  offence.  Hear
ing  that  he  was  to  be  impeached,  he  resigned  in
March,  1825;  but  his  resignation  was  not  accepted.
In  the  next  year,  however,  the  impeachment  was
presented  by  instigation  of  the  vice-president,  San-
tander,  who  had  opposed  Paez  ever  since  he  was
superseded  by  the  latter  in  1816,  and  Paez  gave  up
the  command  on  29  April ;  but  the  people  mutinied
on  the  next  day,  and  on  11  May  the  municipality
of  Valencia  proclaimed  him  supreme  civil  and
military  chief  of  Venezuela.  Bolivar  returned  from
Peru,  and  by  decree  of  1  Jan.,  1827,  confirmed  Paez
in  his  rank.  When  the  convention  of  Ocana  in
1828  declared  against  the  federal  system  and  Boli
var  was  proclaimed  dictator  of  Colombia,  the
opposition  in  Venezuela  to  becoming  a  dependency
of  New  Granada  was  extreme,  and  on  26  Nov.,  1829.
the  secession  of  Venezuela  was  proclaimed.  Paez
was  appointed  provisional  president  by  the  constit
uent  congress  of  1830,  and  constitutional  president
by  congress  on  18  March,  1831.  In  the  latter  year
Gen.  Jose  Tadeo  Monagas  (q.  v.)  revolted,  but  soon
submitted  to  the  government,  and  Paez  was  pre
sented  by  congress  with  a  golden  sword  and  the
title  of  ""illustrious  citizen."  From  1839  till  1843
he  was  again  president,  and  during  his  term  the
remains  of  Bolivar  were  by  his  order  removed  with

great  solemnity,  in  1842,  from  Santa  Marta  to
aracas.  When  Gen.  Monagas,  in  January,  1848,
attempted  to  usurp  supreme  power,  Paez  rose  in
arms,  but  after  an  unfortunate  campaign  capitu
lated.  15  Aug.,  1849,  at  Macapo-Abajo.  He  went
to  Valencia,  but  on  18  Aug.,  in  violation  of  the
capitulation,  was  arrested  by  order  of  Monagas,
who  imprisoned  him  at  Fort  San  Antonio  in  Cu-
mana  until  24  May,  1850,  when  he  was  released  by
order  of  congress.  From  Cumana  he  went  to  New
York,  where  he  was  publicly  received  by  the  authori
ties,  and  resided  there  till  after  the  "overthrow  of
Monagas.  In  November.  1858.  he  went  to  Vene
zuela  by  special  invitation  of  the  government  of
that  country,  and  was  escorted  thither  by  two  U.  S.
vessels.  Gen.  Castro,  then  in  command  at  Cara
cas,  seemed  to  be  jealous  of  Paez's  presence,  and
the  latter  returned  to  New  York.  After  Castro's
fall  he  was  accredited  in  1860  as  minister  to  the


United  States,  but  resigned  in  1861.  After  the  in
vasion  of  Venezuela  by  Gen.  Falcon,  Paez  was
again  called  to  his  country,  and  invested  with
supreme  authority;  but  failing  in  his  efforts,  and
wishing  to  a^oid  further  bloodshed,  he  resigned  by
the  treaty  of  Coche,  22  May,  1863.  and  returned  to
New  York.  He  afterward  lived  for  some  time  in
the  Argentine  Republic,  Peru,  and  Ecuador,  receiv
ing  large  pensions  from  those  countries  and  the
present  republic  of  Colombia,  and  he  was  also  the
recipient  of  several  testimonials  of  respect  from
European  monarchs.  He  finally  retired  to  the
United  States  to  end  his  days.  His  remains  were
deposited  in  the  Marble  cemetery  in  Second  ave
nue.  New  York  city.  In  1888  the  Venezuelan  gov
ernment  decided  to  transport  them  to  his  native
country,  and  bury  them  with  military  honors,  and
a  commission  was  sent  to  the  United  States  to  make
the  arrangements.  He  wrote  "  Autobiografia  del
General  Jose  Antonio  Paez  "  (New  York,  1867).

PAGE,  Charles  Grafton,  physicist,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass..  25  Jan..  1812 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C..  5
May,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1832,
and  then  studied  medicine  in  Boston.  In  1838  he
settled  in  Virginia  and  there  followed  his  profession
for  two  years,  when  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of
chemistry  in  Columbian  university,  Washington,
D.  C.  He  was  made  examiner  in  the  patent-office
in  1840.  when  there  were  but  two  examiners  in  that
office,  and  continued  in  that  place  until  his  death.
As  a  boy  he  showed  great  fondness  for  scientific
studies,  and  at  the  age  of  ten  years  built  an  electric
machine.  He  continued  his  studies  in  that  branch
of  science  throughout  his  life,  and  was  an  accepted
authority  on  the  subject.  He  had  for  years  been
engaged  in  perfecting  machinery  for  the  effective
and  economical  use  of  electro-magnetism  as  a
motive  power,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  had  so
far  succeeded  as  to  be  able  to  use  it  for  the  propul
sion  of  machinery,  and  to  some  extent  as  a  loco
motive  force.  Among  other  things  the  original
discovery  of  the  Ruhmkorff  coil  is  claimed  for  him.
Dr.  Page  was  a  frequent  contributor  to  A'arious  lit
erary  and  scientific  periodicals,  particularly  to  the
';  American  Journal  of  Science,''  and  was  the  author
of  "  Psychomancy.  Spirit-Rappings,  and  Table- Tip-
pings  Exposed  "  "(New  York,  1853).

PAGE.  David  Perkins,  educator,  b.  in  Epping,
N.  H.,  4  July,  1810;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  1  Jan.,
1848.  He  was  brought  up  on  a  farm,  and  with
difficulty  persuaded  his  father  to  allow  him  to
attend  Hampton  academy  in  order  to  fit  himself
for  the  profession  of  teaching.  At  the  age  of
eighteen  he  opened  a  private  school  in  Newbury,
and  three  years  later  he  was  made  principal  of  the
English  department  in  Newbury  port  high-school.
When  the  New  York  legislature  decided  on  estab
lishing  a  state  normal  school  at  Albany  in  1844,
Mr.  Page  was  chosen,  on  the  recommendation  of
Horace  Mann,  to  be  its  first  principal.  A  school
for  the  training  of  teachers  was  then  regarded  in
New  York  as  a  doubtful  experiment,  but  under  his
management  it  was  successful  from  the  beginning.
He  was  a  frequent  speaker  at  teachers'  institutes,
and  did  much  to  spread  professional  enthusiasm
and  a  knowledge  of  the  higher  principles  of  peda
gogies.  He  expounded  his  views  in  a  volume  en
titled  "  Theory  and  Practice  of  Teaching,  or  the
Motives  of  Good  School-Keeping"  (New  York,
1847),  which  has  remained  an  authoritative  treatise
on  the  subject.  A  new  edition  (1886),  edited  by
William  H.  Payne,  professor  of  the  science  and  art
of  teaching  in  Michigan  university,  contains  a  bio
graphical  preface.  Mr.  Page  was  the  author  also
of  an  "  Elementary  Chart  of  Vocal  Sounds  "  (1847).


624


PAGE


PAGE


PAGE,  Emily  Rebecca,  poet,  b.  in  Bradford,
Vt.,  5  May,  1834;  d.  in  Chelsea,  Mass.,  14  Feb.,
1862.  She  was  educated  in  the  academies  at  Brad
ford  and  St.  Johnsbury,  Vt.,  and  began  in  1846  to
contribute  poems  to  the  Portland  "Transcript."
Later  she  wrote  both  prose  and  poetry  for  the
"  Carpet- Bag,"  the  "  Ladies'  Repository,"  and  an
annual  called  the  "  Rose-Bud "  (Boston,  1854-'5).
She  was  for  several  years  a  constant  contributor  to
the  publications  of  Maturin  M.  Ballou  (q.  v.\  and
an  assistant  in  the  editorial  work.  "The  Old
Canoe "  and  others  of  her  poems  were,  on  their
appearance,  attributed  to  various  distinguished
authors.  That  and  "Haunted"  are  printed  in
"  Poets  and  Poetry  of  Vermont "  (Boston,  1860).
"The  Old  Bridge,'"  "Mabel,"  "My  Angels,"  and
"Watching"  are  also  well  known.  "Lily  of  the
Valley"  was  issued  in  book- form -(Boston,  1859).

PAGE,  James,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
in  1795 ;  d.  there.  6  April,  1875.  He  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  Philadelphia  in  1816,  attained  note  in
his  profession,  and  for  nearly  half  a  century  was
active  in  public  affairs.  He  served  in  the  war  of
1812,  afterward  became  captain  of  the  state  fen-
cibles,  and  subsequently  was  colonel  of  a  volunteer
regiment.  In  politics  he  was  a  Democrat,  and  he
wielded  a  large  influence  in  the  counsels  of  his
party.  He  was  postmaster  of  Philadelphia  from
1838  till  1841,  county  treasurer  from  1842  till  1844,
collector  of  the  port  from  1846  till  1849,  and  a
member  of  the  select  council  from  1866  till  1868.
When  the  body  of  John  Quincy  Adams  was  borne
through  Philadelphia,  Col.  Page  was  one  of  the
pall-bearers.  The  James  Page  library  company
was  given  its  name  in  honor  of  Col.  Page.

PAGE,  John,  merchant,  b.  in  Bedfont,  England,
in  1627 ;  d.  in  Williamsburg,  Va.,  23  Jan.,  1692.
He  was  a  member  of  the  colonial  council  in  the
reign  of  William  and  Mary,  and  acquired  a  lai'ge
estate. — His  son,  Matthew,  planter,  b.  in  Virginia
in  1659;  d.  there,  9  Jan.,  1703,  was  one  of  the
original  board  of  trustees  of  William  and  Mary
college,  a  member  of  the  council  under  Queen  Anne,
and  active  in  public  affairs. — Matthew's  son,  Mann,
planter,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1691 ;  d.  there,  24  Jan.,
1730,  was,  next  to  Lord  Fairfax,  the  largest  land
holder  in  Virginia,  owning  nearly  70,000  acres  in
Frederick,  Prince  William,  Spottsylvania,  and  other

counties,  besides
the  plantation  of

v  :  Rosewell,  in  Glou

cester county, on
': ,  '  which  he  built,  in

1725,  the  largest
and  costliest  man
sion  in  the  colony.
The  house,  which
is  still  standing  and
is  shown  in  the  ac
companying  illus
tration,  was  built
of  brick,  with  mar
ble  casements  and
mahogany  wain
scoting  and  balus
trades,  all  the  ma
terial  being  import
ed.  In  one  of  its

rooms,  which  are  all  of  cubic  dimensions,  Thomas
Jefferson  is  said  to  have  drafted  the  Declaration  of
Independence.  The  lead  from  the  window-case
ments  was  used  for  bullets  in  the  Revolutionary
war.  Of  his  three  sons,  MANN  inherited  Rosewell ;
JOHN  removed  to  North  End  in  that  part  of  Glou
cester  county  that  is  now  Matthews  county,  and


was  a  member  of  the  last  royal  council  in  Vir
ginia  ;  and  ROBERT  settled  at  Broadneck,  in  Han
over  county. — The  second  Mann's  son,  John,  gov
ernor  of  Virginia,  b.  at  Rosewell,  Gloucester  co.,
Va.,  17  April,  1744;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  11  Oct.,
1808,  was  graduated  in  1763  at  William  and  Mary,
where  he  was  the  as
sociate and intimate
friend  of  Thomas  Jef
ferson, of whom he
was  a  follower  in  poli
tics afterward. He
was  with  Washington
in  one  of  his  western
expeditions against
the French and In
dians. Afterward  he
was a representative
in  the  Virginia  house
of burgesses and a
member  of  the  colo
nial  council. In  1776
he  was  a  visitor  of  the
College of William

and Mary. In the  //  ^

same  year  he  was  a  &

delegate  to  the  convention  that  framed  the  Vir
ginia  state  constitution.  During  the  Revolution
ary  struggle  he  rendered  important  services  as  a
member  of  the  committee  of  public  safety,  and
as  lieutenant-governor  of  the  commonwealth,  con
tributing  from  his  fortune  to  the  public  cause.  He
was  an  officer  for  the  county  of  Gloucester  during
the  war,  where  he  raised  a  regiment  of  militia  to
repel  a  British  invasion.  He  also  contributed  freely
from  his  private  fortune  to  the  public  cause.  There
is  still  in  existence  a  letter  from  Edmund  Pendle-
ton  urging  Gov.  Page  to  accept  payment  for  the
lead  taken  from  Rosewell  for  making  bullets.
He  was  elected  one  of  the  earliest  representatives
in  congress  from  Virginia,  upon  the  adoption  of
the  Federal  constitution,  and  was  re-elected  three
times,  serving  from  4  March,  1789,  till  3  March,
1797.  In  1800  he  was  chosen  one  of  the  electors
for  president,  and  in  December,  1802,  was  made
governor  of  Virginia,  succeeding  James  Monroe.
After  serving  three  years  he  was  followed  by  Will
iam  Cabell,  as  the  state  constitution  at  that  time
did  not  permit  the  same  person  to  hold  the  office
more  than  three  years  in  succession,  and  was  soon
appointed  by  President  Jefferson  U.  S.  commis
sioner  of  loans  for  Virginia,  which  office  he  held  at
the  time  of  his  death.  Gov.  Page  published  "Ad
dresses  to  the  People"  (1796  and  1799).  He  was
distinguished  for  his  theological  learning,  as  well
as  for  his  soldierly  and  statesman-like  qualities,  and
at  one  time  his  friends  desired  him  to  take  holy
orders  in  order  to  become  the  first  bishop  of  Vir
ginia.  There  is  a  portrait  of  him  executed  in  1758
by  Benjamin  West,  also  a  later  one  by  Charles  W.
Peale.  Gov.  Page  preserved  many  letters  from
leaders  of  the  Revolution,  and  left  these  and  other
material  for  memoirs  of  his  time.  These  papers
were  lost  after  his  death,  but  many  of  them  were
recovered  in  Boston  in  1887. — The  second  John's
half-brother.  Mann,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  at  Rosewell  in  1749;  d.  at  Mansfield,
near  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  was  a  delegate  from  Vir
ginia  to  the  old  congress  in  1777,  his  colleagues  be
ing  Thomas  Jefferson,  Thomas  Nelson,  and  George
Wythe. — The  second  John's  cousin,  Carter,  sol
dier,  b.  in  North  End,  Gloucester  (now  Matthews)
co.,  Va.,  in  1758 ;  d.  in  Willis  Fork,  Cumberland
co.,  Va.,  in  April,  1825,  was  one  of  the  students  that
left  William  and  Mary  college  in  1776  to  join  the


PAGE


PAGE


625


American  army.  He  rose  to  the  rank  of  major,
and  served  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Lafayette  dur
ing  the  campaign  against  Lord  Cornwallis  in  Vir
ginia.  He  married  in  1783  Mary,  a  daughter,  of
Archibald  Gary,  and  in  1799  Lucy,  a  daughter  of
Thomas  Nelson. — Carter's  brother,  Robert,  b.  in
North  End,  Gloucester  (now  Matthews)  co.,  Va.,  in
1764;  d.  in  Janesville,  Clarke  co.,  Va.,  1  Jan.,
1840,  also  left  William  and  Mary  college  to  join
the  army,  and  was  promoted  to  captain  of  infant
ry.  He  and  his  brother  were  among  the  veterans
that  were  present  at  the  reception  of  Gen.  Lafayette
in  Leesburg,  Va.,  9  Aug.,  1825.  He  was  a  member
of  congress  from  Virginia  in  1799-1801. — Carter's
nephew,  Hugh  Nelson,  naval  officer,  b.  in  North
End,  Gloucester  co.,  Va.,  in  September,  1788;  d.
in  Norfolk,  Va.,  3  June,  1871,  entered  the  ser
vice  as  a  midshipman  on  1  Sept.,  1811,  and
served  under  Capt.  Oliver  H.  Perry  at  the  battle
of  Lake  Erie,  where  he  was  wounded.  He  bore
Perry's  despatch  to  Gen.  William  H.  Harrison,  an
nouncing  the  victory,  and  subsequently  took  part
in  the  ineffective  operations  against  Fort  Macki
naw.  He  rose  to  the  rank  of  captain,  29  May,
1850,  was  retired  in  1855,  and  resigned  his  com
mission  on  the  secession  of  Virginia. — The  second
John's  grandson,  Thomas  Jefferson,  b.  at  Shelly,
Gloucester  co.,  Va.,  4  Jan.,  1808,  was  appointed  a
midshipman  on  1  Oct.,  1827,  passed  for  promotion
on  10  June,  1833,  and  was  commissioned  as  lieu
tenant  on  20  Dec.,  1839.  He  served  on  the  coast
survey  for  several  years,  circumnavigated  the  globe
in  the  "  Dolphin,"  and  on  his  return  home  sug
gested  to  the  secretary  of  the  navy,  William  A.
Graham,  a  plan  for  a  survey  of  the  China  seas,  and
obtained  an  appropriation  from  congress  for  the
construction  of  a  steamer  for  the  purpose.  When
John  P.  Kennedy  took  charge  of  the  navy  depart
ment,  he  greatly  enlarged  the  scope  of  the  expedi
tion,  and  placed  Com.  Matthew  C.  Perry  in  com
mand,  offering  the  second  place  to  Lieut.  Page,
who,  however,  declined.  In  1853  he  was  placed  in
command  of  an  expedition  for  the  exploration  of
the  tributaries  of  the  Rio  de  la  Plata  and  adjacent
countries.  He  was  well  received  by  President  Car
los  A.  Lopez,  of  the  republic  of  Paraguay,  and  car
ried  out  his  mission  without  obstruction  till  Feb
ruary,  1855,  when  his  steamer,  the  "  Water-Witch,"
was  fired  upon  from  a  Paraguayan  fort  on  the  Pa
rana  river,  and  one  man  was  killed.  He  returned
the  fire,  but  his  vessel  was  not  fitted  for  offensive
operations.  He  returned  to  the  United  States  in
May,  1856,  after  an  absence  of  three  years  and  four
months.  A  naval  demonstration,  in  January,  1859,
secured  reparation  from  the  Paraguayan  govern
ment.  Page,  who  had  been  promoted  commander
on  14  Sept.,  1855,  resumed  his  surveys,  and  com
pleted  them  in  December,  1860.  Turning  over  to
the  navy  department  the  charts,  notes,  and  jour
nals,  which  embrace  several  thousand  miles  of
river  navigation  previously  unexplored,  and  not
yet  described  in  print,  he  resigned  his  commission
on  the  secession  of  his  state.  He  was  offered  an
admiral's  commission  by  the  Italian  government,
which  desired  his  aid  in  the  reorganization  of  its
navy ;  yet  he  elected  to  serve  in  the  cause  of  the
southern  states.  He  commanded  the  heavy  bat
teries  at  Gloucester  Point  on  York  river,  and  be
gan  the  building  of  gun-boats  at  West  Point,  but
burned  them  and  retreated  after  Yorktown  was
abandoned.  In  1862  he  was  commissioned  as  com
modore,  and  went  to  England  to  take  command  of
an  iron-clad  then  building  in  the  Mersey,  and  when
the  British  government,  under  a  threat  of  war
from  the  U.  S.  minister,  took  possession  of  the  ves-
VOL.  iv. — 40


sel,  he  assumed  command  of  a  small  iron-clad  then
lying  at  Copenhagen  which  put  to  sea  under  the
name  of  "Stonewall,"  and  which  afterward,  when
she  entered  a  Spanish  harbor,  was  seized  by  the
officers  of  Queen  Isabella.  His  career  in  the  Con
federate  service  being  thus  brought  to  a  close,  he
went  to  the  Argentine  Republic,  where  the  benefits
rendered  to  the  country  by  his  explorations  found
a  high  recognition.  For  many  years  he  was  asso
ciated  with  his  old  friend,  ex- President  Uzquiza,  in
sheep  and  cattle  farming.  Then  going  to  England
in  the  commission  of  the  government,  he  superin
tended  the  construction  of  two  iron-clads  and  two
gun-boats  which  formed  the  nucleus  of  the  Argen
tine  navy.  Com.  Page  has  since  resided  in  Flor
ence,  Italy.  His  son,  a  fleet-captain  in  the  Argen
tine  navy,  has  recently  resumed  the  explorations
of  the  tributaries  of  the  River  Plata  at  the  point
where  ends  the  descriptive  account  of  his  father,
who  after  his  return  from  his  first  expedition  to
South  America  published  a  narrative  entitled  "  La
Plata:  the  Argentine  Confederation  and  Para
guay,"  describing  3,600  miles  of  river  navigation
and  explorations  on  land  extending  over  4.400
miles  (New  York,  1859). — Carter's  grandson,  Rich
ard  Channing  Moore,  physician,  b.  at  Turkey
Hill,  Albemarle  co.,  Va.,  2  Jan.,  1841,  entered  the
University  of  Virginia  in  1860,  but  in  July,  1861,
enlisted  in  the  Confederate  artillery.  He  was  com
missioned  as  captain  in  April,  1862,  and  commanded
a  battery  in  nearly  all  the  battles  of  the  Army  of
Northern  Virginia.  He  was  severely  wounded  at
Gettysburg.  In  October,  1864,  after  being  pro
moted  major,  he  was  assigned  to  duty  on  the  staff
of  Gen.  John  C.  Breckinridge  as  chief  of  artillery.
He  studied  medicine  at  the  close  of  the  war  in  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  the  city
of  New  York,  and  after  graduation  in  1868  served
as  house  physician  in  Bellevue  hospital,  and  after
ward  as  house  surgeon  in  the  XVoman's  hospital.
Dr.  Page  has  been  professor  of  general  medicine
and  diseases  of  the  chest  in  the  New  York  poly-
clinic  since  1885.  He  has  contributed  to  the  New
York  "  Medical  Record "  and  other  periodicals.
He  is  the  author  of  a  "  Genealogy  of  the  Page
Family  in  Virginia"  (New  York,  1882)  and  of  a
"  Sketch  of  Page's  Battery,  Jackson's  Corps,  Lee's
Army "  (1885) ;  also  of  a  "  Chart  of  Physical  Di
agnosis  "  (1885).  —  Gov.  John's  great  -  grandson,
Thomas  Nelson,  author,  b.  in  Oakland,  Hanover
co.,  Va.,  23  April,  1853,  was  brought  up  on  the
family  plantation,  which  was  a  part  of  the  original
grant  to  his  ancestor,  Thomas  Nelson.  He  was
educated  at  Washington  and  Lee  university,  stud
ied  law,  receiving  the  degree  of  LL.  B.  from  the
University  of  Virginia  in  1874,  and  has  practised
his  profession  in  Richmond,  Va.  The  degree  of
LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Washington  and
Lee  in  1887.  He  began  to  write  stories  and  poems
in  the  negro  dialect  for  his  own  amusement,  and
one  of  these,  entitled  "  Marse  Chan,"  a  tale  of  the
civil  war,  when  published  in  1884,  several  years
after  it  was  written,  attracted  much  attention,  and
was  followed  by  "  Meh  Lady  "  and  others  in  the
same  vein.  A  collection  of  these  has  been  published
under  the  title  of  "  In  Ole  Virginia  "  (New  York,
1887).  His  serial,  "  Two  Little  Confederates,"  is
now  (1888)  appearing  in  the  '•  St.  Nicholas."

PAGE,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Haverhill,  N.  H.,  21
May,  1787;  d.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  8  Sept.,  1865.  He
received  but  little  early  education,  became  a  farmer,
and  in  1815  was  appointed  assessor  of  the  state
taxes  for  his  district.  He  was  elected  a  member  of
the  legislature  in  1818  and  the  two  following  years.
From  1828  till  1834,  excepting  one  year,  he  was


626


PAGE


PAGES


register  of  deeds  for  Grafton  county.  He  was
again  sent  to  the  legislature  in  1835,  elected  state
councillor  in  March,  1836,  and  in  the  following
June  was  chosen  as  a  Democrat  to  fill  the  vacancy
in  the  U.  S.  senate  caused  by  the  resignation  of
Isaac  Hill.  He  took  his  seat  on  13  June,  and  served
till  the  following  March.  In  1838  he  was  again  a
state  councillor,  and  in  1839  he  was  elected  gov
ernor  of  New  Hampshire,  serving  till  1842.

PAGE,  William,  artist,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  23
Jan.,  1811 :  d.  in  Tottenville,  Staten  island,  N.  Y.,
1  Oct.,  1885.  He  came  to  New  York  city  with  his
parents  at  the  age  of  nine,  and  in  1822  received  a

premium  from  the
American  institute
for  a  drawing  in  In
dia  ink.  At  the  age
of  fourteen  he  began
to  study  law  in  the
office  of  Frederick
I)e  Peyster,  which
he  soon  left  to  enter
the  studio  of  James
Herring,  and  in  less
than  a  year  lie  be
came  a  pupil  of
Samuel  F.  B.  Morse,
through  whom  he
was  also  enrolled  asa
student  in  the  Acad
emy  of  design.  His
drawings  in  the  an
tique  class  there  won
him  the  silver  medal,  but,  uniting  with  the  Pres
byterian  church,  lie  determined  to  enter  its  minis
try.  For  two  years  he  studied  theology  at  An-
dover  and  Amherst,  at  the  end  of  which  time  he
returned  to  art.  After  painting  portraits  in  Albany
for  a  year  he  went  to  New  York,  where  he  executed
likenesses  of  William  L.  Marcy  and  John  Quincy
Adams.  In  1836  he  was  elected  a  National  acade
mician,  and  he  was  president  of  the  academy  from
1871  till  1873.  About  1844  he  removed  to  Boston,
but  he  returned  in  1847  to  New  York,  whence,  after
a  stay  of  two  years,  he  went  to  Europe,  where  he
resided  for  eleven  years  in  Florence  and  Rome,
coming  back  to  New  York  in  1860.  While  he  was
in  Europe  he  painted  the  portraits  of  Robert
Browning  and  his  wife,  and  other  well-known
Englishmen  and  Americans,  and  produced  also  his
"  Venus,"  "  Moses  and  Aaron  on  Mount  Iloreb,"
"  Infant  Bacchus,"  and  "  Flight  into  Egypt."  He
also  took  occasion  to  study  the  works  of  the  great
masters,  notably  Titian,  whom  he  admired  and
emulated,  and  whose  method  of  painting  he  strove
to  discover.  The  copies  that  he  executed  of  Titian's
paintings  were  so  remarkable  that  one  of  them  was
seized  by  the  Florentine  authorities  under  the
belief  that  it  was  the  original.  Page  made  many
experiments  in  his  study  of  art  methods  and  color
theories,  and  published  a  "  New  Geometrical  Method
of  Measuring  the  Human  Figure "  (New  York,
1860).  His  portraits,  for  which  he  was  most  noted,
include  those  of  Hiram  Powers,  painted  in  Florence
about  1848,  Henry  Ward  Beecher,  Wendell  Phillips,
Charles  P.  Daly  (1848),  in  New  York  Historical
Society,  James  Russell  Lowell,  Josiah  Quincy,  Gov.
Reuben  E.  Fenton  (1870),  Charlotte  Cushmah,  Gen.
Grant  (1880),  Thomas  Le  Clear  (1883),  and  Charles
Sumner,  which  was  left  unfinished  at  the  death  of
the  statesman.  His  full-length  painting  of  Admiral
Farragut  at  the  battle  of  Mobile  Bay,  of  which  a
representation  is  given  in  the  article  FARRAGUT  in
this  work,  was  purchased  by  a  committee  in  1871,
and  presented  to  the  emperor  of  Russia.  In  1870


Page  exhibited  a  portrait  head  of  Christ  which
attracted  great  attention  and  excited  much  con
troversy.  His  other  paintings  include,  besides
those  already  mentioned,  "  The  Holy  Family "
(1837);  "The  Last  Interview  "  (1838) ;  "Head  of
Christ  "  (1870) ;  "  Ruth  and  Naomi " ;  and  "  Cupid  "
(1880).  In  1874  Page  made  a  second  visit  to
Europe,  in  order  to  study  the  supposed  death-mask
of  Shakespeare  that  is  preserved  in  Germany,  and
on  his  return  he  executed  a  large  bust  and  several
portraits  of  the  poet  (1874-'8).  He  also  possessed
mechanical  genius,  and  invented  and  patented  va
rious  improvements  in  boats  and  guns.

PAGE,  William  Byrd,  surgeon,  b.  in  Page-
brook,  Clarke  co.,  Va.,  19  May,  1817 ;  d.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  18  Feb.,  1877.  His  ancestor.  Col.  John
Page,  was  the  founder  of  the  Page  family  in  Vir
ginia.  He  was  graduated  in  arts  at  Kenyon  col
lege  in  1835,  and  in  medicine  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1839,  and  became  known  for  his
skill  as  a  surgeon.  He  was  for  many  years  pro
fessor  of  surgery  in  Pennsylvania  medical  college,
and  surgeon  to  the  Pennsylvania  institution  for
the  blind.  He  assisted  Dr.  J.  F.  Meigs  in  the
translation  of  medical  works  from  the  French.
He  was  a  fellow  of  the  College  of  physicians,  and  a
member  of  various  scientific  societies. — His  son,
Samuel  Davis,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
22  Sept.,  1840,  was  'graduated  at  Yale  in  1859,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1862,  and
took  a  graduate  course  in  Harvard  law-school.
He  entered  public  life  by  election  to  the  city  coun
cils,  and  subsequently  to  the  office  of  city  comp
troller.  He  took  part  in  the  presidential  canvass
of  1884  in  New  York  state  as  a  Democrat.  In  July,
1880,  he  was  appointed  assistant  treasurer  of  the
United  States.  His  most  important  public  work
is  the  active  part  he  took  as  chairman  of  the  va
rious  committees  that,  during  several  legislative
terms,  endeavored  to  secure  the  passage  of  the  bill
for  the  improvement  of  the  municipal  government
of  Philadelphia,  which  passed  on  1  June,  1885,  and
is  now  the  charter  of  that  city.  He  is  the  father
of  William  Byrd  Page,  who  has  recently  attained
some  note  as  an  athlete.

PAGES,  Pierre  Marie  Francois,  Viscount  de,
French  explorer,  b.  in  Toulouse  in  1748;  d.  in
Santo  Domingo  in  1793.  He  entered  the  navy  as
midshipman  in  1764,  was  promoted  to  2d  lieu
tenant,  and  in  1767  projected  an  expedition  to
search  for  the  northwest  passage  by  the  eastern
coast  of  Asia.  He  sailed  from  Cape  Francais.  in
Santo  Domingo,  on  30  June,  1767,  and,  although  he
was  unsuccessful  in  his  object,  he  explored  Lou
isiana,  Texas,  Mexico,  and  the  East  Indies,  re
turning  to  Marseilles,  5  Sept.,  1771.  After  some
difficulties  he  was  reinstated  in  the  navy  on  9
March,  1772.  During  the  following  year  he  took
part  in  the  expedition  of  Kerguelen  to  the  South
sea.  In  1776  he  engaged  passage  on  a  whaler  and
visited  Spitsbergen  and  the  coast  of  Greenland,
being  the  first  navigator  to  reach  80°  30'  north
latitude.  After  being  imprisoned  twice  by  ice
fields  he  reached  Amsterdam  on  15  Aug.,  1777.
The  fatigues  and  hardships  that  he  experienced
during  the  journey  having  impaired  his  health,  he
retired  from  the  navy  in  1782  and,  going  to  Santo
Domingo,  settled  upon  an  estate  that  belonged  to
his  wife,  a  Creole.  His  last  years  were  devoted  to
scientific  researches,  and  he  had  in  preparation
several  important  works  on  America  when  he  fell
in  1793  among  the  first  victims  of  the  negro  in
surgents.  Pages  was  a  member  of  many  learned
societies,  and  in  1782  was  created  a  knight  of  St.
Louis.  He  published  "  Observations  sur  1'histoire


PAIGE


PAINE


627


naturelle.  la  temperature,  les  mceurs,  1'industrie  et
les  habitants  du  royaume  de  la  Nouvelle  Espagne  "
(2  vols.,  Paris,  177*2) ;  "  Memoire  sur  1'anomalie  de
la  constitution  atruospherique  des  deux  poles"
(1775)  ;  "  Voyage  autour  du  monde  et  vers  les
deux  poles,  par  terre  et  par  mer,  pendant  les  annees
1767  a  1776"  (2  vols.,  1782  ;  translated  into  Dutch,
Rotterdam,  1784;  German,  Leipsic,  1786;  Swedish,
Cpsala,  1788;  and  English,  London,  1791,  and
Boston,  1793) ;  and  '•  Reflexions  sur  les  vents  d'est
qui  regnent  entre  les  tropiques,  sur  les  pluies  et  le
ciel  serein  dans  ce  parallele  et  les  circonvoisins "
(Cape  Fran9ais,  1790).

PAIGE,  Alonzo  Christopher,  jurist,  b.  in
Schaghticoke,  Rensselaer  co.,  N.  Y.,  31  July,  1797;
d.  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  31  March,  1868.  "He  was
graduated  at  Williams  in  1812,  began  the  study  of
theology,  but  soon  removed  to  Schenectady  to
read  law,  and  after  admission  to  the  bar  in  1819
practised  in  that  town.  He  was  sent  to  the  legis
lature  in  1826,  and  served  for  four  years.  He  was
reporter  of  the  court  of  chancery  from  1828  till
1846,  when  the  court  was  abolished.  In  1837-'42
he  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate.  On  the  in
troduction  of  the  elective  judiciary  system  in  1847
he  was  chosen  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  and
served  for  four  years.  He  was  again  elected  on  the
occurrence  of  a  A'acancy  in  1855,  and  held  the  office
for  two  more  years.  In  1867  he  was  a  member  of
the  State  constitutional  convention,  and  advocated
a  reform  in  the  election  laws.  Judge  Paige  re
ceived  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Williams  in
1860.  His  judicial  deliverances  are  esteemed  as
clear  and  learned  expositions  of  the  law.  He  com
piled  eleven  volumes  of  "  Reports  of  Cases  in  the
Court  of  Chancery"  (New  York,  1830-'48),  four  of
which  he  revised  and  annotated  in  1856-'7.

PAIGE,  Lucius  Robinson,  author,  b.  in  Hard-
wick,  Mass.,  8  March,  1802.  He  is  a  nephew  of  the
Rev.  Reed  Paige,  and  was  educated  at  the  academy
in  Hadley,  Mass.,  began  preaching  at  the  age  of
twenty-one,and  was  a  Uni versalist  minister  till  1839.
He  was  city  clerk  of  Cambridge,  Mass.,  from  that
year  till  1855,  and  then  treasurer  of  the  Cambridge-
port  savings  bank  till  1871.  He  has  been  a  justice
of  the  peace  since  1843,  and  in  1878-'9  was  a  rep
resentative  in  the  general  court.  After  his  retire
ment  from  the  pastorate  he  continued  to  preach
occasionally  for  thirty  years.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Tufts  college  in  1861.  In
the  earlier  part  of  his  life  Dr.  Tufts  was  a  frequent
contributor  to  various  theological  and  historical
periodicals.  A  polemic  in  reply  to  Timothy  Mer-
ritt,  printed  in  the  "Religious  Enquirer"  of  Hart
ford,  Conn.,  in  1830,  was  issued  in  pamphlet-form
under  the  title  of  "  Universalism  Defended."  His
next  publication  was  "  Selections  from  Eminent
Commentators  who  have  believed  in  Punishment
after  Death,  wherein  they  have  agreed  with  the
Universalists "  (Boston,  1833 ;  revised  eds.,  1840
and  1859).  "  Questions  on  Select  Portions  of  the
Gospels "  was  published  for  the  use  of  Sunday-
schools  and  Bible-classes  (Boston,  1838).  Among
his  published  addresses  is  one  delivered  on  15  Nov.,
1838,  at  the  centennial  celebration  in  Hard  wick
(Cambridge,  1838).  He  gave  many  years  of  study
to  a  •'  Commentary  on  the  New  Testament "  (Bos
ton.  1844-'70).  Dr.  Paige  is  also  the  author  of  a
"History  of  Cambridge,  Mass.,  1630-1877,"  with
a  genealogical  register  (Boston,  1877),  and  of  a
"History  of  Hardwick,  Mass.,"  also  accompanied
by  a  genealogical  register  (1883).

"PAINE,  Byron,  jurist,  b.  in  Painesville,  Ohio,
10  Oct.,  1827;  d.  in  Madison,  Wis.,  13  Jan..  1871.
His  great-grandfather,  Edward,  founded  Paines


ville  in  1800,  and  his  father,  James  Harvey,  held
the  rank  of  general  of  Ohio  militia,  and  was  an
early  anti-slavery  champion.  The  son  studied  in
Painesville  academy  and  in  1849  was  admitted  to
the  bar  of  Milwaukee,  whither  his  father  removed
in  1847.  He  was  judge  of  the  Milwaukee  county
court  from  1856  till  1859,  and  associate  justice  of
the  state  supreme  court  from  1859  till  1864.  He
attracted  much  attention  in  1854  as  defendant  for
Sherman  M.  Booth  in  his  trial  for  aiding  in  the
rescue  of  Joseph  Glover,  a  fugitive  slave,  who  had
been  captured  by  his  master  and  confined  in  the
Milwaukee  jail.  In  after-years  Judge  Paine  was
active  in  establishing  the  right  of  negro  suffrage.
He  entered  the  National  army  as  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  43d  Wisconsin  infantry  on  10  Aug.,  1864,
and  served  till  he  was  mustered  out  on  27  Nov..
1865.  From  1867  until  his  death  he  was  an  asso
ciate  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  Wisconsin,
and  from  1868  till  1871  was  professor  of  law  in  the
University  of  Wisconsin,  from  which  institution
he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1869.

PAINE,  Eleazar  A.,  soldier,  b.  in  Parkman,
Geauga  co.,  Ohio,  10  Sept.,  1815;  d.  in  Jersey  City,
N.  J.,  16  Dec.,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1839,  and  assigned  to
the  1st  infantry,  served  in  the  Florida  war  of
1839-'40,  and  resigned  on  11  Oct.,  1840.  Pie  then
studied  law  and  practised  in  Painesville,  Ohio,  from
1843  till  1848,  and  in  Monmouth,  111.,  from  1848  till

1861,  and  served  in  the  legislature  of  Illinois  in
1852-'3. In  1842-'5  he  was  deputy  U.  S.  marshal
for  Ohio,  and  also  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  Ohio
militia,  and  he  held  the  rank  of  brigadier-general
from  1845  till  1848.  He  was  appointed  colonel  of  the
9th  Illinois  volunteers  on  3  July,  1861,  and  served
throughout  the  civil  war,  being  made  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  on  3  Sept.,  1861,  and  leading
a  brigade  in  Paducah.  Ky..  in  1861,  and  in  Cairo,
111.,  in  1862. On  12  March,  1862,  he  was  assigned
to  the  command  of  the  first  division  of  the  Army
of  the  Mississippi,  under  Gen.  John  Pope,  and  par
ticipated  in  the  battle  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  which
terminated  in  its  capture,  21  March,  1862. He  was
also  present  at  the  capture  of  Island  No.  10,  and
took  part  in  the  advance  on  Corinth,  the  evacuation
of  which  was  materially  hastened  by  his  operations,
his  troops  being  engaged  with  the  Confederates  at
Farmington.  9  May,  1862. He  was  in  command  of
Gallatin,  Tenn.,  and guarded  the railroad from
Mitchellsville  to  Nashville,  Tenn.,  from  24  Nov.,

1862,  till  4  May,  1864,  and  was  in  command  of  the
district  of  Western  Kentucky  from  18  July  till  11
Sept.,  1864. Gen.  Paine  was  a  personal  friend  of
President  Lincoln,  from  whom  he  received  many
commendations  for  efficient  service. He  resigned
on  5  April,  1865.— His  cousin,  Halbert  Eleazar,
soldier,  b.  in  Chardon,  Ohio,  4  Feb.,  1826. After  his
graduation  at  Western  Reserve  in  1845  he  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Cleveland  in  1848,
and  removed  to  Milwaukee  in  1857. He  entered
the  National  army  in  May,  1861,  as  colonel  of  the
4th  Wisconsin regiment,  and became brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  on  13  March,  1863. He  served
mainly  in  the  Army  of  the  Gulf,  and  lost  a  leg  in
the  last  assault  on  Port  Hudson,  La.,  where  he  com
manded  the  3d  division  of  the  19th  corps. He  de
fended  Washington  during  Gen.  Jubal  A.  Early's
raid  in  1864,  was  bre vetted  major-general  of  volun
teers  on  13  March,  1865,  and  resigned  on  3  May  of
that  year. He  was  afterward  elected  to  congress
from  "Wisconsin  as  a  Republican,  serving  from  4
Dec.,  1865,  till  3  March,  1871,  and  was  instrumental
in  the  passage  of  a  bill,  dated  19  Dec.,  1869,  that  pro
vided  for  taking  meteorological  observations  in  the


628


PAINE


PAINE


interior  of  the  continent.  (See  ABBE,  CLEVELAND.)
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  loyalists'  con
vention  of  1806.  and  after  the  expiration  of  his  third
term  in  congress  practised  law  in  Washington,
D.  C.,  where  he  was  U.  S.  commissioner  of  patents
from  1879  till  1881.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Paine
on  Contested  Elections"  (Washington,  1888).

PAINE,  Elijah,  jurist,  b.  in  Brooklyn,  Conn.,
21  Jan.,  1757 ;  d.  in  Williamstown,  Vt.,  38  April,
1842.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1781,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1784,  began
to  practise  in  Vermont,  and  became  largely  inter
ested  in  the  development  of  that  state.  He  engaged
in  agricultural  enterprises  and  in  the  manufacture
of  American  cloths,  for  which  purpose  he  con
structed  an  establishment  at  a  cost  of  $40,000  in
Northfleld,  Vt.,  then  a  wilderness.  He  also  built  a
turnpike  about  twenty  miles  in  length  over  the
eastern  spurs  of  the  Green  mountains.  Mr.  Paine
was  a  member  and  secretary  of  the  convention  to
revise  the  state  constitution  in  1786,  and  in  1789
was  a  commissioner  to  adjust  the  claims  of  New
York  and  Vermont.  He  was  a  member  of  the
legislature  from  1787  till  1791,  at  the  end  of  which
term  he  was  appointed  judge  of  the  supreme  court,
holding  this  office  until  1795.  He  was  then  elected
U.  S.  senator,  as  a  Federalist,  serving  from  7  Dec.,
1795,  till  3  March,  1801,  and  from  that  year  until
his  death  he  was  U.  S.  judge  for  the  district  of
Vermont.  He  was  a  member  of  the  American
academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  of  the  American
antiquarian  society,  and  of  other  learned  bodies,
and  was  president  of  the  Vermont  colonization
society.  He  was  an  earnest  promoter  of  educa
tion,  being  a  trustee  of  Dartmouth  and  Middlebury
colleges,  and  of  the  University  of  Vermont.  In
1782  he  pronounced  the  first  oration  before  the
Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  of  Harvard.  Dartmouth
gave  him  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  B.  in  1786,  and
Harvard  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1812,  which  degree  he
also  received  from  the  University  of  Vermont  in
1825. — His  son,  Martyn,  physician,  b.  in  Williams-
town,  Vt.,  8  July,  1794 ;  d.  'in  New  York  city,  10
Nov.,  1877,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1813,  and
at  the  medical  department  in  1816.  He  practised
in  Montreal,  Canada,  from  1816  till  1822,  when  he
removed  to  New  York.  During  the  cholera  epi
demic  of  1832  he  published  a  series  of  letters  to
Dr.  John  C.  Warren,  of  Boston,  which  were  col
lected  in  a  volume  entitled  "  The  Cholera  Asphyxia
of  New  York"  (New  York,  1832).  In  1841  he
united  with  four  other  physicians  in  establishing
the  University  medical  college  (now  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  New  York),  in
which  he  was  professor  of  medicine  and  materia
medica  from  1841  till  1850,  and  of  therapeutics  and
materia  medica  from  1850  till  1867.  He  was  a
member  of  many  medical  societies  in  this  country
and  Europe,  and  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
the  University  of  Vermont  in  1854.  He  was  the
author  of  "  Medical  and  Physiological  Commen
taries  "  (3  vols.,  1840-'44) ;  •'  Essays  on  the  Philoso
phy  of  Vitality  and  on  the  Modus  Operandi  of
Remedial  Agents  "  (1842) ;  "  A  Therapeutical  Ar
rangement  of  Materia  Medica"  (1842) ;  "  Physiology
of  Digestion "  (1844) ;  "  Defence  of  the  Medical
Profession  of  the  United  States"  (1847);  "The
Institutes  of  Medicine  "  (1847 ;  9th  ed.,  1870) ;  "  Or
ganic  Life  as  Distinguished  from  Chemical  and
Physical  Doctrines  "  (1849) ;  "  Physiology  of  the
Soul  and  Instinct  as  Distinguished  from  Material
ism,"  in  opposition  to  Prof.  Huxley  and  the  natu
ralists  of  the  modern  school  (1848;  enlarged  ed.,
1872) ;  and  a  "  Review  of  Theoretical  Geology  "
(185(3).  In  1852  he  prepared  for  private  circulation


a  memoir  of  his  son,  Robert  Troup  Paine,  who
died  in  1851,  in  the  year  of  his  graduation  at  Har
vard,  and  he  also  contributed  largely  to  medical
periodicals.  A  series  of  articles  by  him  on  the
superiority  of  medical  education  in  the  United
States  over  that  of  Great  Britain,  founded  upon
parliamentary  documents,  appeared  editorially  in
the  New  York  "  Medical  Press  "  (1859). — Another
son,  Elijah,  lawyer,  b.  in  Williamstown,  Vt.,  10
April,  1796 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  6  Oct.,  1853,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1814,  and  studied  law  in
Litchneld,  Conn.  He  became  a  partner  of  Henry
Wheaton,  and  assisted  in  preparing  Wheatoirs
"  Reports  of  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  from  1816
till  1827"  (12  vols.,  New  York  and  Philadelphia,
1826-'7 ;  2d  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1847).  From  1850
till  1853  he  was  a  judge  of  the  superior  court  of
New  York,  and  his  decision  in  the  Lemmon  slave
case  was  particularly  able.  (See  ARTHUR,  CHESTER
ALAN.)  He  was  the  author  of  Paine's  "  U.  S.
Circuit  Reports"  (New  York,  1827;  2d  vol.,  pub
lished  by  Thomas  W.  Waterman,  1856) ;  and  in
connection  with  John  Duer  he  published  "  Practice
in  Civil  Actions  and  Proceedings  in  the  State  of
New  York  "  (2  vols.,  1830). — Another  son,  Charles,
governor  of  Vermont,  b.  in  Williamstown,  Vt.,  15
April,  1799;  d.  in  Waco,  Texas,  6  July,  1853,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1820,  and  engaged  suc
cessfully  in  manufacturing.  From  1841  till  1843
he  was  governor  of  Vermont,  and  he  was  a  liberal
benefactor  of  the  state  university  and  other  insti
tutions  of  learning.  He  rendered  the  state  great
service  in  the  construction  of  its  railroads,  and  was
active  in  the  Southern  Pacific  railroad  movement.

PAINE,  Ephraim,  congressman.  He  was  a
delegate  from  New  York  to  the  Continental  con
gress  in  1784.  He  suggested  "  that  another  com
missioner  be  appointed  in  addition  to  those  ap
pointed  by  the  act  of  congress  of  4  March  last  to
negotiate  with  the  Indians,"  which  was  resolved
upon.  He  also  moved  that  the  sum  of  $8,000
should  be  presented  to  Baron  Steuben,  which  was
seconded  by  Elbridge  T.  Gerry,  and  which  failed
in  its  passage,  but  was  subsequently  affirmed,  the
sum  being  increased  to  $10,000.

PAINE,  Henry  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Wins-
low,  Me.,  30  Aug.,  1810.  lie  was  graduated  at
Waterville  college  (now  Colby  university)  in  1830,
was  a  tutor  in  the  college  for  a  year,  and  later
studied  at  Harvard  law-school.  In  1834  he  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  practice  at  Hallo-
well.  In  1836,  1837,  and  1853  he  represented  that
town  in  the  Maine  legislature,  and  he  was  also  for
five  years  attorney  for  Kennebec  county.  In  1854
he  opened  a  law-office  in  Boston.  Here  he  speedily
took  rank  among  the  leaders  of  the  New  England
bar,  and  enjoyejl  a  large  and  lucrative  practice,
until  in  1874  declining  health  and  partial  deafness
compelled  him  to  confine  himself  to  office  busi
ness.  For  twenty-five  years  his  opinion  on  ab
struse  points  of  law  was  solicited  by  eminent  coun
sel  in  different  states,  while  as  referee  and  master
in  chancery  he  was  called  upon  to  arbitrate  in
many  difficult  and  complicated  law-cases,  involving
the  ownership  and  disposition  of  large  amounts  of
property.  In  1863,  and  again  in  1864,  Mr.  Paine
was  nominated  by  the  Democratic  party  of  Massa
chusetts  a  candidate  for  governor.  In  1872-'83  he
was  lecturer  at  the  law-school  of  Boston  university
on  the  law  of  real  property.  In  1854  he  received
from  Colby  university  the  degree  of  LL.  D. — His
cousin,  Timothy  Otis,  author,  b.  in  Winslow,
Kennebec  co.,  Me.,  13  Oct.,  1824,  was  graduated  at
Waterville  college  (now  Colby  university),  Me.,  in
1847,  and  since  1856  has  been  pastor  of  the  Sweden-


PAIXE


PAINE


629


borgian  church  at  Elmwood.  Mass.  In  1866,  at  the
organization  of  the  theological  school  of  the  gen
eral  convention  of  the  Xew  Jerusalem  church,  now
located  in  Boston,  Mass.,  he  was  appointed  teacher
of  Hebrew,  which  place  he  still  (1888)  holds.  In
1875  Colby  university  conferred  on  him  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  He  has  published  "  Solomon's  Temple,  or
the  Tabernacle  ;  The  First  Temple ;  House  of  the
King,  or  House  of  the  Forest  of  Lebanon  ;  Idola
trous  High  Places ;  The  City  on  the  Mountain :
The  Oblation  of  the  Holy  Portion ;  and  The  Last
Temple  "  (Boston,  18(51):  and  "  Solomon's  Temple
and  Capitol,  Ark  of  the  Flood  and  Tabernacle,  or
the  Holy  Houses  of  the  Hebrew,  Chaldee,  Syriac,
Samaritan,  Septuagint,  Coptic,  and  Itala  Scrip
tures''  (1885).

PAINE.  Horace  Marshfleld,  physician,  b.  in
Paris,  Oneida  co.,  X.  Y.,  19  Nov.,  1827.  He  was
educated  at  Xewark.  X.  J..  graduated  in  medicine
at  the  University  of  the  city  of  Xew  York  in  1849,
and  began  to  practise  as  a  homoeopathist  in  Albany,
where  he  has  continued,  with  the  exception  of  the
years  1855-'65,  when  he  was  in  Clinton,  X'.  Y.  Dr.
Paine  has  been  identified  with  the  liberal  branch
of  his  school,  rejecting  many  of  the  theories  of  its
founder.  He  has  made  many  efforts  toward  the
union  of  all  qualified  medical  practitioners  with
out  regard  to  therapeutic  belief,  and  the  present
standing  of  homoeopathy  is  due  largely  to  his  la
bors.  He  is  the  inventor  of  various  appliances  for
the  treatment  of  uterine  disorders,  and  is  a  mem
ber  of  numerous  medical  associations.  In  1887
he  was  elected  president  of  the  State  homoeopathic
medical  society.  He  was  an  editor  of  the  "  Medical
Union  "  of  Xew  York  in  1873-'4,  and  is  the  author
of  many  contributions  to  medical  literature. — His
brother.  John  Alsop,  archaeologist,  b.  in  Xewark,
X.  J.,  14  Jan.,  1840.  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  in
1859  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1862,
but  was  not  ordained  till  1867.  Having  engaged  in
original  investigations  in  several  branches  of  sci
ence  and  natural  history,  especially  in  that  of  bot
any,  he  made  many  additions  to  the  flora  of  the
state  of  Xew  York,  under  the  appointment  and  by
the  aid  of  the  regents  of  the  University  of  Xew
York,  who  published  his  "  Plants  of  Oneida  County
and  Vicinity"  (Albany,  1865),  he  was  appointed
to  the  chair  of  natural  science  at  Robert  college,
Constantinople,  in  1867,  which  post  he  held  until
1869,  and  from  which  he  received  the  degree  of
Ph.  D.  in  1874.  In  1870  he  was  appointed  pro
fessor  of  natural  history  and  German  at  Lake
Forest  university.  III.  In  1871  he  became  an  asso
ciate  editor  of  the  "  Independent."  In  1872  he
was  appointed  archaeologist  to  the  first  expedition
that  was  sent  by  the  Palestine  exploration  society
to  regions  east  of  the  Jordan  and  the  Dead  sea.  In
1873  he  discovered  and  deciphered  one  Roman  and
two  Greek  inscriptions  near  Beirut,  Syria,  the  chief
one  of  which,  in  Greek,  he  made  the  subject  of  a
special  report,  and  it  was  published  in  the  "  Sec
ond  Statement "  of  the  society  (1873).  His  reports
of  the  discoveries  during  the  first  season  of  the  ex
pedition,  chiefly  the  identification  of  Mount  Pis-
gah,  comprise  the  "  Third  Statement  "  issued  by  the
society.  In  1882-'4  he  edited  and  published  '•  The
Journal  of  Christian  Philosophy,"  and  in  1887  he
became  a  member  of  the  editorial  staff  of  the  dic
tionary  that  is  in  preparation  by  the  Century  com
pany.  Prof.  Paine  is  a  member  of  various  learned
societies.  He  has  contributed  a  large  number  of
articles  on  oriental  subjects  to  magazines  and  pe
riodicals,  and  has  now  (1888)  in  preparation  an
abridgment  of  Dr.  Edward  Robinson's  "  Biblical
Researches  in  Palestine,"  supplemented  by  a  review


of  all  discoveries  and  results  that  have  been  more
recently  added  in  sacred  geography.

PAINE.  John  Kuowles,  musician,  b.  in  Port
land,  Me.,  9  Jan.,  1839.  He  studied  music  under
Hermann  Kotzschmar  in  his  native  town,  and
made  his  first  appearance  there  as  an  organist  in
1857.  In  1858  he  went  to  Berlin,  Germany,  where
he  remained  three  years,  studying  the  organ,
composition,  instrumentation,  and  singing  under
Haupt,  Wieprecht,  and  others.  He  gave  several
organ  concerts  in  Germany,  made  an  artistic  tour
in  1865-'6,  and  returned  to  the  United  States.  In
1872  he  was  appointed  instructor  of  music  at  Har
vard,  and  in  1876  received  the  full  title  of  professor
of  music,  being  the  first  occupant  of  the  chair
at  that  university.  He  directed  his  "  Mass  "  at  the
Singakademie  in  Berlin  in  February,  1867,  and  his
oratorio  of  ••  St.  Peter  "  at  Portland  on  3  June,  1873.
His  first  symphony  was  brought  out  by  Theodore
Thomas  in  Boston,  6  Jan.,  1876.  Many  of  his  or
chestral  works  have  been  performed  in  the  princi
pal  cities  in  the  United  States.  He  composed  the
Centennial  Hymn,  to  the  words  of  John  G.  Whit-
tier,  that  was  sung  at  the  opening  of  the  exhibition
in  Philadelphia,  1876.  One  of  his  most  remarkable
works  is  the  music  to  the  "  (Edipus  Tyrannus  "  of
Sophocles,  as  performed  in  Greek  at  the  Sanders
theatre,  Cambridge,  in  May,  1881.  No  attempt  was
made  to  reproduce,  in  an  antiquarian  spirit,  the
crude  music  of  the  ancient  Greeks,  about  which
very  little  is  really  known  ;  but  the  most  complete
resources  of  modern  chorus  and  orchestra  were
brought  to  bear  upon  the  task  of  rendering  the
peculiar  and  subtle  religious  sentiment  of  the
Greek  tragic  drama.  The  result  is  a  work  of  won
derful  sublimity.  Among  his  later  compositions
may  especially  be  noticed  the  cantata  "Phoebus,
arise,"  words  by  Drummond,  of  Hawthornden
(1882) ;  Keats's  "  Realm  of  Fancy,"  for  chorus,
quartet,  and  orchestra  (1882) ;  Milton's  "  Nativity."
for  chorus,  solos,  and  orchestra,  composed  for  the
Handel  and  Haydn  festival  in  Boston  (1883) ;  "  A
Song  of  Promise,"  cantata  composed  for  the  Cin
cinnati  festival,  May,  1888,  being  a  grand  national
hymn.  He  is  now  (1888)  composing  an  opera,  upon
a  mediaeval  theme,  to  libretto  written  by  himself.
His  other  works  include  the  second  or  "  Spring  "
symphony,  an  overture  to  "As  you  Like  It,"  a  sym
phonic  fantasia  on  Shakespeare's  "  Tempest,"  and
many  songs,  motets,  organ-preludes,  string  quar
tets,  trios,  duos,  sonatas,  and  lighter  pieces  for  the
piano.  By  eminent  critics  in  Germany,  Prof.  Paine
is  ranked  among  the  foremost  living  composers.

PAINE,  Robert,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Person
county,  N.  C.,  12  Nov.,  1799  :  d.  in  Aberdeen,  Miss.,
20  Oct.,  1882.  On  9  Oct.,  1817,  he  united  with  the
Methodist  church,  and  began  to  preach  at  once
as  a  licentiate.  He  was  ordained  deacon  in  1821
and  elder  in  1823.  For  three  years  he  was  pre
siding  elder  of  the  Nashville  district,  and  in  1830
he  was  elected  president  of  La  Grange  college,
Ala.,  which  office  he  filled  for  sixteen  years.  He
was  several  times  a  member  of  the  conference
of  his  church,  and  in  1844  he  led  the  delegation.
In  that  year  he  was  a  leader  in  the  debates  that
preceded  the  division  of  the  church.  He  was
chairman  of  the  committee  of  nine  that  reported
the  plan  of  separation,  of  a  committee  to  draw  up
a  declaration  of  the  intention  of  the  delegates  of
the  southern  states,  and  a  member  of  the  Louis
ville  convention  in  1845.  which  organized  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church,  south,  and  he  exerted
a  powerful  influence  in  favor  of  the  claims  of  the
southern  church  to  a  division  of  the  property.  In
1846,  at  the  first  general  conference  of  the  new


630


PAINE


PAINE


body  in  Petersburg,  Va.,  he  was  elected  bishop.
During  the  civil  war  his  church  prosecuted  its
work  under  great  embarrassment  and  increasing
poverty,  during  which  the  energy  and  hopefulness
of  Bishop  Paine  were  a  constant  inspiration.  Sub
sequently  it  rose  above  its  embarrassment,  and  his
contemporaries  attributed  this  in  large  measure  to
his  efforts.  He  was  greatly  interested  in  missions.
Bishop  Paine  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from
the  University  of  Nashville,  and  that  of  D.  L).  from
Wesleyan  university  in  1842.  He  published  "  The
Life  and  Times  of  Bishop  McKendree"  (2  vols.,
1859),  which  is  essential  to  any  that  wish  to  study
that  period  in  the  history  of  the  Methodist  church.
His  only  other  publication  of  importance  was  a
small  controversial  work  against  Hopkinsianism.

PAINE,  Robert  Treat,  signer  of  the  Declara
tion  of  Independence,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  11
March,  1731;  d.  there,  11  May,  1814.  His  father,
Thomas  (b.  about  1097;  d.  in  1757),  was  for  several

years  pastor  of  a
church  in  Wcy-
rnouth,Mass.,but,
o  w  i  1 1  g  to  i  m  pai  re<  1
health,  resigned
his  charge  and
engaged  in  mer
cantile  pursuits  in
Boston.  He  pub
lished  an  "  Ordi
nation  Sermon  "
(1719);  a  "Lec
ture  on  Origi
nal  Sin"  (1724);
and  a  "  Lecture
on  Earthquakes"
(1728).  The  son
was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1749.
went  to  Europe
on  mercantile  business,  studied  theology,  acted  as
chaplain  of  the  troops  on  the  northern  "frontier  in
1755,  and  subsequently  preached  in  the  pulpits  of
the  regular  clergy  in  Boston  and  in  its  vicinity.
He  then  studied  law,  supporting  himself  by  teach
ing,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1759,  and  practised
for  a  time  in  Boston.  He  afterward  removed  to
Taunton,  Mass.,  and  was  a  delegate  from  that  town
in  1768  to  the  convention  that  was  called  at  Bos
ton  after  the  dissolution  of  the  general  court  by  Sir
Francis  Bernard,  governor  of  Massachusetts,  for
refusing  to  rescind  the  circular  letter  to  the  other
colonies  requesting  them  to  act  in  concert  for  the
public  good.  In  1770  he  came  more  prominently
into  public  notice  by  conducting  with  ability  and
ingenuity,  in  the  absence  of  the  attorney-general,
the  prosecution  against  Capt.  Thomas  Preston
and  his  men  for  firing  on  inhabitants  of  Boston  on
5  March,  1770.  In  1773-'4  he  was  a  delegate  from
Taunton  to  the  general  assembly  of  Massachusetts,
and  was  one  of  the  members  that  were  chosen  to
conduct  the  impeachment  of  Peter  Oliver,  then
chief  justice  of  the  province,  who  was  charged
with  receiving  his  stipend  from  the  king  instead
of  a  grant  from  the  assembly.  Fie  was  a  delegate
to  the  Provincial  congress  in  1774-'5,  and  to  the
Continental  congress  Irom  1774  till  1778,  serving
on  important  committees  and  signing  the  Declara
tion  of  Independence.  In  the  autumn  of  1775  he
was  appointed  one  of  a  committee  of  three  to  visit
Gen.  Philip  Schuyler's  army  on  the  northern  fron
tier.  During  his  term  in  congress  he  was  chair
man  of  a  committee  to  make  contracts  for  muskets
and  bayonets  and  for  encouraging  the  manufac
ture  of  fire-arms,  and  held  important  offices  in


|  Massachusetts,  being  in  1777  speaker  of  the  house
of  representatives  and  attorney-general.  In  1778
he  was  one  of  a  committee  on  the  part  of  Massa
chusetts  to  meet  others  from  the  northern  states
in  New  Haven  to  regulate  the  pi-ice  of  labor,  pro
visions,  and  manufactures,  and  presented  the  case
to  the  legislature,  which  soon  passed  a  bill  to  pre
vent  oppression  and  monopoly.  In  1779  he  was  a
member  of  the  executive  council  and  a  delegate  to
the  State  constitutional  convention  and  the  adop
tion  of  the  new  constitution.  In  the  following  year
he  was  chosen  attorney-general  of  Massachusetts.
He  held  this  office  until  1790,  when  he  became
a  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  which  post  lie  re
signed  in  1804.  In  that  year  he  was  again  a  state
councillor.  His  legal  attainments  were  great,  and
he  was  an  able  and  impartial  judge,  an  excellent
scholar,  and  noted  for  the  brilliancy  of  his  wit.
Mr.  Paine  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Harvard  in  1805,  and  was  a  founder  of  the  Ameri
can  academy  of  arts  and  sciences  in  1780. — His  son,
Robert  Treat,  poet,  b.  in  Taunton,  Mass.,  9  Dec.,
1773:  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  13  Nov.,  1811,  was  origi
nally  named  Thomas,  but  in  1801  assumed  the
name  of  his  father,  by  act  of  legislature.  He  was
accustomed  to  say  that  he  now  had  a  "  Christian  "
name,  alluding  to  the  deistic  doctrines  of  his
namesake,  Thomas  Paine.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1792,  and  entered  a  counting-house
in  Boston.  During  this  period  he  was  a  frequent
contributor  to  the  "  Massachusetts  Gazette."  In
1794  he  established  a  semi-weekly  newspaper
called  the  "Federal  Orrery,"  which  he  conducted
for  two  years  without  discretion  or  profit,  and
in  which  appeared  "  The  Jacobiniad "  and  "  The
Lyars,"  whose  personalities  made  him  many  ene
mies  and  occasioned  assaults  upon  his  person.  In
1792  professional  actors  made  their  first  appear
ance  in  Boston,  and,  in  order  to  avoid  collision  with
the  law  forbidding  "  stage  plays,"  their  perform
ances  were  termed  dramatic  recitations.  This  law
was  repealed  in  1793,  and  in  the  next  year  the
Federal  theatre  was  built  and  opened  with  a  prize
prologue  by  Paine,  who  became  intimate  with  those
connected  with  the  stage,  and  married  an  actress.
This  led  to  a  disagreement  with  his  father  and  his
exclusion  from  fashionable  society.  Resigning  the
office  of  "  master  of  ceremonies,"  which  post  had
been  created  for  him  at  the  theatre,  he  removed  to
Newburyport  and  studied  law  under  Theophilus
Parsons,  with  whom  he  practised  in  Boston  in
1802.  Although  he  achieved  success  and  had  brill
iant  prospects,  he  resumed  his  intimacy  with  act
ors,  wrote  criticisms  of  the  theatre,  and  returned
to  his  unsettled  mode  of  life,  passing  his  latter
days  in  destitution  and  misery.  On  taking  his
degree  of  A.  M.  at  Cambridge  in  1795,  he  delivered
a  poem  entitled  "  The  Invention  of  Letters,"  con
taining  some  lines  on  Jacobinism,  which  he  spoke,
notwithstanding  they  had  been  crossed  out  by  the
college  authorities.  It  is  dedicated  to  Washington
and  closes  with  a  rapturous  eulogy  of  him.  For
this  composition  he  received  $1,500,  or  more  than
$5  a  line.  He  gained  $1,200  on  the  publication  of
"The  Ruling  Passion"  in  1797,  and  $750  for
the  famous  song  "  Adams  and  Liberty,"  written
in  1798  at  the  request  of  the  Massachusetts  chari
table  fire  society.  When  he  showed  this  to  a  friend
in  whose  house  he  was  visiting,  his  host  pronounced
it  imperfect,  as  the  name  of  Washington  was
omitted,  and  declared  that  Paine  should  not  ap
proach  the  sideboard,  on  which  wine  had  just  been
placed,  until  he  had  written  an  additional  stanza.
In  a  few  moments  Paine  wrote  the  verse,  which  is
considered  the  best  in  the  song.  In  1799  he  de-


PAINE


PAINE


631


livercd  an  oration  on  the  first  anniversary  of  the
dissolution  of  the  alliance  with  France,  for  which
he  was  complimented  by  Gen.  Washington,  lie
delivered  a  eulogy  on  Washington  at  Newburyport
on  2  Jan.,  1800.  Although  possessing  a  prolific
imagination,  bold  views,  wit,  and  sarcasm,  Paine's
writings  are  all  commonplace.  In  searching  for
effect  he  became  tawdry.  A  collection  of  his  writ
ings  was  published  by  Charles  Prentiss  (Boston,
1812). — His  great-grandson,  Charles  Jackson,
soldier,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  26  Aug.,  1833,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1853,  and  entered  the
National  army  as  captain  in  the  22d  Massachusetts
volunteers  on  8  Oct.,  1861.  He  became  major  of
the  Eastern  Bay  State  regiment  on  14  Jan.,  1862,
was  sent  to  Ship  island,  Miss.,  was  made  colonel  of
the  2d  Louisiana  volunteers  in  September,  1862,
and  led  a  brigade  during  the  siege  of  Port  Hudson,
La.,  24  May  till  8  July,  1863.  He  then  joined
Gen.  Benjamin  P.  Butler  in  the  Department  of
Virginia  and  North  Carolina,  participating  in  the
battle  of  Drewry's  Bluff,  Va.,  12-16  May,  1864,  and
commanded  a  division  of  colored  troops  in  the  at
tack  at  Newmarket,  Va.,  29  Sept.,  1864.  He  also
participated  in  the  expedition  against  Fort  J^isher,
15  Jan.,  1865,  was  afterward  with  Sherman's  army
in  North  Carolina,  and  was  in
command  of  the  district  of
New  Berne.  He  was  appoint
ed  brigadier-general  of  volun
teers  on  4  July,  1864,  received
the  brevet  of  major-general
of  volunteers  on  15  Jan.,  1865.
and  was  mustered  out  on  15
Jan.,  1866.  Gen.  Paine  has
taken  much  interest  in  yacht
ing,  is  a  member  of  the  New
York  yacht  club,  and  has  three
times  successfully  defended
the  "America's"  cup,  for  which
service  the  club,  in  February,
1888,  presented  him  the  silver
cup  represented  in  the  illus
tration.  The  original  is  twen
ty-seven  inches  high.  In  1885
he  was  one  of  the  syndicate
that  built  the  "  Puritan,"  with
which  he  defeated  the  "  Genes-
ta,"  arid  in  1886-'7  built  alone  the  "  Mayflower,"
which  contested  the  cup  with  the  "  Galatea,"  and
the  "  Volunteer,"  which  defeated  the  "  Thistle  "  in
September,  1887.

PAINE,  Thomas,  b.in  Thetford,  Norfolk,  Eng
land,  29  Jan.,  1737;  d.  in  New  York,  8  June,  1809.
His  father,  a  Quaker,  was  a  stay-maker,  and  Paine
was  brought  up  to  the  trade.  "  He  left  home  be
fore  reaching  his  majority,  and  went  to  London,
but  soon  moved  to  Sandwich,  where  he  married
the  daughter  of  an  exciseman  and  entered  the  ex
cise  service.  On  the  death  of  his  wife,  who  lived
but  a  year,  he  returned  to  London,  and,  after  teach
ing,  re-entered  the  excise  service,  in  which  he  re
mained  for  some  years,  employing  some  of  his
leisure  time  in  writing  prose  and  verse  and  preach
ing  from  dissenting  pulpits.  He  was  selected  by
his  official  associates  to  embody  in  a  paper  their
complaints  and  desires  regarding  the  management
of  the  excise ;  and  on  this  work  he  displayed  such
ability  as  a  writer  that  Benjamin  Franklin,  then
the  Pennsylvania  colony's  agent  at  London,  sug
gested  that  America  would  be  a  more  satisfac
tory  field  for  the  exercise  of  his  special  abilities.
Naturally  a  republican  and  radical,  and  so  persist
ent  a  critic  of  England's  government  and  politi
cal  customs  that  he  seemed  almost  to  hate  his


native  land,  Paine  came  to  this  country  in  1774,
and,  through  letters  from  Franklin,  at  once  found
work  for  his  pen.  Within  a  year  he  became  editor
of  the  "Pennsylvania  Magazine,"  and  in  the  same
year  contributed  to  Bradford's  "  Pennsylvania
Journal"  a  strong  anti-
slavery  essay.  The  liter
ary  work  that  gave  him
greatest  prominence,  and
probably  has  had  more
influence  than  all  his
other  writings  combined,
was  "  Common  Sense,"  a
pamphlet  published  early
in  1776,  advocating  abso
lute  independence  from
the  mother  country.  In
this  little  book  appeared
all  the  arguments  that
had  been  made  in  favor
of  separation,  each  being
stated  with  great  clear
ness  and  force,  yet  with
such  simplicity  as  to
bring  them  within  the
comprehension  of  all
classes  of  readers.  The  effect  of  this  pamphlet  was
so  powerful,  instantaneous,  and  general  that  the
Pennsylvania  legislature  voted  Paine  £500,  the  uni
versity  of  the  state  conferred  upon  him  the  degree
of  M.  A.,  and  the  Philosophical  society  admitted  him
to  membership.  "Common  Sense"  soon  appeared
in  Europe  in  different  languages,  and  is  still  fre-

?uently  quoted  by  republicans  in  European  nations,
lis  "  Crisis,"  which  appeared  at  irreg-ular  intervals
during  the  war  for  independence,  was  also  of  great
service  to  the  patriot  cause ;  the  first  number,  pub
lished  in  the  winter  of  1776,  was  read,  by  Washing
ton's  order,  to  each  regiment  and  detachment  in  the
service,  and  did  much  to  relieve  the  despondency
that  was  general  in  the  army  at  that  time.  It  has
frequently  been  asserted  that  Paine  was  the  author
of  the  original  draft  of  the  Declaration  of  Inde
pendence,  but  the  evidence  offered  is  far  from  con
clusive.  After  serving  a  short  time  in  the  army  as
aide  to  Gen.  Nathanael  Greene,  he  became  secretary
of  the  congressional  committee  on  foreign  affairs,
and  losing  this  place  in  1779,  through  charges
against  Silas  Deane,  commissioner  to  France,  he
became  clerk  of  the  Pennsylvania  legislature.
While  holding  this  place  Paine  made  an  urgent
appeal  to  the  people  in  behalf  of  the  army,  which
was  in  extreme  destitution  and  distress,  and  he
proved  his  earnestness  by  subscribing  his  entire
salary  for  the  year  to  the  fund  that  was  raised.  In
1781  "he  was  associated  with  Col.  Laurens  in  the
successful  effort  to  obtain  loans  from  France  and
Holland.  The  nation  was  profoundly  grateful  for
Paine's  services,  and  endeavored  to  reward  him.
Soon  after  peace  was  declared  congress  voted  him
$3,000,  the  state  of  New  York  gave  him  a  large
farm  in  Westchester  county,  and  Pennsylvania
again  made  him  clerk  of  her  legislature.

The  close  of  the  war  deprived  him  for  a  time  of
the  intense  mental  stimulus  that  seemed  necessary
to  his  pen,  and  he  turned  his  attention  to  me
chanics,  one  of  his  inventions  being  an  iron  bridge,
which  he  endeavored,  in  1787,  to  introduce  in
Europe.  Reaching  France  during  the  revolution
ary  period,  he  published,  under  an  assumed  name,
a  pamphlet  advocating  the  abolition  of  royalty.
In  1791  he  published  in  England  his  "  Rights  of
Man,'*  in  reply  to  Burke's  "  Reflections  on  the
French  Revolution."  For  this  he  was  outlawed  by
the  court  of  king's  bench,  in  spite  of  an  able  de-


632


PAIXE


PAINE


fence  by  Lord  Erskine.  Escaping  from  England,
he  went  to  France,  where  he  was  received  as  a  hero
and  elected  a  member  of  the  National  convention.
His  republicanism,  however,  was  not  extreme
enough  to  please  the  Jacobins ;  he  opposed  the  be
heading  of  the  king,  urging  that  Louis  should  be
banished  to  America.  The  Jacobins  finally  ex
pelled  him  from  the  convention  on  the  ground  that
he  was  a  foreigner,  although  he  had  become  a
French  citizen  by  naturalization,  and  Robespierre
had  him  thrown  into  the  Luxembourg  prison,  where
he  spent  nearly  a  year  in  anticipation  of  the  guillo
tine.  Release'd  finally  through  the  efforts  of
James  Monroe,  American  minister  to  France-,  he
resumed  his  seat  in  the  convention,  and  gave  last
ing  offence  to  the  people  of  the  United  States  by
writing  an  abusive  letter  to  President  Washington,
whom  he  accused  of  not  endeavoring  to  secure  his
release  from  prison.  He  also  alienated  most  of  his
American  friends  and  admirers  who  were  religiously
inclined  by  his  "  Age  of  Reason  "  (2  parts,  London
and  Paris,  1794-'5),  an  attack  upon  the  Bible,  writ
ten  partly  while  he  was  in  the  Luxembourg  prison.
Six  years  later,  however,  when  he  returned  to  the
United  States,  he  still  stood  so  high  in  public  es
teem  that  President  Jefferson  allowed  him,  at  his
own  request,  to  be  brought  home  by  an  American
sloop-of-war,  and  he  was  favorably  received  in  soci
ety.  He  took  no  active  part  in  politics  after  his  re
turn,  and  it  is  generally  admitted  that  intemper
ance  and  other  vices  had  weakened  his  mental  abili
ties.  In  1809  he  died  in  New  York,  and  by  his  own
direction  was  buried  on  his  farm  at  New  Rochelle,
where  he  had  spent  most  of  the  seven  last  years  of
his  life.  A  few  years  later  William  Cobbett,  the
English  radical,  removed  Paine's  bones  to  England,
with  the  hope  of  increasing  enthusiasm  for  the  re
publican  ideas  of  which  Paine  was  still  the  favorite
exemplar  in  print :  but  the  movement  did  not  pro
duce  the  desired  effect,  and  it  is  believed  that  the
remains  found  their  final  resting-place  in  France.
The  monument  for  which  Paine  provided  in  his
will  still  stands  over  his  first  grave,  beside  the  road
from  New  Rochelle  to  White  Plains.

In  addition  to  the  books  that  made  him  promi
nent  as  a  republican,  patriot,  and  unbeliever,  Paine
wrote  many  pamphlets,  some  published  anonymous
ly.  Most  of  them  were  on  political  topics  of  the  time;
but  he  also  wrote  largely  on  economics  and  applied
science.  Among  his  later  works  were  suggestions  on
the  building  of  war-ships,  iron  bridges,  the  treat
ment  of  yellow  fever,  Great  Britain's  financial  sys
tem,  and  the  principles  of  government ;  he  also  for
mulated  and  published  a  plan  by  which  govern
ments  should  impose  a  special  tax  "on  all  estates,  at
the  owner's  death,  for  the  creation  and  maintenance
of  a  fund  from  which  all  persons,  on  reaching
twenty-one  years,  should  receive  a  sum  sufficient  to
establish  them  in  business,  and  by  which  all  in  the
decline  of  life  should  be  saved  from  destitution.

Few  men  not  occupying  his  official  or  ecclesiasti
cal  position  have  been  as  widely  known  as  Paine,
or  subjects  of  opinions  so  contradictory.  Abhor
rence  of  his  anti-religious  writings  has  made  many
critics  endeavor  to  belittle  his  ability  and  attribute
his  "  Common  Sense,"  "  Crisis,"  and  "  Rights  of
Man"  to  the  inspiration  of  other  minds.  It  is
known  that  "  Common  Sense  "  was  written  at  the
suggestion  of  the  noted  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush,  of
Philadelphia.  But  beyond  doubt  Washington,
Franklin,  and  all  other  prominent  men  of  the
Revolutionary  period  gave  Paine  the  sole  credit  for
everything  that  came  from  his  pen,  and  regarded
his  services  to  the  patriot  cause  as  of  very  high  and
enduring  quality.  His  "  Rights  of  Man,"  if  the


undenied  statement  as  to  its  circulation  (a  million
and  a  half  copies)  is  correct,  was  more  largely  read
in  England  and  France  than  any  other  political
work  ever  published.  His  '•  Age'  of  Reason,"  al
though  very  weak  as  an  attack  upon  the  Scriptures,
when  compared  with  some  of  the  later  criticisms  of
the  German  school,  and  even  of  some  followers  of
Bishop  Colenso,  was  so  dreaded  in  its  day  that
more  than  twenty  replies,  by  as  many  famous
divines,  quickly  appeared  ;  among  these  was  Bishop
Watson's  famous  "  Apology  for  the  Bible."  Many
of  Paine's  later  acquaintances  believed  that  the
author  of  the  "  Age  of  Reason  "  was  not  proud  of
his  most  berated  book.  Paine  admitted,  on  his
return  to  this  country,  that  he  regretted  having
published  the  work,  for,  while  he  did  not  disavow
any  of  the  contents,  he  had  become  convinced  that
it  could  do  no  good  and  might  do  much  harm.  It  is
known  that  Benjamin  Franklin,  himself  a  doubter,
counselled  Paine  not  to  publish  the  "  Age  of  Rea
son,"  saying:  "  Burn  this  piece  before  it  is  seen  by
any  other  person,  whereby  you  will  save  yourself  a
good  deal  of  mortification  from  the  enemies  it  may
raise  you,  and  perhaps  a  good  deal  of  regret  and
repentance."  The  fault  of  the  book  was  not  mere
ly  that  it  questioned  cherished  religious  beliefs,
but  that  it  attacked  them  with  invective  and  scur
rility  of  a  low  order.  Paine's  apologists  plead  in
extenuation  that  much  of  the  book  was  written  in
prison,  under  circumstances  that  destroyed  the  faith
of  thousands  more  religious  than  the  author  of  the
"  Age  of  Reason."  It  must  be  noted  that  Paine
never  was  an  atheist ;  born  a  Quaker,  and  roaming
through  the  various  fields  of  dissent  from  the  estab
lished  faith,  he  always  believed  in  the  existence  of
a  God,  and  had  high  and  unselfish  ideals  of  the
Christian  virtues.  Men  who  died  not  many  years
ago  remembered  that  in  the  last  few  years  of  his
life  Paine  frequently  preached  on  Sunday  after
noons  in  a  grove  at  New  Rochelle,  and  that  his  ser
mons  were  generally  earnest  and  unobjectionable
homilies.  By  nature  Paine  was  a  special  pleader,
and  neither  education  nor  experience  ever  modi
fied  his  natural  bent.  lie  was  a  thinker  of  some
merit,  but  had  not  enough  patience,  continuity,
or  judicial  quality  to  study  any  subject  thoroughly.
Whatever  conscience  he  possessed  was  generally
overborne  by  the  impulse  of  a  strong  nature  that
never  had  practised  self-control.  lie  lacked  even
the  restraint  of  family  influence ;  his  first  wife
lived  but  a  short  time,  from  his  second  wife  he  soon
separated,  an  irregular  attachment  to  the  wife  of  a
Paris  publisher  did  not  improve  his  character,  and
he  had  no  children  nor  any  relative  in  this  country.
Although  affectionate  and  generous,  he  was  so  self-
willed  and  arrogant  that  none  of  his  friendships
could  be  lasting  after  they  became  close.  Between
improvidence  and  the  irregularities  of  his  life  he
frequently  fell  into  distresses  that  embittered  his
spirit  and  separated  him  from  men  who  admired
his  abilities  and  desired  to  befriend  him.  In  spite
of  his  faults,  however,  the  sincerity  of  his  devotion
to  the  cause  of  liberty  cannot  be  doubted,  nor
can  the  magnitude  of  his  service  to  the  United
States  be  diminished.

PAINE,  William,  physician,  b.  in  Worcester,
Mass.,  5  June,  1750;  d.  there,  19  April,  1833.  He
was  the  son  of  Timothy  Paine,  a  loyalist,  and  was
graduated  at  Harvard  m  1768.  Having  been  pro
scribed  as  a  loyalist  in  1778,  he  became  surgeon  to
the  British  forces  in  Rhode  Island  and  New  York,
ami  was  surgeon-general  in  1782.  After  the  Revo
lution  he  settled  in  New  Brunswick,  was  a  member
of  the  assembly  for  Charlotte  county,  clerk  of  that
body,  and  deputy  surveyor  of  the  king's  forests  in


PAIXE


PALAFOX Y MEXDOZA


633


America.  He  removed  to  Salem,  Mass.,  in  1787,
and  in  1793  to  Worcester.

PAIXE.  William,  physician,  b.  in  Chesterfield,
Mass.,  in  1821.  He  became  professor  of  the  princi
ples  and  practice  of  medicine  and  pathology  in  the
Eclectic  medical  college  of  Pennsylvania,  at  Phila
delphia,  and  became  editor  of  the  "  Eclectic  Medi
cal  Journal "  in  that  city,  and  of  the  "  University
Journal  of  Medicine  and  Surgery."  He  is  the  au
thor  of  "Epitome  of  the  American  Eclectic  Prac
tice  of  Medicine  "  (Philadelphia.  1857) ;  "  American
Eclectic  Practice  of  Surgery,  Obstetrics,  and  Dis
eases  of  Women  and  Children  "  (1859) ;  and  "  The
Domestic  Practice  of  Medicine  "  (1869).

PAINTER,  Gamaliel,  jurist,  b.  in  Xew  Haven,
Conn.,  22  May,  1743;  d.  in  Middlebury,  Vt.,  21
May,  1819.  He  received  a  common-school  educa
tion,  and  erected  the  first  house  in  Middlebury,  Vt.,
in  1773.  He  served  as  a  captain  and  quartermaster
in  the  war  of  the  Revolution,  and  was  a  delegate
to  the  convention  that,  in  1777,  declared  the  inde
pendence  of  Vermont.  He  was  a  representative  in
the  Vermont  legislature,  a  judge  of  the  county
court,  and  a  councillor  in  1813-'14,  and  a  member  of
the  first  constitutional  convention  of  Vermont  in
1793.  He  was  the  principal  founder  of  Middle-
bury  college,  to  which  he  left  a  bequest  of  $10,000
at  his  death.

PAKENHAM,  Sir  Edward  Michael,  British
soldier,  b.  in  Pakenham  Hall,  County  Westmeath,
Ireland,  19  March,  1778  ;  d.  near  Xew  Orleans,  La.,
8  Jan.,  1815.  He  was  the  second  son  of  the  Earl
of  Longford.  His  early  education  must  have  been
that  of  a  mere  school-boy,  for  he  became  a  lieuten
ant  in  the  92d  foot  on  28  May,  1794.  and  a  captain
in  the  same  regiment  on  31  May  of  the  same  year.
On  0  Dec.  he  was  made  a  major  in  the  33d  dra
goons,  and  on  1  Jan..  1798,  he  was  transferred  to
the  23d  dragoons.  He  was  subsequently  promoted
to  lieutenant-colonel,  17  Oct.,  1799,  brevet-colonel,
25  Oct.,  1809,  and  major-general,  1  Jan.,  1812.
Pakenham  served  in  the  peninsula  and  the  south
of  France  under  his  brother-in-law,  the  Duke  of
Wellington,  in  various  capacities.  After  com
manding  first  a  battalion  and  then  a  brigade,  he
became  adjutant-general,  and  finally  was  placed  at
the  head  of  the  division  that  broke  the  French
centre  at  the  battle  of  Salamanca.  The  duke  used
to  say  that  this  was  the  best-manoeuvred  battle  in
the  whole  war.  The  two  armies  faced  each  other,
and  moved  in  parallel  lines  for  three  days.  They
saw  clearly  from  opposite  rising  grounds  whatever
went  on  in  either  camp,  the  valley  that  divided
them  measuring  not  more  than  half  a  mile  across.
Gen.  Marmont's  object  was  to  interpose  between
Wellington  and  Badajoz ;  Wellington's  object,  to
prevent  this.  In  their  eagerness  to  gain  their
point,  the  French  leading  divisions  outmarched
those  that  followed,  and  thus  caused  a  vacant
space  in  the  centre,  of  which  the  duke  took  instant
advantage.  "  Xow's  your  time,  Xed,"  he  said  to
Pakenham,  who  stood  near  him.  The  hint  was
enough.  Pakenham  kissed  his  brother-in-law,  and,
giving  the  word  to  his  division,  moved  on,  and
won  the  battle.

The  death  of  Gen.  Ross  before  Baltimore  led  to
the  selection  of  Pakenham  to  command  the  British
force  that  had  hitherto  operated  in  the  Chesapeake,
but  which  were  now  to  be  used  in  an  expedition
against  Xew  Orleans.  He  ought  to  have  joined  it
in  Jamaica,  to  which  re-enforcements  were  sent,  but
adverse  winds  detained  him,  and  he  did  not  reach
his  command  till  after  the  landing  had  been
effected  below  Xew  Orleans  and  an  action  had
taken  place  in  which  each  side  had  lost  more  than


200  men.  He  found  the  army  in  a  false  position
on  a  narrow  neck  of  land  flanked  on  one  side  by
Mississippi  river,  and  on  the  other  by  an  impass
able  morass.  He  had  opposed  to  him  one  of  the
ablest  of  the  generals  that  the  United  States  has
produced.  (See  JACKSON,  ANDREW.)  After  a  costly
reconnoissance,  Pakenham  erected  bastions  of  hogs
heads  of  sugar,  and  mounted  thirty  guns,  but  on  1
Jan.,  1815,  these  defences  were  destroyed  by  the
American  fire.  In  the  week  that  followed  both
sides  were  re-enforced.  It  is  just  possible  that  if
Pakenham  had  been  patient  enough  to  wait  the
development  of  his  own  plans  he  might  have  carried
the  American  lines  and  entered  Xew  Orleans.  It
was  his  intention  to  attack  on  both  sides  of  the
river  before  dawn  on  8  Jan.  But  there  was  delay
in  crossing,  and  he  impatiently  sent  up  the  signal
rocket  before  his  men  on  the  west  side  of  the  river
were  ready.  He  was  killed  in  the  unsuccessful
assault  that  followed.

PALACIO,  Diego  Garcia  de  (pah-lah'-the-o).
Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Asturias,  Spain,  about  1530 ;
d.  after  1580.  Little  is  known  of  his  early  life,
except  that  he  was  auditor  of  Guatemala  in  1576,
according  to  a  report  that  was  made  by  him  to  the
king  of  Spain  in  that  year,  and  published  in  1860
by  Ephraim  G.  Squier  in  his  "  Documents  concern
ing  the  Discovery  and  Conquest  of  America."  under
the  title  of  "  Carta  dirigida  al  Rey."  His  name  is
found  again  on  a  contract  that  was  made  with
i  Diego  Lopez  of  Trujillo,  Honduras,  on  4  Dec..  1576,
j  for  the  conquest  and  colonization  of  the  province
of  Tegucigalpa,  from  Cape  Camaron  to  San  Juan
!  river.  In  another  letter  to  the  king,  dated  8  March,
!  1578,  which  is  in  the  archives  of  Seville,  he  offered
to  conquer  and  pacify  the  Philippine  islands  at
his  own  expense,  and  urged  the  change  of  the
transit  between  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific,  from
Mexico  and  Panama,  to  the  route  through  Hon
duras,  from  Puerto  Caballos  to  the  Bay  of  Fonseca.
On  30  April,  1579,  he  addressed  another  letter  to
I  the  crown  from  Xicaragua  about  the  pillaging  of
the  coast  of  Peru  by  Francis  Drake.  In  1580  he
was  ordered  as  auditor  to  Mexico,  and  he  was  given
in  1581  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  by  the  University  of,
that  city,,  of  which  he  afterward  became  rector.
I  He  was  appointed  commander  of  the  fleet  that  was
!  despatched  from  Acapulco  against  the  English
j  corsairs  of  the  South  sea,  and  his  commission,  which
'  is  in  the  archives  of  Mexico,  gave  him  great  lati
tude,  but  the  result  of  the  expedition  is  not  known,
and  his  name  does  not  appear  again.  He  wrote
"  Dialogos  .Militares "  (Mexico,  1583)  and  "  In-
struccion  Xautica  para  el  uso  de  las  Xaos  "  (1587).
PALAFOX  Y  MENDOZA,  Juan  (pah-lah-foh'),
Mexican  archbishop,  b.  in  Fitero,  Xavarre,  24  June,
1600 ;  d.  in  Osma,  Spain,  1  Oct.,  1659.  He  was  a
son  of  the  Marquis  of  Ariza,  studied  law  in  the
University  of  Salamanca,  and  was  appointed  by
King  Philip  IV.  attorney  of  the  supreme  council
of  war,  and  afterward  of  the  council  of  Indies.
Subsequently  he  was  ordained  priest,  went  with
the  Princess  Mary  to  Germany  as  almoner,  and  on
his  return  was  made  bishop  of  Puebla  de  los  An
geles.  In  1640  he  went  to  Mexico  in  company  with
the  newly  appointed  viceroy,  the  Marquis  de  Vil-
Jena.  The  latter,  who  belonged  to  a  family  of
Portuguese  origin,  did  not  inspire  great  confidence
at  court,  and  by  his  arbitrary  conduct  caused  many
complaints  against  him  in  Madrid,  and  therefore
Palafox  was  ordered  by  a  secret  despatch  to  take
charge  of  the  government.  As  he  had  been  pro
moted  archbishop  of  Mexico,  he  went  to  the  capital
under  the  pretext  of  assuming  his  see,  and  during
the  night  of  9  June,  1642,  he  convoked  the  authori-


634


PALFREY


PALFREY


ties  and  communicated  the  royal  decree,  ordering
the  arrest  of  the  viceroy  by  one  of  the  judges  of
the  supreme  court.  Villena  was  sent  to  the  con
vent  of  Churubuseo,  but  after  a  few  days  he  was
permitted  to  reside  in  San  Martin  de  Texmelucan,

whence  he  left  for
Spain  in  September.
During  Palafox's
short  government
he  ordered  the  de
struction  of  many
Aztec  idols,  statues.
and  other  valuable
antiquities,  which
had  been  preserved
by  former  viceroys.
He  delivered  the  ex
ecutive,  on  23  Nov..
1642,  to  the  new
viceroy.  Count  de
Salvatierra,  and  re
signed  the  archbish
opric,  but  con  t  i  n  ued
his  inspection  of  the
audiencias  and  gov
ernment  offices  till
1(145,  when  he  re
turned  to  Puebla.  In  1047  his  controversies  with
the  Jesuits  began,  which  at  one  time  threatened  to
result  in  armed  hostilities,  and  required  the  inter
vention  of  the  temporal  authorities.  Palafox  fos
tered  education  and  protected  the  Indians,  but  in
1(549  he  was  ordered  to  appear  at  court.  Ha  was
appointed  president  of  the  supreme  council  of  Ara-
gon,  and  when  judgment  in  his  favor  was  given  in
Rome  in  regard  to  the  Puebla  controversies,  he  was  '
given  the  see  of  Osma  in  1653.  Besides  nearly  100
ecclesiastical  works,  he  wrote  the  following :  "  De  la  ,
Naturaleza  del  Indio,"  "  Sitio  y  socorro  de  Fuente-
Rabia,"  "  Respuesta  al  Marques  de  Villena,"  and
"  Tratado  de  Ortografia,"  all  reprinted  in  Madrid
in  1762,  and  "Carta  al  P.  Andres  de  Rada,  Pro-;
vincial  de  la  Compania  de  Jesus  in  Mexico,1'  re
printed  in  Madrid  in  1789.

v  PALFREY,  Warwick,  journalist,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  in  1787;  died  there,  23  Aug.,  1838.  He  was
descended  from  Peter,  the  first  settler  at  Salem.
He  began  his  apprenticeship  in  the  "  Essex  Regis
ter  "office  in  1801,  and  was  its  editor  from  1805
till  his  death.  Mr.  Palfrey  was  a  member  of  the
city  council  of  Salem,  and  "of  both  branches  of  the
Massachusetts  legislature  for  several  years.  He
was  the  author  of  "  Evangelical  Psalms'"  (1802).

PALFREY,  William  (paulfry),  patriot,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  in  1741 ;  d.  at  sea  in  December.
1780.  He  was  active  in  the  movements  that  pre
ceded  the  Revolution,  and  visited  England  in  1771.
He  was  aide  to  Washington  from  March  till  April,
1776,  when  he  was  appointed  paymaster-general,
with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  In  November,
1780,  he  was  appointed  consul-general  in  France
by  a  unanimous  vote  of  congress,  and  embarked  in
a  ship  for  that  country,  which  was  never  heard  of
after  she  had  left  the  capes. — His  grandson,  John
Gorham,  author,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  2  May,  1796;
d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  26  April,  1881,  received  his
elementary  education  at  a  boarding-school  kept
by  the  father  of  John  Howard  Payne  at  Exeter,  and
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1815.  He  afterward
studied  theology,  and  was  ordained  pastor  of  the
Brattle  street  Unitarian  church.  Boston,  17  June,
1818,  as  successor  to  Edward  Everett.  His  pastor
ate  continued  until  1830,  when  he  resigned,  and  in
1831  he  was  appointed  professor  of  sacred  literature
in  Harvard,  which  chair  he  held  till  1839.  Durin"-


the  period  of  his  professorship  he  was  one  of  three
preachers  in  the  University  chapel,  and  dean  of  the
theological  faculty.  He  was  a  member  of  the  house
of  representatives  during  1842-'3,  secretary  of  state
in  1844— '8,  and  was  a  member  of  congress  from  Mas
sachusetts,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Whig,  from  6
Dec.,  1847,  till  3  March,  1849.  In  the  election  of
1848  he  was  a  Free-soil  candidate,  but  was  defeated.
He  was  postmaster  of  Boston  from  29  March,  1861,
till  May,  1867,  and  after  his  retirement  went  to
Europe,  where  he  represented  the  United  States  at
the  Anti-slavery  congress  in  Paris  in  the  autumn
of  1867.  After  his  return  he  made  his  residence  in
Cambridge.  He  was  an  early  anti-slavery  advo
cate,  and  liberated  and  provided  for  numerous
slaves  in  Louisiana  that  had  been  bequeathed  to
him.  lie  was  editor  of  the  "  North  American  Re
view  "in  1835-'43,  delivered  a  course  of  lectures
before  the  Lowell  institute  in  Boston  in  1839  and
1842,  contributed  in  1846  a  series  of  articles  on
"  The  Progress  of  the  Slave  Power  "  to  the  "  Boston
Whig,"  .and  was  in  1851  one  of  the  editors  of  the
"  Commonwealth  "  newspaper.  He  was  the  author
of  two  discourses  on  "  The  History  of  Brattle  Street
Church";  '-Life  of  Col.  William  Palfrey."  in
Sparks's  ''American  Biography";  "A  Review  of
Lord  Million's  History  of  England,"  in  the  "  North
American  Review " ;  and  also  published,  among
other  works,  "Academical  Lectures  on  the  Jewish
Scriptures  and  Antiquities"  (4  vols.,  Boston,  1833-
'52),  "  Elements  of  Chaldee,  Syriac,  Samaritan,
and  Rabbinical  Grammar  "  (1835) ;  "  Discourse  at
Barnstable,  3  Sept.,  1839,  at  the  Celebration  of
the  Second  Centennial  Anniversary  of  the  Set
tlement  of  Cape  Cod "  (1840) ;  "  Abstract  of  the
Returns  of  Insurance  Companies  of  Massachu
setts,  1  Dec.,  1846  "
(1847);  "The  Re
lation  between  Ju
daism  and  Chris
tianity  "  (1854) ;
and  "  History  of
New  England  to
1875 "  (4  vols.,
1858 -'64).  —  John
Gorham's  daugh
ter,  Sara  Ham
mond,  author,  b.
in  Boston,  11  Dec.,
1823,  was  educated
privately  in  Bos
ton  and  Cam
bridge.  Miss  Pal
frey  has  written
both  in  prose  and
verse.  generally
under  the  pen-name  of  "E.  Foxton."  She  has
published  "  Premices,"  poems  (Boston,  1855) ;
"Herman,  or  Young  Knighthood"  (1866);  "Sir
Pavon  and  St.  Pavon "  (1867)  :  "  Agnes  Went-
worth  "  (Philadelphia,  1869) ;  "  The  Chapel "  (New
York,  1880) ;  and  "  The  Blossoming  Rod  "  (Boston,
1887). — John  Gorham's  son,  Francis  Winthrop,
lawyer,  b.  in  Boston,  11  April,  1831,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1851,  and  at  the  law-school  in  1853.
He  served  in  the  civil  war  as  lieutenant-colonel
and  colonel  of  the  20th  Massachusetts  volunteer
infantry,  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  after  re
ceiving  a  severe  wound,  and  has  been  a  register  in
bankruptcy  since  1872.  He  is  the  author  of  "A
Memoir  of  William  F.  Bartlett "  (Boston,  1879);
"  Antietam  and  Fredericksburg,"  being  vol.  v.  of
"  Campaigns  of  the  Civil  War"  (New  York,  1882);
parts  of  the  first  volume  of  "  Military  Papers  of  the
Historical  Society  of  Massachusetts'";  and  various


PALISOT DE BEAUVOIS


PALLISER


635


articles  in  the  "North  American  Review/' — Another
son.  John  Carver,  soldier,  b.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
25  Dec.,  1833,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1853,
and  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  at  the  head  of
his  class,  in  1857.  He  was  assigned  to  the  engineers,
and  during  the  civil  war  served  in  constructing
defences  on  Ship  island,  in  repairing  Fort  St.
Philip  and  Fort  Jackson.  La.,  at  the  siege  of  Port
Hudson,  and  in  the  Red  river  expedition.  He  also
had  charge  of  the  operations  at  the  siege  and  cap
ture  of  Fort  Morgan,  Ala.,  and  from  20  March  till
12  April,  1865.  he  participated  in  the  siege  and
capture  of  Mobile.  He  was  chief  engineer  and  as
sistant  inspector-general  of  the  13th  army  corps
from  15  March  till  1  Aug.,  1865,  and  was  brevetted
major,  lieutenant-colonel,  colonel,  and  brigadier-
general,  U.  S.  army,  26  March,  1865.  He  resigned
on  1  May,  1866,  and  he  has  since  been  connected
with  manufacturing  companies  at  Lowell,  Mass.,
and  elsewhere.  He  became  overseer  of  the  Thayer
school  of  civil  engineering  of  Dartmouth  in  18"68.
and  is  a  vice-president  of  the  Webster  bank  in  Bos
ton.  He  has  contributed  to  the  publications  of  the
Military  historical  society  of  Massachusetts,  to  the
"  Xorth  American  Review,"  and  other  periodicals.
PALISOT  DE  BEAUVOIS,  Ambrose  Marie
Francois  Joseph  (pah-le-so),  Baron  de.  French
naturalist,  b.  in  Arras,  France,  27  July,  1752;  d.
in  Paris,  21  Jan.,  1820.  After  finishing  his  stud
ies  he  was  appointed  advocate  to  the  parliament
of  Paris  in  1772,  and  afterward  receiver-general.
He  then  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  natural
history,  and  especially  that  of  botany,  and.  after
extensive  explorations  in  Africa,  went  to  Santo
Domingo  in  1788.  He  was  admitted  into  the
colonial  assembly  and  the  superior  council,  opposed
the  abolition  of  the  slave-trade,  and  wrote  in  1790
a  pamphlet  in  which  he  accused  English  philan
thropists  of  sinister  motives  in  supporting  this
project.  He  also  went  to  the  United  States  to  ask
the  aid  of  the  government  in  reducing  the  negroes
to  obedience.  On  his  return  from  this  useless  mis
sion  in  June,  1793,  he  found  the  island  in  insurrec
tion.  His  collections  and  manuscripts  were  de
stroyed,  and  he  was  imprisoned,  but  he  was  finally
allowed  to  depart  from  the  island,  and  sought
refuge  in  the  United  States  in  utter  destitution.
He  learned,  as  he  was  making  preparations  to  re
turn  to  France,  that  he  had  been  proscribed  as  an
emigrant.  He  then  obtained  employment  in  the
orchestra  of  a  circus  in  Philadelphia,  but  whatever
time  he  could  spare  was  devoted  to  natural  history.
The  French  charge  d'affaires,  Pierre  Adet,  a  noted
chemist,  gave  him  funds  for  a  journey  into  the
interior  of  North  America,  which  he  had  long  con
templated.  He  now  made  several  valuable  discov
eries,  including  that  of  a  new  species  of  rattlesnake,
and  he  passed  several  months  among  the  Creek
and  Cherokee  Indians.  He  was  elected  a  member
of  the  American  philosophical  society,  to  which  he
communicated  a  part  of  his  observations;  but  as  he
was  preparing  another  expedition  the  news  reached
him  that  his  name  had  been  erased  from  the  list  of
emigrants,  and  he  decided  on  returning  to  France.
Palisot  invented  a  new  method  of  classification  for
insects,  and  proposed  another  for  quadrupeds.  He
observed  the  details  of  the  reproductive  organs  in
mosses,  and.  as  the  existence  of  these  organs  was
denied,  he  confirmed  his  first  researches  by  new
observations.  Among  his  works  are  "  Insectes
recueillis  en  Afrique  "  (Paris,  1805-'21)  and  "  Refu
tation  d'un  ecrit  intitule  resume  des  temoignages,
etc..  touchant  la  traite  des  negres  "  (1814).  The
third  volume  of  the  "  Transactions  of  the  Philo
sophical  Society  of  Philadelphia  "  contains  a  paper


by  him  on  cryptogamic  plants,  and  the  fourth,  one
on  a  new  plant  of  Pennsylvania  (the  Heterandra
raniformis)and  on  a  new  species  of  rattlesnake,  etc.
His  "  Description  du  mur  naturel  dans  la  Caroline
du  Nord"  appears
in  vol.  viii.  of  the

;  "  Annales  du  mu-

I  seum  d'histoire
naturel  le"(  Paris,

'  1811),  and  was  re-

1  printed in  "  De-

!  scription  of  the
United  States,"

|  by Warren  (vol.

i  i.).  He  also  pub
lished  "  Memoire

I  sur  les palmiers

;  au  general  et  en

!  particulier  sur  un

'.  nouveau  genre  de
cette  famille "
(Paris,  1801) ;
"  Flore  d'Oware
et  de  Benin"  (2

vols.,  1804-'21) ;  "  Prodrome  des  mousses  et  des
lycopodes  "  (Paris,  1805) ;  and.  posthumously,  "  Mus-
cologie  "  (1822).  See  a  memoir  of  Palisot,  by  Thie-
baut  de  Berneaud  (Paris,  1821).

FALLEN,  Mont  rose  Anderson,  educator,  b.
in  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  2  Jan.,  1836.  His  father,  11
native  of  Virginia,  was  professor  of  obstetrics  in
St.  Louis  medical  college  for  twenty-seven  years
The  son  was  graduated  at  St.  Louis  university  in
1853,  and  in  medicine  in  1856.  After  spending
two  years  in  hospital  service  and  study  in  London,
Paris,  and  Berlin,  he  began  practice  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  medical  direc
tor  of  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise's  legion  in  1861.  of  Gen.
William  J.  Hardee's  army  corps  in  1862.  and  after
ward  of  the  Department  of  Mississippi  till  Febru
ary,  1863.  He  was  subsequently  sent  to  Canada
by  the  Confederate  government  to  report  on  the
condition  of  the  Confederate  prisoners  on  John
son's  island.  He  returned  to  Richmond  in  1864.
and  after  a  visit  to  Paris,  France,  where  he  ob
tained  surgical  and  medical  supplies  for  the  Con
federate  armies,  he  was  sent  to  Montreal  again,  but
was  captured  on  his  way  back  to  the  south,  and
held  on  parole  in  New  York  city  till  the  end  of  the
war.  After  occupying  chairs  in  various  institu
tions,  he  was  in  1874  appointed  professor  of  gyne-
cology  in  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York.
In  1883  he  assisted  in  forming  the  Post-graduate
medical  college  in  that  city.  Among  other  inven
tions  by  Dr.  Pallen  are  a  self-retaining  vaginal
speculum,  peculiar  needles  for  small  and  deep  cavi
ties,  and  various  uterine  supports.  He  has  written
much  for  medical  periodicals,  and  published  -^Ab
normities  of  Vision  and  Ophthalmoscope  "  (Wash
ington,  D.  C.,  1858);  "Uterine  Abnormities"  (Cin
cinnati,  1866) :  "  Prophylaxis  of  Pregnancy ''  (New
York,  1878):  and  "  Dysmenorrhoea  "  (1880).

PALLISER,  Joliii.  Canadian  explorer,  b.  in
Comragh.  Waterford.  Ireland.  29  Jan..  1817.  He
was  a  brother  of  the  late  Sir  William  Palliser,  in
ventor  of  the  projectiles  and  guns  that  bear  his
name.  He  went  to  Canada  in  early  life,  and  passed
much  time  among  the  Indians  of  the  northern
woods  and  western  prairies.  He  conducted  an  ex
pedition  into  the  Indian  country  in  1856-'7.  and  in
1857-'60.  under  a  commission  from  the  British  gov
ernment,  explored  a  large  part  of  the  northwest  of
British  North  America  as  far  as  the  shores  of  the
Pacific.  He  also  topographically  determined  the
international  boundary-line  from  Lake  Superior  in


636


PALM  A Y ROM  AY


PALMER


Canada,  across  the  Rocky  mountains,  and  thence  to
the  sea-coast  range.  His  report  was  published  in
the  parliamentary  papers  of  1861.  He  published
"  The  Solitary  Hunter,  or  Sporting  Adventures  in
the  Prairies  "  (London,  1853).

PALMA  Y  ROMAY,  Ramon  (pal'-mah),  Cuban
author,  b.  in  Havana  in  January,  1812;  d.  there  in
January,  1860.  He  studied  in  "his  native  city,  en
gaged  in  teaching,  and  was  at  the  head  of  several
educational  institutions,  but  in  1842  was  admitted
to  the  bar.  His  first  poems  were  published  in  1830.
In  1837  he  issued,  with  J.  A.  Echeverria.  "  Agui-
naldo  Habanero,"  a  collection  of  essays  and  poems
by  the  best  Cuban  writers.  In  the  following  years
his  novels  "  Una  pascua  en  San  Marcos,"  "  El  colera
en  la  Habana,"  and  "  El  Ermitano  del  Niagara "
were  published.  His  drama  "  La  vuelta  del  Cru-
zado  "  was  performed  in  1837  with  great  success.
Volumes  of  his  poems  have  appeared  with  the  titles
"Aves  de  Paso"  (1841);  "  Hojas  caidas  "  (1843);
and  •'  Melodias  Poeticas  "  (1846).  A  complete  edi
tion  of  Palma's  works  was  announced  in  1861,  but
only  the  first  volume  has  been  published.

PALMER,  Albert  Gallatin,  clergyman,  b.  in
North  Stonington,  Conn.,  11  May,  1813.  He  was
ordained  to  the  Baptist  ministry  in  1834,  and,  with
the  exception  of  brief  pastorates  in  other  places,  he
has  spent  his  ministerial  life  in  preaching  to  the
Baptist  church  in  Stonington  borough,  Conn.
Madison  university  has  given  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  Besides  a  large  number  of  published  ser
mons,  he  is  the  author  of  an  "  Historical  (Centen
nial)  Discourse  "  (1872) ;  and  many  poems,  among
them  a  translation  of  the  "  Dies  Irae."  He  has  is
sued  a  collection  of  these,  with  the  title  "  Psalms  of
Faith  and  Songs  of  Life  "  (Hartford,  1884).— His
son,  Albert  Marshman,  theatre-manager,  b.  in
North  Stonington,  Conn.,  27  July,  1838,  was  edu
cated  at  private  schools,  and  graduated  at  the  law-
school  of  the  University  of  New  York  in  1860.
Mr.  Palmer  never  followed  the  practice  of  the
law,  but  in  1869,  and  for  several  years  afterward,
served  as  librarian  of  the  Mercantile  library  in
New  York  city.  In  June,  1872,  he  assumed  the
management  of  the  Union  square  theatre  in  New
York,  and  continued  there  until  1882.  In  the
spring  of  that  year  he  retired  and  went  to  Europe,
whence  he  returned  in  1884  to  assume  control  of
the  Madison  square  theatre  in  New  York.  This  he
continues  to  the  present  time.  He  is  one  of  the
founders  of  the  "  Actors'  fund  "  of  America,  and  is
now  (1888)  its  president.

PALMER,  Alonzo  Benjamin,  physician,  b.  in
Richfield,  Otsego  co.,  N.  Y.,  6  Oct.,  1815 ;  d.  in  Ann
Arbor,  Mich.,  23  Dec.,  1887.  He  was  educated  in
various  schools  and  academies  in  New  York  state,
and  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons  of  the  western  district  of
New  York  in  1839.  After  attending  lectures  in
that  city  and  in  Philadelphia  in  1847-'50  he  went
to  Tecumseh,  Mich.,  and  afterward  removed  to
Chicago.  In  1852  he  served  as  city  physician  there
during  a  severe  cholera  epidemic  among  emigrants
from  northern  Europe,  and  in  that  year  was  ap
pointed  professor  of  anatomy  in  the  College  of
medicine  and  surgery  of  the  University  of  IVIichi-
gan.  In  1854  he  was  transferred  to  the  chair  of
medical  therapeutics  and  diseases  of  women  and
children.  In  1860  he  was  appointed  to  the  pro
fessorship  of  pathology  and  practice  of  medicine,
which  he  held  at  the  time  of  his  death.  He  became
surgeon  of  the  2d  Michigan  regiment  of  infantry,
and  dressed  the  first  wound  that  was  inflicted  by
the  enemy  at  Blackburn's  Ford  on  18  July,  1861,
but  he  resigned  in  September,  1861,  and  returned


to  the  University  of  Michigan.  He  afterward  vis
ited  the  army  occasionally  as  volunteer  surgeon,
and  was  president  of  the  American  medical  associ
ation  during  the  war.  He  was  instructor  of  pa
thology  and  practice  of  medicine  at  Berkshire
medical  college,  Mass.,  in  1864,  and  at  Bowdoin
in  1809-'70.  He  was  president  of  the  Michigan
medical  society  in  1872-'3,  and  of  the  section  of
pathology  in  the  Ninth  international  medical  con
gress  in  Washington.  I).  C.,  in  1887.  He  instructed
nearly  10,000  medical  students,  and  was  active  in
building  up  the  medical  department  of  the  Univer
sity  of  Michigan.  From  1852  till  1859  he  edited
with  others  "  The  Penisular  Journal  of  Medicine."
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  I),  from  the  Univer
sity  of  Michigan  in  1881.  In  addition  to  papers,
reports,  and  clinical  lectures,  he  published  "  Homoe
opathy,  What  is  It  ?  A  Statement  and  Review  of
its  Doctrines  and  Practice"  (Detroit,  1880):  "The
Treatment  of  the  Science  and  Practice  of  Medicine  "
(New  York,  1885);  "A  Treatise  on  Epidemic
Cholera  "  (Ann  Arbor,  1885)  ;•  "  The  Temperance
Teachings  of  Science"  (Boston,  1886);  and  "Diar-
rhffia  and  Dysentery :  Modern  Views  of  their  Pa
thology  and  Treatment"  (Detroit,  1887).

PALMER.  Anthony,  colonial  governor,  b.
probably  in  England  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in
May,  1749.  He  first  engaged  in  business  as  a  mer
chant  in  St.  Michael's  parish,  Barbadoes,  and  in
1707,  having  purchased  of  (.'apt.  George  Lillington,
of  Barbadoes.  a  large  tract  of  land  in  Philadelphia,
he  removed  to  the  latter  place,  where  he  engaged
in  mercantile  pursuits.  In  1730  he  purchased  the
Fairman  mansion,  together  with  129  acres  of
ground.  He  divided  the  land  into  smaller  lots,
letting  them  on  ground-rent,  and  opening  streets,
and  called  the  town  Kensington.  It  is  now  the
"  Kensington  district "  of  Philadelphia,  and  is  the
manufacturing  centre  of  the  city.  Palmer  lived  on
his  estate  in  great  style,  keeping  a  coach,  then  a
luxury,  and  a  pleasure  barge,  by  which  he  made
his  visits  to  the  city.  In  1708  he  was  called  to  the
provincial  council  of  Pennsylvania,  of  which  body
he  remained  a  member  until  his  death,  a  period  of
more  than  forty  years.  On  the  resignation  of
Lieut.-Gov.  George  Thomas,  who  departed  for  Eu
rope  in  May,  1747,  the  executive  branch  of  the
government  devolved  on  the  council,  of  whom  Pal
mer  was  president,  being  the  oldest  in  service,  and
he  accordingly  became  head  of  the  colony  under
the  title  of  president  of  the  council,  and  continued
such  for  eighteen  months,  when  he  was  superseded
by  the  arrival  of  Gov.  James  Hamilton.  His  ad
ministration  was  a  time  of  great  anxiety.  France
and  Spain  were  at  war  with  England,  and  Spanish
privateers  frequently  came  into  Delaware  bay,
plundered  the  coast,  and  sometimes  ascended  the
river,  threatening  New  Castle  and  Philadelphia  it
self  ;  yet  the  assembly,  which  was  controlled  by  the
Quakers,  although  urged  repeatedly  by  Palmer  and
his  council  so  to  do,  refused  to  make  any  appropria
tion  for  putting  the  province  in  a  state  of  defence.
But  his  government,  acting  independently  of  the
assembly,  was  successful  in  organizing  a  considera
ble  body  of  troops,  and  in  erecting  "  batteries  on
the  river,  so  situated  and  of  such  strength  and
weight  of  metal  as  to  render  it  very  daTigerous  for
an  enemy  to  attempt  the  bringing  any  ships  before
the  city."  His  government  also  made  treaties  of
friendship  with  the  Indians  of  the  Six  Nations  on
the  Ohio,  and  the  Twightees  on  the  Wabash,  who
had  formerly  been  in  the  French  interest.  He  was
a  justice  of  the  peace  and  of  the  county  courts  of
Philadelphia  county  from  1718  until  1732,  for  sev
eral  years  one  of  the  judges  of  the  court  of  common


PALMER


PALMER


637


pleas,  and  in  1720  one  of  the  first  masters  in  chan-  '
eery  that  was  appointed  by  Gov.  Sir  William  Keith
at  the  organization  of  a  court  of  chancery.

PALMER, Benjamin  Morgan,  clergyman,  b.
in  Philadelphia.  Pa..  25  Sept..  1781 ;  d.  in  Charles-  ;
ton,  S.  C.,  9  Oct.,  1847. He was graduated at
Princeton  in  1800.  studied  theology  in  Charleston,
and  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  Congregational
association  of  ministers  in  South  Carolina,  continu-  |
ing  with  this  body  until  it  was  merged  into  the
Charleston union presbytery in 1822. He was  I
pastor  for  several  years  of  the  Presbyterian  church  j
in  Beaufort,  S.  C.,  and  from  1817 'till  1835  of  a
church  in  Charleston. He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  the  College  of  South  Carolina  in  1815.
In  addition to  numerous  sermons,  he  published
"The  Family  Companion" (1835). — His nephew,
Benjamin  Morgan,  clergyman,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C.,  25  Jan.,  1818.  was  the  son  of  Rev.  Edward
Palmer,  who.  at  his  death  in  1882,  was  the  oldest
minister  of  the  southern  Presbyterian  church. He
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Georgia  in  1838,
and  at  the  Theological  seminary  of  Columbia,  S.  C.,  I
in  1841. He  has  held Presbyterian  pastorates  in  j
Savannah,  Ga., and  Columbia,  S.  C.,  and  since  :
1856  has  been  in  Xew  Orleans,  La. In  1853-'6  he
was professor  of church history and polity in
Columbia  theological  seminary,  S.  C.,  of  which  he  j
was  a  director  from  1842  till  1856. He  has  also  i
been  a  director  of  the  Southwestern  Presbyterian
university,  Clarksville,  Tenn.,  since  1873,  and  of
Tulane  university,  Xew  Orleans,  since  its  organiza
tion  in  1882. He  has  frequently  served  as  com
missioner  to  the  general  assemblies  of  his  denomi-
nation. He received  the degree  of  D.  D. from  i
Oglethorpe  university  in  1852,  and  that  of  LL.  D.
from  Westminster  college,  Fulton,  Mo.,  in  1870.
Since  1847  he  has  been  an  editor  and  contributor
to  "  The  Southern  Presbyterian  Review."  published
in  Columbia,  S.  C., of which journal he was  a
founder. In  addition  to  numerous  addresses  and
pamphlets,  he  is  the  author  of  "  The  Life  and  Let
ters of Rev. James Henley Thornwell, D.  I)..
LL.  D." (Richmond.  1875) ; '"  Sermons " (2  vols.,  i
Xew  Orleans,  1875-'6) :  and  "  The Family  in  its
Civil  and  Churchly  Aspects"  (Xew  York,  1876).

PALMER,  Conrtlandt,  merchant. b.  in  Stoning-  j
ton,  Conn.,  11  Xov.,  1800 ;  d.  in  Xew  York  city,  10  :
May,  1874. He  received  a  common-school  educa-  !
tion.  and  in  early  boyhood  came  to  Xew  York  city,  ]
where  he  entered  the  hardware  business,  and  soon  I
gained  a  large fortune. The  financial  crisis  of
1837  was  disastrous  to  his  firm,  but  he  invested  the
little  capital  that  remained  in  real  estate,  which  so  ]
increased  in  value  that  at  the  time  of  his  death  he
was  included  among  the  rich  men  of  the  city. Mr.  ',
Palmer  was  for  several  years  president  of  the  Provi-  '
dence  and  Stonington  railroad,  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Safe  deposit  company  of  Xew  York,  and  a  1
director  in  several  business  corporations. — His  son.  ;
Courtlandt,  b.  in  Xew  York  city,  25  March,  1843 ;
d.  at  Lake  Dunmore,  Vt.,  23  July,  1888,  was  edu-  j
cated  at  Columbia  and  Williams,  and  graduated  at
the  Columbia  law-school  in  1869. Mr.  Palmer  took
much  interest  in  the  development  of  technical  edu
cation,  and  was  an  advocate  of  liberal  ideas. In
1880  he  established  and  became  president  of  the  ,
Xineteenth  century  club  of  Xew  York,  an  organ
ization  that  meets  periodically  during  the  winter
months,  when  leaders  of  art,  literature,  and  social
science  are  invited  to  speak,  and  their  remarks  are
followed  by  open  discussion,  in  which  the  utmost
freedom  of  courteous  speech  is  permitted. Mr.
Palmer  made  frequent  addresses,  and  contributed
to  the  literature  of  free  thought.


PALMER,  Edward,  reformer,  b.  in  Xew  Eng
land  in  1802 ;  d.  in  Xew  York  city,  25  Feb.,  1886.
He  became  a  printer  in  Boston,  Mass..  and  at
tracted  attention  by  writing  and  publishing  a
pamphlet  in  which  he  demanded  the  abolition  of
slavery  and  the  suppression  of  capitalized  monopo
lies.  Removing  to  Xew  York  city,  he  associated
himself  with  a  coterie  of  philosophers,  under  the
leadership  of  Marcus  Spring,  and  promulgated
many  eccentric  ideas.  He  claimed  that  men  should
work  for  higher  motives  than  that  of  pecuniary
gain,  and  emphasized  his  teachings  by  refusing  to
accept  money  for  his  services,  confining  himself  to
the  barest  necessities  of  life.  At  his  death  he  had
passed  out  of  recollection,  as  he  had  lived  in  retire
ment  for  nearly  a  generation.

PALMER.  Elihti,  author,  b.  in  Canterbury.
Conn.,  in  1764;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  7  April,
1806.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1787,
and  studied  divinity,  but  became  a  deist  in  1791.
He  resided  for  a  time  in  Augusta.  Ga.,  where  he
collected  materials  for  Dr.  Jedediah  Morse's
"  Geography,"  and  subsequently  lived  in  Philadel
phia  and  Xew  York.  In  1793  he  became  totally
blind  from  an  attack  of  yellow  fever.  He  was  a
violent  political  agitator,  and  the  head  of  the  society
of  Columbian  illurninati.  which  was  established  in
Xew  York  in  1801.  He  published  "  A  Fourth  of
July  Oration"  (1797),  and  was  also  the  author  of
"  The  Principles  of  Xature,  or  A  Development  of
the  Moral  Causes  of  Happiness  and  Misery  among
the  Human  Species"  (London.  1802;  reprinted
1819),  and  "  Prospect  or  View  of  the  Moral  World
from  the  Year  1804"  (2  vols.,  Xew  York.  1804).

PALMER,  Erastns  Dow,  sculptor,  b.  in  Pom-
pey.  Onondaga  co.,  X.  Y.,  2  April.  1817.  He  fol
lowed  the  trade  of  carpenter  and  joiner  from  the
age  of  eleven  until  he  was  nearly  twenty-nine,  when
he  first  turned  his  attention  to  art.  Incited  by  a
cameo  portrait,  he  did  his  first  work  in  this  direc
tion — a  head  of  his  wife  on  a  bit  of  shell,  with  tools
that  were  made  by  himself  from  files.  Encouraged
by  a  connoisseur  of  the  neighborhood,  he  devoted
himself  wholly  to  this  new  occupation,  and  during
the  two  following  years  cut  about  100  cameo  por
traits.  Then,  finding  that  the  delicate  work  was
injuring  his  eyes,  and  led  by  a  longing  for  artistic
labors  that  would  afford  greater  scope  for  his  talent,
he  first  attempted  sculpture  proper.  An  ideal  bust,
the  "  Infant  Ceres,"  modelled  in  1849  from  one  of
his  own  children,  was  his  first  work  in  marble.  It
was  exhibited  at  the  Academy  of  design  in  1850,  and
attracted  much  attention.  This  was  followed  by  two
allegorical  bas-reliefs — representing  "  Xight "  and
'•  Morning."  The  artist,  having  meanwhile  settled
in  Albany,  subsequently  produced  numerous  other
bas-reliefs,  notably  "  Faith,"  "  The  Spirit's  Flight,"
"  Mercy,"  "  Sappho,"  and  "  Peace  in  Bondage  "
(1863),  "the  last  one  of  his  best.  Of  his  ideal  busts
the  principal  are"  Resignation."  "Spring."  "June,"
and  "The  Infant  Flora."  The  "Indian  Girl"
(1856)  was  the  first  of  his  full-length  figures,  most
of  which  were  strongly  idealized.  The  most  im
portant  of  these  are  "The  Sleeping  Peri,"  "The
Emigrant  Children."  "The  Little  Peasant."  "  The
White  Captive."  which  is  generally  considered  his
best  work  (1858),  and  "  The  Angel  at  the  Sepul
chre."  a  monument  in  Rural  cemetery.  Albany
(1868).  His  group,  "  The  Landing  of  the  Pilgrims,"
comprising  sixteen  figures  fifteen  inches  high,  was
executed  in  1857.  It  was  designed  to  occupy  the
pediment  of  the  south  wing  of  the  capitol  at
Washington,  but  its  motive  grated  on  the  strong
southern  sentiment  represented  by  John  Floyd,
the  secretary  of  war,  who  had  charge  of  the  capi-


638


PALMER


PALMER


tol  extension,  and  the  pediment  is  still  vacant.  It
is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  Palmer,  unlike  most
American  sculptors,  did  not  study  abroad,  but  ac
quired  all  his  knowledge  of  art  and  technical  skill
in  his  native  state,  New  York.  It  was  not  until
1873,  when  he  had  long  been  famous,  that  he  went
to  Europe,  visiting  Italy  and  Paris.  In  the  latter
city,  in  1873-'4,  he  executed  a  statue  of  Robert  R.
Livingston,  which  was  placed  in  the  old  hall  of
representatives,  Washington,  in  1875 ;  it  received
a  medal  of  the  first  class  in  the  Centennial  ex
hibition,  1870.  Palmer  has  also  executed  many
portrait-busts,  among  them  those  of  Alexander
Hamilton,  Com.  Matthew  C.  Perry,  Gov.  Edwin  I).
Morgan,  Washington  Irving  (in  the  New  York
historical  society),  Moses  Taylor,  and  a  bronze
bust  of  Dr.  James  II.  Armsby,  completed  in  1878,
now  in  Washington  park,  Albany. — His  son,  Wal
ter  Laiint,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  1  Aug.,  1854.
studied  with  Frederic  E.  Church  in  1871-'2,  went
abroad  in  1873,  and  settled  in  Paris,  where  he
was  the  pupil  of  Carolus  Duran.  In  1876  he  was
again  studying  in  France,  and  he  has  since  made
repeated  visits  to  Europe,  sketching  most  of  the
time  in  Venice.  He  painted  in  New  York  city  in
18?7-'82,  after  which  he  returned  to  Albany.  In
1881  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Society  of
American  artists,  and  in  1887  he  received  the  sec
ond  Hallgarten  prize  for  his  "  January,"  which
painting  also  gained  him  his  election  as  an  associate
of  the  National  academy.  Among  his  works  are
"  Dining-Room  at  Appledale  "  (1879) ;  "  An  Edi
tor's  Study  "  (1880);  "Waving  Grain"  (1881);
"  Venice  "  (1882) ;  "  The  Oat-Field  "  (1884) ;  "  The
Inlet  "  (1885) ;  and  "  An  Early  Snow"  (1887).

PALMER,  Frank  W  a)  land,  editor,  b.  in  Man
chester,  Ind.,  11  Oct.,  1827.  After  receiving  a
common-school  education,  he  was  apprenticed  to  a
printer  in  Jamestown,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1848  became
joint  proprietor  and  editor  of  the  "Journal"  in
that  town.  In  1852-'4  lie  served  in  the  New  York
legislature,  but  in  1858  lie  removed  to  Dubuqiie,
Iowa,  where  he  became  editor  and  one  of  the
proprietors  of  the  ''  Daily  Times."  From  1801
till  1868  he  was  state  printer  of  Iowa  and  edi
tor  and  proprietor  of  the  "  Iowa  State  Register."
He  was  then  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,
serving  from  4  March,  1869,  till  3  March.  1873.
Mr.  Palmer  afterward  removed  to  Chicago,  where
he  edited  the  "  Inter-Ocean  "  in  1873-'6.  He  was
a  member  of  the  postal  commission,  created  in
1870,  and  in  1877-'85  was  postmaster  of  Chicago.

PALMER,  George  Washington,  lawyer,  b.  in
Ripley,  Chautauqua  co.,  N.  Y.,  7  June,  1835;  d.  in
New  York  city,  2  Jan.,  1887.  He  was  graduated
at  Albany  law-school  in  1857,  and  practised  his

Erofession.  He  was  active  in  politics  during  the
incoln  campaign,  and  in  1861  was  assistant  clerk
in  the  U.  S.  senate.  Receiving  an  appointment  in
the  war  department,  he  served  in  the  quarter
master-general's  office,  and  was  afterward  appointed
captain  and  provost-marshal  of  the  31st  district  of
New  York.  In  December,  1864,  he  became  mili
tary  secretary  to  Gov.  Reuben  E.  Fenton,  in  the
following  spring  was  made  commissary-general  of
ordnance  of  New  York  state,  with  the  rank  of
brigadier-general,  and  in  1868  was  charged  with
the  duties  of  quartermaster.  In  1869  he  practised
Jaw  in  New  York  city,  but  became  appraiser  of
customs,  holding  this  office  until  1871,  and  then
resuming  his  law-practice.  In  1879  he  was  placed
in  charge  of  the  law  department,  which  post,  he
resigned  in  1886.  For  twenty  years  he  was  an  ac
tive  campaign  speaker,  and  his  fatal  illness  was
ascribed  to  his  over-exertion  in  1884.


PALMER,  Horatio  Richmond,  musician,  b.
in  Sherburne,  Chenango  co.,  N.  Y.,  20  April,  1834.
He  studied  music  with  his  father,  and  subsequent
ly  pursued  his  studies  in  languages,  music,  meta
physics,  and  other  branches  under  various  masters
in  New  York,  Berlin,  Germany,  and  Florence,  Italy.
Mr.  Palmer  is  known  chiefly  as  a  conductor  of  mu
sical  societies  and  a  writer  of  musical  text-books,
and  is  rather  a  musical  theorist  than  a  composer.
He  has  done  much  to  popularize  music.  He  is  the
author  of  "  Rudimental  Class-Teaching  "  and  "  Ele
ments  of  Musical  Composition  "  (1867) :  "  Theory  of
Music  "  (1875) ;  "  Musical  Catechism  "  (1880) :  "  Vo
cal  Modulator"  (1883)  and  "Brief  Statements  of
Musical  Notation"  (1883);  and  "Pronouncing
Pocket  Dictionary"  and  " Piano  Primer "  (1885);
and  he  has  also  edited  collections  of  music,  notably
•'  The  Song  Queen  "  (1867)  and  "  The  Song  King  "
(1871),  and  is  known  as  the  author  of  numerous
anthems  and  other  musical  compositions.

PALM ER,  Innis  Kewton,  soldier,  b.  in  Buffalo,
N.  Y.,  30  March,  1824.  He  was  graduated  at  the
I".  S.  military  academy  in  1846,  and  assigned  to
the  mounted  rifles,  in  which  he  became  2d  lieu
tenant  on  20  July,  1847,  and  served  in  the  siege  of
Vera  Cruz  and  Cerro  Gordo.  He  was  bre vetted  1st
lieutenant  on  20  Aug.,  1847,  for  gallant  and  merito
rious  conduct  in  the  battles  of  Contreras  and  Churu-
busco,  Mexico,  and  at  Chapultepec  he  was  wounded
and  brevetted  captain.  lie  was  also  at  the  assault
and  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico,  after  which  he
was  on  recruiting  service  in  Missouri,  and  then  on
frontier  duty  in  Oregon  and  Washington  territory.
He  became  1st  lieutenant  of  mounted  rifles  on  27
Jan.,  1853,  captain  in  the  2d  cavalry  on  3  March,
1855,  and  major  on  25  April,  1861,  and  on  3  Aug.,
1861,  was  transferred  to  the  5th  cavalry  with  the
same  rank.  He  served  throughout  the  civil  war,
was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  on  21  July,  1861,
for  gallant  and  meritorious  service  at  Bull  Run,
V'a.,  and  on  23  Sept.,  1861,  was  made  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers.  lie  served  in  the  Virginia
peninsular  campaign  in  command  of  a  brigade  in
the  4th  corps  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He
organized  and  forwarded  to  the  field  the  New  Jer
sey  and  Delaware  volunteers,  and  superintended
camps  of  drafted  men  in  Philadelphia  before  the
operations  in  North  Carolina,  when  he  commanded
the  1st  division  of  the  18th  army  corps  from  1
Jan.  till  10  July.  1803.  the  Department  of  North
Carolina  from  1  Feb.  till  2  March,  1803,  the  district
of  Pamlico  from  10  to  25  July,  1863.  the  18th  army
corps  from  25  July  till  18  Aug.,  1863,  and  the  de
fences  of  New  Berne,  N,  C.,  from  18  Aug.,  1863,  till
19  April,  1864.  He  was  made  lieutenant-colonel  on
23  Sept.,  1863,  and  on  13  March,  1865,  was  brevetted
colonel  and  brigadier  -  general,  U.  S.  army,  and
major-general  of  volunteers.  He  was  mustered
out  of  the  volunteer  service  on  15  Jan.,  1866,  and
then  served  in  Kansas  and  Wyoming.  He  was
colonel  of  the  2d  U.  S.  cavalry  from  9  June,  1868,
till  20  March,  1879,  when  he  was  retired.

PALMER,  James  Croxall,  naval  surgeon,  b.
in  Baltimore,  Md.,  29  June,  1811 ;  d.  in  Washing
ton,  D.  C.,  24  April,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at
Dickinson  in  1829,  and  studied  medicine  at  the
University  of  Maryland,  where  he  took  his  de
gree.  In  1834  he  was  commissioned  assistant
surgeon.  He  was  ordered,  on  17  July,  1838,  to
the  store-ship  "Relief,"  of  the  exploring  expedi
tion  under  Lieut.  Charles  Wilkes.  and  in  attempt
ing  the  Brecknock  passage  into  the  straits  of  Ma
gellan,  was  transferred  to  the  sloop  '•  Peacock,"
the  adventurous  cruise  of  which  is  recorded  in  the
general  history  of  the  exploring  expedition.  Dr.


PALMER


PALMER


639


Palmer  recorded  one  episode  in  a  poem,  the  last
edition  of  which  is  entitled  "The  Antarctic  Mari
ner's  Song  "(New  York,  1868).  After  the  wreck
of  the  "Peacock  "  at  the  mouth  of  Columbia  river,
19  July,  1841,  he  commanded  a  large  shore-party
at  Astoria.  On  27  Oct.,  1842,  he  was  commissioned
surgeon,  and  served  in  the  Washington  navy-yard,
where  he  had  charge  of  those  who  were  wounded
by  the  explosion  on  the  "  Princeton."  He  served
iii  Mexican  waters  during  the  annexation  of  Texas
and  the  consequent  war,  and  in  185?  he  was  ordered
to  the  steam-frigate  "  Niagara  ''  on  the  first  effort
to  lay  the  Atlantic  cable,  and  originated  a  plan  for
splicing  the  wire  in  mid-ocean.  He  was  afterward
attached  to  the  naval  academy  in  Annapolis,  and
when  it  was  transferred  to  Newport,  R.  I.,  during
the  civil  war.  he  assumed  its  sole  medical  charge.
He  was  on  the  flag-ship  "Hartford"  as  fleet  sur
geon  at  the  battle  of  Mobile  Bay.  5  Aug.,  18C4,  was
ordered  by  Farragut  to  go  to  all  the  monitors  and
tell  them  to  attack  the  "  Tennessee,"  and  went
around  the  fleet  in  the  admiral's  steam-barge
"  Loyall "  to  aid  surgeons  who  had  no  assistants.
Upon  his  return  to  the  "  Hartford,"  after  the  bat
tle,  he  was  ordered  by  Farragut  to  go  on  board  the
enemy's  ram  "Tennessee,"  just  captured,  and  to
attend  Admiral  Franklin  Buchanan.  He  saved
the  leg  of  this  officer,  which  had  been  broken  dur
ing  the  engagement,  by  refusing  to  resort  to  ampu
tation,  as  had  been  proposed  by  the  surgeon  of  the
Confederate  fleet.  Dr.  Palmer  brought  about  an
agreement  between  Stephen  R.  Mallory  and  Ad-  |
miral  Farragut  to  exempt  all  medical  officers  and
attendants  from  detention  as  prisoners  of  war.  He  |
was  afterward  in  charge  of  the  naval  hospital  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  for  about  four  years.  On  3  March,  ;
1871,  he  was  commissioned  medical  director,  and  j
on  10  June,  1872,  he  became  surgeon-general  of  the
navy,  and  was  retired  on  29  June,  1873.  He  pub-
lished  some  important  professional  contributions  j
through  the  bureau  of  medicine  and  surgery. — His  j
brother.  John  Williamson,  author,  b.  in  Balti-  '
more,  Md.,  4  April,  1825,  was  graduated  at  the  j
University  of  Maryland  in  1847,  and  studied  medi
cine  in  Baltimore.  He  was  the  first  city  physician
of  San  Francisco  in  1849-'50,  and  subsequently
wrote  a  series  of  graphic  papers  relating  to  that
time  for  "  Putnam's  Monthly."  In  1851-'2  he  was
surgeon  of  the  East  India  company's  war-steamer
"  Phlegethon"  in  the  Burmese  war,  being  the  only
American  that  ever  held  a  commission  in  the  East
India  company's  navy.  He  was  Confederate  war-
correspondent  of  the  "  New  York  Tribune "  in
18G3-'4,  and  since  that  time  has  been  a  frequent
contributor  to  journals  and  magazines.  In  1870
he  returned  from  Baltimore  to  New  York,  and  is
now  (1888)  engaged  on  the  editorial  staff  of  the  j
English  dictionary  in  preparation  by  the  Century
company.  In  addition  to  many  translations,  in
cluding  Michelet's  '-L'Amour"  (New  York,  1860)
and  "La  Femme"  (1860),  the  latter  of  which  he
accomplished  in  seventy-two  hours'  work,  he  has
compiled  a  book  of  "  Folk-Songs  "  (1860)  and  five
volumes  of  poetry  (Boston,  1867).  He  is  the  author
of  "  The  Golden  Dagon.  or  Up  and  Down  the
Irrawaddi  "  (New  York.  1853);  "The  New  and  the
Old,  or  California  and  India  in  Romantic  As
pects  "  (1859) ;  '•  The  Beauties  and  Curiosities  of
Engraving"  (Boston.  1879);  "  A  Portfolio  of  Auto
graph  Etchings "  (London,  Paris,  and  Boston.
1882);  and  a  novel  entitled  ''After  His  Kind."
published  under  the  pen-name  of  "  John  Coventry  "
(New  York,  1886).  He  has  also  written  several  j
poems,  including  "  For  Charlie's  Sake  "  and  "  Stone-  j
wall  Jackson's  Wav." — John  Williamson's  wife,  j


Henrietta  Lee,  author,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  6
Feb.,  1834,  was  educated  at  Patapsco  institute,  El-
licott  city,  Md..  and  was  married  in  1855.  She  has
contributed  to  several  journals,  translated  "The
Lady  Tartuffe"  for  Rachel,  the  actress,  and  is  the
author  of  "The  Stratford  Gallery,  or  The  Shake
speare  Sisterhood  "  (New  York.  1858).  and  "  Home
Life  in  the  Bible  "  (Boston,  1882).

PALMER,  James  Sliedden,  naval  officer,!),  in
New  Jersey  in  1810;  d.  in  St.  Thomas,  W.  I.,  7
Dec.,  1867.  He  became  midshipman  on  1  Jan.,
1825,  and  lieutenant,  17  Dec.,  1836,  and  served  on
the  "  Columbia  "
in  the  attack  on
Quallah  Battoo
and  Mushie,  in  the
island  of  Suma
tra.  In  the  Mexi
can  war  he  was  in
command  of  the
schooner  "  Flirt,"
engaged  in  block
ading  the  Mexi
can  coast.  He  was
appointed  com
mander  on  14
Sept.,  1855.  and  at
the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  com
manded  thesteam-
er  "  Iroquois,"  of
the  Mediterrane
an  squadron,  but

was  soon  afterward  attached  to  the  Atlantic
blockading  fleet  under  Admiral  Samuel  F.  Du-
pont.  He  became  captain  on  16  July,  1862,  and
in  that  summer  led  the  advance  in  the  passages  of
the  Vicksburg  batteries,  and  was  engaged  in  the
fight  with  the  Confederate  ram  "  Arkansas."  At
the  passage  of  Vicksburg  the  flag-ship  stopped  her
engines  for  a  few  minutes  to  allow  the  vessels  in
the  rear  to  close  up.  Fancying  that  some  accident
had  befallen  the  admiral,  Palmer  dropped  the
"  Iroquois,"  which  was  the  leading  ship,  down  to
the  '"  Hartford."  Not  understanding  this  move
ment,  Farragut  hailed  Palmer  through  his  trumpet,
saying:  "Captain  Palmer,  what  do  you  mean  by
disobeying  my  orders?"  Palmer  replied:  ''I
thought,  Admiral,  that  you  had  more  fire  than  you
could  stand,  and  I  came  down  to  draw  off  a  part
of  it."  This  piece  of  gallantry  Farragut  never  for
got,  and  he  remained  Palmer's  close  friend.  Palmer
was  commissioned  commodore  on  7  Feb.,  1863,  and
at  New  Orleans  and  Mobile  he  was  Farragut's  flag-
captain.  He  became  rear-admiral  on  25  July,  1866,
and  died  of  yellow  fever  while  in  command  of  the
South  Atlantic  squadron  in  the  West  Indies.  He
was  popularly  known  as  "  Pie-crust  Palmer."
Loyall  Farragut.  in  his  father's  "  Life  and  Letters."
says  of  him  :  "  Under  a  reserve  of  manner  and  dig
nified  bearing,  which  almost  amounted  to  pom
posity,  Palmer  showed  a  warm  and  generous  nature,
He  was  brave  and  cool  under  fire,  and  always  ready
to  obey  his  chief's  commands.  The  writer  has  seen
him  going  into  battle  dressed  with  scrupulous
neatness,  performing  the  last  part  of  his  toilet  in
buttoning  his  kid  gloves  as  though  he  were  about
to  entor  a  ball-room."

PALMER,  John,  English  traveller.  He  sailed
from  Liverpool  on  28  March,  1817,  in  the  ship  in
which  William  Cobbett  returned  to  the  United
States,  and  travelled  through  this  country  and
Canada.  On  his  return  to  England  he  published
his ''Journal  of  Travels  in  the  United  States  of
North  America  and  in  Lower  Canada"  (London,


640


PALMER


PALMER


1818).  This  contains  particulars  relating  to  the
prices  of  land  and  provisions,  remarks  on  the  coun
try  and  the  people,  an  account  of  the  commerce  of
the  principal  towns,  and  a  description  of  a  pair  of
sea-serpents  that  were  said  to  have  been  seen  off
Marblehead  and  Cape  Ann  in  1817.  Sidney  Smith
said  that  Palmer  was  "  a  plain  man,  of  good  sense
and  slow  judgment."

PALMER,  John  McCauley,  soldier,  b.  in  Eagle
Creek,  Scott  co.,  Ky.,  18  Sept.,  1817.  He  removed
to  Illinois  in  1832,  and  in  1839  settled  in  Carlin-
ville.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840,  was  a
delegate  to  the  State  constitutional  convention  in
1847,  a  member  of  the  state  senate  in  1852-'4,  a
delegate  to  the  National  Republican  convention  at
Philadelphia  in  1856,  a  presidential  elector  on  the
Republican  ticket  of  1860,  and  a  delegate  to  the
Peace  convention  at  Washington,  4  Feb.,  1861.  He
was  elected  colonel  of  the  14th  Illinois  volunteers
in  April,  1861,  accompanied  Gen.  John  C.  Fre
mont  in  his  expedition  to  Springfield,  Mo.,  and  was
commissioned  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on
20  Dec.  He  was  with  Gen.  John  Pope  at  the  cap
ture  of  New  Madrid  and  Island  No.  10,  and  after
ward  commanded  the  1st  brigade,  1st  division  of
the  Army  of  the  Mississippi.  In  November,  1862,
he  was  with  Gen.  Grant's  army  in  temporary  com
mand  of  a  division.  Subsequently  he  led  a  division
at  the  battle  of  Stone  River,  and  for  his  gallantry
there  he  was  promoted  to  major-general  of  volun
teers,  29  Nov.,  1862.  He  participated  in  the  battle
of  Chickamauga,  and  led  the  14th  corps  in  the
Atlanta  campaign,  from  May  till  September,  1864.
He  was  governor  of  Illinois  from  1869  till  1873.

PALMER,  Joseph,  patriot,  b.  in  Massachusetts
in  1718  ;  d.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,  25  Dec.,  1788.  lie  was
a  member  of  the  Provincial  congress  of  1774— '5,
and  of  the  committee  of  safety  that  was  ap
pointed  by  that  body.  As  colonel  of  militia  he
served  often  in  the  field  near  Boston  in  the  defence
of  the  coast,  and  in  1777,  with  the  rank  of  briga
dier-general,  commanded  the  Massachusetts  militia
in  the  attempt  to  defend  Rhode  Island.

PALMER,  Joseph,  physician,  b.  in  Needham,
Mass.,  3  Oct.,  1796;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  3  March,
1871.  After  his  graduation  at  Harvard  in  1820
he  studied  medicine,  receiving  his  degree  in  1826,
and  taught  in  Roxbury  and  at  the  Boston  Latin-
school.  In  1829-'30  he  resided  in  Cuba,  and  after
his  return  to  Boston  he  became  an  editor  there,
and  was  connected  with  the  "Sentinel  and  Ga
zette,"  the  "  Transcript,"  and  the  "  Daily  Adver
tiser."  to  which  journal  he  contributed,  from  1851
till  1862,  biographical  sketches  of  the  deceased
alumni  of  Harvard  college.  This  necrology  was
published  in  book-form  (Boston,  1864).  He  was
also  historiographer  of  the  New  England  historical
and  genealogical  society  from  1856  till  1861.

PALMER,  Minnie,  actress,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  31  March,  1865.  Her  early  years  were  spent
in  the  Convent  of  the  Sacred  Heart,  Manhattan-
ville,  N.  Y.,  but  at  the  age  of  eight  she  was  taken
by  her  parents  to  Vienna  to  study  music  and  Ger
man,  and  afterward  to  Paris,  where  she  acquired
proficiency  in  dancing.  Her  first  appearance  was
made  in  September,  1876.  in  Baltimore,  in  a  juve
nile  part  in  a  play  entitled  "  Kisses,"  which  she
played  in  several  cities.  After  a  visit  to  Europe
she  played  Dorothy  in  "  Dan'l  Druce,"  which  was
produced  by  Lawrence  Barrett  in  New  York.  The
following  season  she  acted  Minnie  Symperson  in
"  Engaged,"  Dot  in  "  The  Cricket  on  the  Hearth,"
and  Belle  in  "  Risks,"  and  achieved  success  as
Louise  in  "  The  Two  Orphans."  In  1879-'80  she
made  a  tour  through  the  United  States,  playing


"  The  Boarding  School  "  and  "  My  Sweetheart,"  in
which  she  was  very  successful.  Miss  Palmer  first
appeared  on  the  British  stage  in  Glasgow,  on  4
June,  1883,  and  in  London  at  the  Grand  theatre,
Islington,  on  17  Sept.,  1883.  On  4  Jan.,  1884,  she
appeared  at  the  Strand  with  "  My  Sweetheart,"
subsequently  played  on  the  continent  and  in  Aus
tralia,  and  now  (1888)  resides  in  New  York  city.

PALMER,  Ray,  hymnologist,  b.  in  Little  Comp-
ton,  R.  I.,  12  Nov.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  29
March,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1830,
and  engaged  for  several  years  in  teaching  in  New
York  city  and  New
Haven,  Conn.  He
was  licensed  to  preach
by  the  New  Haven
west  association  of
Congregational  min
isters  in  1832,  ordain
ed  in  1835,  and  settled
in  Bath,  Me.,  where
he  officiated  fifteen
years.  In  1850  he
removed  to  Albany,
N.  Y.,  serving  there
nearly  sixteen  years,
and  in  1866  he  be
came  secretary  of  the
Congregational  un
ion,  holding  the  office
twelve  years.  In  1885
he  suffered  a  stroke
of  paralysis,  and  lived  in  retirement  till  the  sec
ond  and  fatal  one.  Union  college  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1852.  Besides  numerous  works,
pamphlets,  and  special  contributions  to  religious
periodicals,  he  was  the  author  of  "Spiritual  Im
provement,  or  Aid  to  Growth  in  Grace  "  (Boston,
1839;  republished  as  "Closet  Hours,"  Albany,
1851);  "Remember  Me"  (Boston,  1855:  new  ed.,
New  York.  1873);  "  Hints  on  the  Formation  of  Re
ligious  Opinions"  (New  York,  1860) ;  "  Hymns  and
Sacred  Pieces"  (1865);  "  Hymns  of  My  Holy  Hours  "
(1866);  "Home,  or  The  Unlost  Paradise  "  (1868) ;
"  Eai'nest  Words  on  True  Success  in  Life  "  (1873) ;
"  Complete  Poetical  Works  "  (1876) ;  and  "  Voices
of  Hope  and  Gladness  "  (1880).  In  the  special  line
of  hymnology  Dr.  Palmer  held  the  first  place
among  American  writers.  His  first  hymn  that  at
tracted  attention,  entitled  "My  Faith  looks  up  to
Thee,"  was  written  in  1831  while  he  was  teaching
in  New  York,  but  was  not  published  for  several
years.  It  has  since  been  translated  into  more  than
twenty  languages.  Next  to  this,  his  best-known
hymns  are  "Fount  of  Everlasting  Love"  (1832);
"Thou  who  roll'st  the  Year  Around"  (1832);
"Away  from  Earth  my  Spirit  turns"  (1833);
"Stealing  from  the  World  Away"  (1834);  "Be
fore  Thy  Throne  with  Tearful  Eyes"  (1834);
"Wake  Thee,  O  Zion !  Thy  Mourning  is  Ended"
(1834) ;  "  When  Downward  to  the  Darksome  Tomb  "
(1842) ;  "  And  is  There,  Lord,  a  Rest  f  "  (1843) ;  "  O
Sweetly  Breathe  the  Lyres  Above  !  "  (1843);  "Eter
nal  Father,  Thou  hast  "Said"  (1860) ;  "Jesus,  Lamb
of  God,  for  Me"  (1863);  "Take  Me,  0  My  Father!
Take  Me"  (1864);  "Thou  Saviour,  from  Thy
Throne  on  High"  (1864);  and  "Lord,  Thou  on
Earth  did'st  Love  Thine  Own  "  (1864).

PALMER,  Phoebe,  evangelist,  b.  in  New  York
city,  18  Dec.,  1807 :  d.  there,  2  Nov.,  1874.  Her
maiden  name  was  Worrell,  and  in  1827  she  married
Dr.  Walter  Clark  Palmer,  a  physician  of  New  York
city.  She  became  interested  in  the  Wesleyan  doc
trine  of  Christian  perfection,  and,  professing  with
her  husband  the  experience  of  "  entire  sanctifica-


PALMER


PAXCOAST


641


tion,"  held  weekly  meetings  at  her  home  for  the
advancement  of  this  doctrine  for  nearly  fifty  years.
They  travelled  extensively  in  this  country  and  in
Europe  in  supporting  their  views.  She  was  an
editor  of  a  monthly  magazine  entitled  "  The  Guide
to  Holiness,"  and  she  was  the  author  of  ''The  Way
of  Holiness  "  (Xew  York.  1845) :  "  Entire  Devotion  "
(1845);  "Faith  and  its  Effects"  (1846) ;  "Inciden
tal  Illustrations  of  the  Economy  of  Salvation"
(1852);  "  Promises  of  the  Father"  (1856);  "Four
Years  in  the  Old  World  "  (1865) :  "  Pioneer  Expe
riences  "  (1867);  and  "Sweet  Mary;  or  A  Bride
made  ready  for  her  Lord"  (England,  1862).  In
1876  her  sister,  Mrs.  Sarah  Lankford.  became  the
second  wife  of  Dr.  Palmer,  who  died  in  1883,  and
subsequently  edited  •'  The  Guide  to  Holiness."  See
"Life  and  Letters  of  Mrs.  Phoebe  Palmer,"  edited
by  the  Rev.  Richard  Wheatley  (New  York,  1876).

PALMER,  Thomas  Witherell,  senator,  b.  in
Detroit,  Mich.,  25  Jan.,  1830.  After  studying  in
the  University  of  Michigan  he  made  a  pedestrian
tour  in  Spain,  travelled  in  South  America,  and
then  engaged  in  mercantile  life  in  Wisconsin.  He
entered  the  real  estate  business  in  Detroit  in  1853,
then  became  a  lumber  merchant,  and  was  active  in
politics  of  the  state,  serving  as  a  member  of  the
board  of  estimates,  and  as  a  state  senator  in  1878.
He  was  defeated  for  congress  in  1876,  but  was
elected  a  U.  S.  senator  from  Michigan  for  a  term
of  six  years,  from  4  March.  1883.  He  was  president
of  the  Waterways  convention  held  in  Sault  Sainte
Marie  under  the  auspices  of  the  Duluth  chamber  of
commerce,  in  August,  1887,  to  consider  the  condi
tion  of  affairs  resulting  from  the  increase  of  com
merce  between  Lake  Superior  and  the  lower  lakes.

PALMER,  William  Adams,  senator,  b.  in
Hebron,  Conn.,  12  Sept.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Danville,  Vt.,
3  Dec.,  1860.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Vermont  in  1817,  studied  law.  was  admitted  to
the  bar.  and  began  to  practise  in  Vermont.  He  :
served  for  eight  years  in  the  legislature,  during  two
of  which  he  was  state  senator,  was  clerk  of  courts,
and  afterward  judge  of  the  probate,  of  the  county
court,  and  of  the  supreme  court  in  1816-'18.  He
was  elected  a  U.  S.  senator  in  place  of  James  Fisk,
serving  from  16  Nov.,  1818,  till  3  March,  1825.  Mr.
Palmer  was  a  delegate  to  the  State  constitutional
conventions  of  1828  and  1835.  and  was  governor  of
Vermont  from  1831  till  1835.

PALMER.  William  Henry,  magician,  b.  in
Canterbury.  England,  in  1828;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  18  Nov.,  1878.  His  father,  Henry  Palmer,
was  the  organist  in  Canterbury  cathedral,  and
intended  his  son,  who  was  a  musical  prodigy,  to
succeed  him.  At  the  age  of  twelve  the  son  played
the  piano  before  Liszt,  by  whom  he  was  commended.
He  received  a  good  education  in  Kent,  and  subse
quently  became  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  academy
in  London,  and  while  a  student  there  gave  his
first  magical  entertainment.  In  1852  he  came  to
this  country,  assuming  the  name  of  Robert  Heller,
for  a  time  taught  music  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  and
then  adopted  the  profession  of  a  magician,  ac
quiring  a  fortune  by  his  public  performances.  His
best-known  trick,  by  which  he  made  a  wide  repu
tation,  was  called  "  second  sight,"  and  was  per
formed  in  conjunction  with  an  assistant,  who  cor
rectly  and  minutely  described  unseen  articles  of
all  kinds  that  were  handed  to  Heller  as  he  stood
among  the  audience  in  the  body  of  the  house,
while  the  assistant  was  on  the  stage.  He  directed
in  his  will  that  all  the  secret  apparatus  and  me
chanical  devices  connected  with  his  art.  many  of
which  were  his  own  invention,  should  be  destroyed ;
but  this  was  not  done.
TOL.  iv. — 11


PALMER,  William  Pitt,  poet,  b.  in  Stock-
bridge,  Mass.,  22  Feb.,  1805:  d.  in  Brooklyn,  X.  Y..
2  May,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in
1828,  taught  in  Xew  York  city,  studied  medicine,
and  became  a  journalist.  He  was  president  of  the
Manhattan  insurance  company,  and  after  its  failure,
which  was  owing  to  the  Chicago  and  Boston  fires,
he  became  vice-president  of  the  Irving  insurance
cojnpany.  He  was  the  author  of  numerous  poems,
several  of  which,  such  as  the  "  Ode  to  Light  "  and
"  Orpheus  and  Eurydice,"  gained  wide  reputation.

PALOMINO,  Juau  Alonso  (pah-lo-me'-no),
Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Andalusia  late  in  the  15th  cen
tury  :  d.  in  Cuzco,  16  Xov..  1553.  He  went  to  Peru
after  the  death  of  Atahualpa,  and  is  first  mentioned
as  fighting  in  the  battle  of  Salinas  on  the  side  of
Almagro.  After  the  victory  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro  he
was  banished  by  the  latter,  and  took  part  in  the
unfortunate  expedition  of  Pedro  Candia  to  the  east
of  the  Andes  range.  When  Pizarro  pronounced  in
rebellion  against  the  viceroy  Xufiez  Vela,  Palomino
followed  the  former's  party  and  was  sent  to  the
fleet  of  Pedro  de  Hinojosa.  by  whom  he  was  com
missioned  to  capture  a  brother  of  the  viceroy,  who
had  been  sent  to  Spain  with  Pizarro's  son  as  pris
oner.  He  overtook  Xunez  in  Buenaventura  and
took  him  captive  to  Peru,  releasing  Pizarro's  son.
When  President  Pedro  de  la  Gasca  arrived.  Palo
mino  with  the  fleet  went  over  to  the  royalist  side,
and  was  sent  to  Callao  to  gzither  the  fugitives  from
Pizarro's  party,  and  as  captain  of  infantry  he  took
part  in  the  passage  of  Apurimac  river  and  the
battle  of  Sacsahuana,  where  Pizarro  was  defeated.
When  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron  (q.  r.)  made  his
first  attempt  at  revolution.  Palomino  fled  to  Lima,
cutting  the  bridges  of  Apurimac  and  Abancay,  but
after  Giron 's  pardon  he  returned  to  Cuzco,  and
during  the  second  successful  revolt,  on  12  Xov.,
was  attacked  by  the  rebels  during  a  festivity  and
dangerously  wounded.  dying,a  few  days  after.

PANAT,  Charles  Louis  Etienne,  Chevalier  de,
French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Brest  in  1762;  d.  in
Paris,  26  Jan.,  1834.  He  was  the  fourth  son  of
Count  de  Panat,  a  "  chef  d'escadre,"  who  had  dis
tinguished  himself  in  Canadian  waters.  Entering
the  navy  as  a  midshipman  in  1776.  the  son  took
part  in  the  war  for  American  independence,  and,
although  only  a  2d  lieutenant  in  1780,  he  was  in
trusted  with  the  command  of  a  brig,  and  captured
many  English  vessels  near  Boston.  In  the  combat
in  Chesapeake  bay  between  the  first  division  of
De  Grasse's  fleet  and  the  British  'squadron  he  took
an  English  frigate,  and  he  afterward  commanded
a  company  of  marines  in  the  two  assaults  on  York-
town,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.  After  the
conclusion  of  peace  in  1783  he  was  promoted  cap
tain,  created  knight  of  Saint  Louis,  and  made  a
member  of  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati.  In  1790
he  took  part  in  the  first  expedition  of  Santo  Do
mingo,  but,  disapproving  the  principles  of  the
French  revolution,  he  resigned  and  emigrated  in
1792.  He  returned  to  Paris  in  1800.  and  held  dur
ing  the  whole  of  Xapoleon's  reign  the  office  of  per
manent  under-secretary  of  the  navy,  which  he
exchanged  at  the  restoration  of  Louis  XVIII.  for
that  of  secretary-general  to  the  board  of  admiralty,
with  the  rank  of  rear-admiral.  He  published
"Histoiredes  operations  des  armees  navales  pen
dant  la  guerre  pour  Findependance  dc  FAmerique,
de  1778  a  1782,  dans  le  ,golfe  du  Mexique,  aux
Antilles,  sur  les  cotes  des  Etats-Unis,  de  la  Floride
a  Boston,  et  dans  Foe-can  Indien  "  (Paris,  1813).

PANCOAST,  Joseph,  surgeon,  b.  in  Burlington
county,  X".  J.,  in  1805;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  7
March,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  the  medical


642


PANCOAST


department  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1828,  practised  as  a  surgeon  in  Philadelphia,  and
in  1831  began  to  teach  classes  in  practical  anatomy
and  surgery.  He  was  chosen  one  of  the  physicians
of  the  Blockley  hospital  in  1834,  soon  afterward
was  made  head  physician  of  the  children's  hospital
connected  with  it,  and  from  1838  till  1845  was  one
of  the  visiting  surgeons.  In  1838  he  was  elected
professor  of  surgery  in  Jefferson  medical  college,
and  in  1847  was  transferred  to  the  chair  of  anatomy,
which  he  filled  till  1874,  when  he  was  succeeded  by
his  son,  William  H.  Pancoast.  From  1854  till  1804
he  was  one  of  the  surgeons  to  the  Pennsylvania
hospital.  Dr.  Pancoast  was  the  originator  of  an
operation  for  soft  cataract  with  a  fine  needle,  bent
near  the  point.  He  devised  many  new  operations
in  plastic  surgery,  among  them  the  formation  of  a
nose  by  means  of  the  plough  and  groove  or  plastic
suture,  introduced  in  1841 ;  a  substitute  for  the
eyebrow,  formed  from  a  flap  of  the  scalp;  the
introduction  of  a  catheter  for  empyema  into  the
pleura  by  raising  a  flap  of  the  integuments  over
the  ribs  ;  turning  down  flaps  from  the  skin  of  the
abdomen  for  the  relief  of  extrophy  of  the  bladder,
which  was  first  performed  by  him  in  1868  ;  and  the
raising  of  a  flap  over  the  coronoid  process,  and  the
removal  of  that  process  and  part  of  the  lower  jaw
in  order  to  divide  the  trunks  of  the  nerves  that
cause  pain  in  facial  neuralgia.  He  discovered  that
in  some  cases  of  strabismus  the  internal  oblique
muscle  must  be  cut.  He  has  restored  the  voice  by
dividing  the  muscles  of  the  soft  palate  that  have
become  contracted  from  ulceration.  He  also  de
vised  an  abdominal  tourniquet,  which  he  first  used
in  1860,  for  compressing  the  aorta,  and  thus  pre
venting  death  from  loss  of  blood  in  amputation  at
the  hip-joint  or  upper  thigh.  He  was  a  member  of
the  American  philosophical  society,  and  of  various
medical  and  scientific  associations.  Besides  numer
ous  contributions  to  the  "  American  Journal  of  the
Medical  Sciences,"  the  "  American  Medical  Intelli
gencer,"  and  the  "  Medical  Examiner,"  essays  and
introductory  lectures  to  his  classes,  of  which  the
most  notable  was  "Professional  Glimpses  Abroad,"
and  various  pathological  and  surgical  monographs
and  reports  of  new  operations,  he  published  a  trans
lation  from  the  Latin  of  J.  Frederick  Lobstein's
"Treatise  on  the  Structure,  Functions,  and  Dis
eases  of  the  Human  Sympathetic  Nerve"  (Phila
delphia,  1831) ;  "  Treatise  on  Operative  Surgery,
including  Descriptions  of  all  the  New  Operations,"
his  greatest  work  (1844;  revised  ed.,  1852);  and
"  A  System  of  Anatomy  for  the  Use  of  Students,"
based  on  the  work  of  Casper  Wistar  (1844).  He
edited  "  Manec  on  the  Great  Sympathetic  Nerve  " ;
the  "  Cerebro-Spinal  Axis  of  Man,"  by  the  same
author  (1841) ;  and  "  Quain's  Anatomical  Plates  "
(1852). — His  son,  William  Henry,  surgeon,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  16  Oct.,  1835,  was  graduated  at
the  Jefferson  medical  college  in  1850,  studied  for
three  years  in  London,  Paris,  and  Vienna,  and  on
his  return  established  himself  in  practice  in  Phila
delphia,  and  acquired  a  high  reputation  as  a  bold,
rapid,  and  skilful  operative  surgeon,  conservative
in  treatment  and  seldom  mistaken  in  diagnosis.
During  the  civil  war  he  served  as  a  surgeon  in  the
army.  In  1874  he  succeeded  his  father  as  professor
in  Jefferson  medical  college.  In  1884  he  secured
the  bodies  of  the  Siamese  twins,  and  proved  that
the  band  could  not  have  been  safely  cut  except  in
their  childhood.  He  became  professor  of  the  Phila
delphia  medieo-chirurgical  college  in  1886.

PANCOAST,  Seth,  physician,  b.  in  Darby,  Pa.,
28  July,  1823.  He  is  a  descendant  of  one  of  three
Pancoast  brothers  who  came  to  this  country  with


PAPINEAU

William  Penn.  He  received  a  classical  education,
engaged  in  business  in  1843,  and  afterward  studied
medicine,  being  graduated  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1852.  He  became  professor  of
anatomy  in  Philadelphia  female  college  in  1853,
and  the  following  year  was  called  to  a  chair  in
Pennsylvania  medical  college.  When,  five  years
later,  liis  private  practice  compelled  his  resignation,
he  was  made  emeritus  professor,  and  so  remained
until  the  close  of  the  college  in  1802.  In  1877  he
wrote  "The  Cabala,"  the  first  book  on  the  subject
in  the  English  language,  in  which  are  explained
the  ten  "  sepheroths,"  which  are  the  basis  of  the
Cabala.  In  1875  Dr.  Pancoast  calculated  the  re
turn  of  the  seventh  cycle  of  Trithemius  in  1878,
announcing  that  if  the  calculation  were  correct
there  would  be  a  revival  in  theosophy  and  other
occult  studies,  which  has  since  occurred.  His  work
was  merely  a  prelude  to  a  much  lai'ger  one,  which
is  now  (1888)  approaching  completion.  The  formu
lation  of  the  latter  has  required  twenty  years'
search  and  selection  through  ancient  works  in  Eu
ropean  libraries.  Dr.  Pancoast  has  the  finest  pri
vate  collection  of  works  on  the  occult  sciences  in
the  United  States.  His  other  books  include  "  Con
sumption  "  (Philadelphia,  1855);  "Ladies'  Medical
Guide"  (1858);  "Boyhood's  Perils"  (1860);  and
"  Bright's  Disease  "  (1882).

PANET,  Charles  Eusfene,  Canadian  lawyer,  b.
in  the  city  of  Quebec,  17  Nov.,  1830.  His  father,
Philip,  was  a  judge  of  the  court  of  Queen's  bench,
Quebec.  Charles  was  educated  in  the  Quebec
seminary,  and  at  the  Jesuit  college  of  Georgetown,
D.  C.,  studied  law.  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1854.  He  began  practice  in  Quebec,  and  also  took
an  interest  in  military  matters,  organizing  and
commanding  for  many  years  the  Voltigeurs  de
Quebec,  from  which  he  retired  in  April,  1880,  with
the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  He  is  a  member  of
the  Dominion  rifle  association,  and  vice-president
of  the  Dominion  artillery  association.  During  the
Fenian  troubles  of  1868  he  held  command  of  the
7th  military  district.  On  2  March,  1874,  he  be
came  a  member  of  the  Dominion  senate,  but  re
signed,  5  Feb.,  1875,  when  he  was  appointed  deputy
minister  of  militia  and  defence.

PAPINEAU,  Louis  Joseph,  Canadian  agitator,
b.  in  Montreal  in  October,  1789;  d.  in  Montebello,
Quebec,23  Sept.,  1871.
His  father,  a  Mon
treal  notary,  was  long
a  member  of  the  legis
lative  assembly  of
Lower  Canada.  The
son  was  educated  at
the  Seminary  of  Que
bec,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1812.  While
yet  a  student  he  was,
in  1809,  elected  a
member  of  the  legis
lative  assembly  for
the  county  of  Kent
(now  Chambly),  and
in  1811  succeeded  his
father  as  a  member
for  one  of  the  districts
of  Montreal,  which
he  continuously  rep
resented  for  twenty
years.  In  his  early
parliamentary  career  he  ably  supported  the  legis
lature  in  its  opposition  to  executive  control  of  the
revenue,  and  was  soon  recognized  as  the  leader


PAQUET


PARANA


643


of  the  young  French  Canadian  party.  He  served
in  the  war  of  1812,  had  command  of  the  company
(hat  preceded  the  American  prisoners  taken  at
Detroit  to  their  destination  at  Montreal,  and  acted
as  a  captain  in  the  militia  till  the  close  of  the  war.
On  15  Jan.,  1815.  Mr.  Papineauwas  chosen  speaker
of  the  Lower  Canada  house  of  assembly,  which
office  he  held  for  twenty  years.  In  1820  he  was
appointed  an  executive  councillor  by  the  new  gov
ernor  of  Lower  Canada.  Lord  Dalhousie.  notwith
standing  the  fact  that  Mr.  Papineau  was  leader  of
t he  radical  party  and  had  opposed  the  demand  of
the  executive  for  a  permanent  civil  list.  In  1823
he  went  to  London  to  remonstrate  against  the
union  of  Upper  and  Lower  Canada.  In  1827  his
election  as  speaker  was  not  ratified  by  Lord  Dal
housie,  who  preferred  to  adjourn  the  parliament
rather  than  sanction  this  choice,  and  it  was  not
till  1828  that  Papineau  could  take  his  seat.  He
prepared  a  list  of  the  demands  and  grievances  of
his  countrymen,  which  were  embodied  in  "  Ninety-
two  resolutions,"  forming  the  basis  of  petitions  to
the  king,  lords,  and  commons  of  the  United  King
dom.  As  it  was  considered  that  the  prayers,  or
rather  demands,  of  Papineau  and  his  compatriots,
if  granted,  would  be  'subversive  of  British  au
thority,  they  were  refused.  Papineau  afterward
continued  his  agitation,  recommending  more  vio
lent  opposition  to  the  home  government,  and  in
March,  1837,  the  fact  that  the  latter  empowered
the  executive  of  Lower  Canada  to  use  the  public
moneys  of  the  province  for  necessary  expenditures,
still  further  increased  the  revolutionary  feeling
there.  During  September,  1837,  Papineau  attended
the  meetings  of  the  agitators  throughout  the  coun
try  and  intensified  their  feeling  of  animosity
against  Great  Britain  by  his  eloquent  appeals  to
their  national  prejudices.  On  6  Nov.  a  few  loyalists
were  attacked  in  Montreal  by  a  band  of  men  be
longing  to  •'  Les  fils  de  la  liberte,"  led  by  Thomas
Storrow  Brown,  an  American  resident  of  that
city.  As  Papineau  was  held  to  be  mainly  responsi
ble  for  the  uprising  of  the  French  Canadians,  a
warrant  was  issued  on  16  Nov.  for  his  arrest,  which
he  evaded  by  escaping  to  Richelieu  river,  where  the
insurgents  were  prepared  to  rise  at  the  bidding  of
their  chiefs.  He  afterward  was  the  guest  at  St.
Benis  of  Dr.  Robert  Nelson,  whose  bravery  was  in
marked  contrast  to  the  conduct  of  Papineau.  The
latter,  instead  of  heading  those  whom  he  had  in
cited  to  revolution,  abandoned  them  in  the  moment
of  danger,  and  fled  to  Yamaska,  on  St.  Hyacinthe
river,  whence  he  subsequently  made  his  way  to  the
United  States.  In  February.  1839,  he  left  for
France,  where  he  resided  chiefly  in  Paris  till  1847,
returning  in  that  year  to  Canada,  under  the  general
amnesty  of  1840.  He  was  subsequently  elected  to
the  united  parliament,  and  led  the  opposition
against  Louis  H.  Lafontaine.  one  of  his  former
followers.  Papineau's  political  prestige  being
gone,  he  retired  from  public  life  in  1854.  and  after
ward  resided  at  La  Petite  Nation  Seigiory,  Otta
wa  river.  After  his  return  to  Canada  he  was  paid
£4.500  arrears  of  salary  as  speaker.

PAQUET,  Anselme  Homere.  Canadian  sena
tor,  b.  in  St.  Cuthbert.  Quebec.  27  Sept.,  1830.  He
was  educated  at  the  College  of  L'Assomption,  and
graduated  at  the  College  of  physicians  and  sur
geons  of  Lower  Canada.  He  became  professor  of
medical  clinic  at  the  Hotel  Dieu  hospital,  of  hy
giene  and  public  health  at  the  Montreal  school  of
medicine  and  surgery,  and  a  member  of  the  medi
cal  faculty  of  Victoria  university.  Dr.  Paquet  was
an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  the  legislative  coun
cil  in  1863,  represented  Berthier  in  the  Canada


assembly  from  1863  till  1867,  and  sat  for  the  same
constituency  in  the  Dominion  parliament  from  the
union  till  9  Feb..  1875,  when  he  became  a  senator.

PARADISE.  John,  artist,  b.  in  New  Jersey,  24
Oct.,  1783;  d.  in  New  York  city,  16  June.  1834.
He  was  apprenticed  to  a  village  saddler  in  his
youth,  but,  not  being  strong  enough  for  the  work,
abandoned  it  for  the  more  congenial  pursuit  of
painting,  and  went  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  was
a  pupil  of  Denis  A.  Yolozan.  At  twenty  years  of
age  he  began  professional  work  as  an  artist,  and
in  1810  removed  to  New  York,  where  he  became  a
member  of  the  National  academy  of  design  on  its
formation  in  1826.  Mr.  Paradise  was  a  member  of
the  Methodist  church,  and  is  principally  known  by
his  portraits  of  Methodist  divines,  which  were  en
graved  by  his  son  for  a  sectarian  magazine.  He
had  a  correct  eye  for  drawing,  and  therefore  gener
ally  produced  strong  resemblances  in  his  portraits,
but  his  ability  as  an  artist  was  not  very  high. — His
son.  John  Wesley,  engraver,  b.  in  1809:  d.  in  New
York  city.  17  Aug..  1862,  at  the  age  of  sixteen  be
came  a  pupil  of  Asher  B.  Durand,  to  learn  the
art  of  engraving,  and  produced,  in  conjunction
with  his  master,  portraits  of  William  Dunlap,
Elkanah  \Vatson,  and  Morgan  Lewis.  All  of  his
plates  are  small,  and  for  many  years  he  was  occu
pied  principally  on  bank-note  work.  He  was  an
associate  of  the  National  academy,  but  his  work,
which  was  in  the  line-manner,  has  no  great  merit.

PARAGUASSU  (par-ah-gwas-soo ),  Brazilian
heroine,  lived  in  the  16th  century.  Her  father,  the
cacique  of  the  Tupinambas,  gave  her  in  marriage
to  a  shipwrecked  Portuguese  mariner,  Diego  Al
varez  Correa,  who  became  famous  among  the  savages
under  the  name  of  Caramuru-Assu,  or  Creator  of
Fire.  After  some  years  of  married  life,  Correa  one
day  saw  a  European  vessel  approaching  the  Gulf
of  Bahia,  and,  suddenly  taken  by  a  longing  for
civilization,  made  signals  to  the  ship.  When  he
was  leaving  the  shore  in  a  boat  that  had  been
sent  for  him,  he  was  discovered  by  Paraguassu,
and  without  hesitation  she  swam  after  him  and
was  kindly  received  on  board  the  vessel.  Both
were  landed  in  France  and  carried  to  Paris,  where
Queen  Catherine  de  Medicis  took  great  interest  in
the  young  Indian  wife.  Paraguassu  quickly  ac
quired  civilized  customs,  was  instructed  in  the
Christian  religion,  and  baptized  under  the  name  of
Catherine  Alvarez,  the  queen  being  her  godmother.
They  returned  to  Brazil,  and  settled  among  the
Tupinambas,  near  the  site  of  the  present  town  of
Yelha,  where  Correa  acquired  great  influence  in
the  tribe.  Paraguassu,  with  her  countrymen,
aided  the  first  Portuguese  settlers,  and  caused  the
Tupinambas  to  submit  without  great  resistance  to
foreign  dominion.  The  territory  of  the  tribe  had
been  included  in  the  grant  of  one  of  the  twelve
original  hereditary  captaincies,  created  in  1532.  and
the  grantee.  Pereira  Coutinho,  wishing  to  usurp  the
cultivated  land  around  Yelha,  imprisoned  Correa
on  a  false  charge.  Paraguassu  immediately  roused
her  tribe,  marched  at  their  head  against  Coutinho,
and  defeated  his  forces,  and  the  captain  with  his
son  perished  in  the  encounter.  The  governor-
general  of  Brazil.  Duarte  da  Costa,  informed  of
Coutinho's  injustice  and  fearing  the  influence  of
Paraguassu  over  her  tribe,  thought  it  prudent  not
to  molest  her.  She  lived  for  long  years  with  her
husband  and  family  at  Yelha,  where  she  founded
in  1582  the  first  church,  dedicating  it  to  Nossa
Senhora  da  Gracia.  Her  remains  are  buried  there,
but  the  year  of  her  death  is  uncertain.

PARANA.  Honorio  Henneto  Carneiro  Leao
(pah-rah-nah ),  Marquis  of,  Brazilian  statesman,  D.


644


PARANAGUA


in  Minas  Geraes,  11  Jan..  1801 ;  d.  in  Rio  Janeiro,
3  Sept.,  185G.  He  received  his  preparatory  educa
tion  in  Minas  Geraes,  and  was  graduated  in  law
at  the  University  of  Coimbra  in  1825.  He  entered
the  magistracy,  and  in  1829  became  chief  judge  of
the  court  of  appeals  of  Pernambuco.  Entering
parliament  in  1830,  Lean  allied  himself  to  the  Lib
eral  party,  and  in  1831  was  one  of  the  deputies
that  protested  against  the  policy  of  the  emperor.
After  the  abdication  of  Pedro  I.  he  had  much  influ
ence  in  the  councils  of  the  moderate  Liberal  party,
and  in  1832  he  brought  about  the  resignation  of
the  ministry  and  the  regency.  In  1840  he  opposed
the  declaration  of  the  majority  of  Pedro  II.  In
1841  the  Conservative  party  was  again  called  to
power,  but  the  emperor  chose  Leao  senator  from
the  list  that  was  offered  by  the  province  of  Minas
Geraes  in  1842.  When  the  Liberal  revolts  broke
out  in  S.  Paulo  and  Minas  Geraes,  Leao,  who  was
president  of  Rio  Janeiro,  rendered  important  ser
vices  to  the  cause  of  order.  He  was  minister  of
foreign  relations  in  1843,  in  1849  president  of
Pernambuco,  and  in  1851  envoy  to  the  Argentine
Republic.  In  1853  he  was  called  to  form  a  minis
try,  and  for  three  years  he  was  at  its  head,  but  his
he'alth  was  undermined  by  over-work  in  his  con
tinued  struggle  against  the  Conservative  party,  and
he  fell  sick  suddenly  in  the  department  of  state
and  died  soon  afterward.  In  1852  he  had  been
created  Viscount, and  in  1854  Marquis  of  Parana.

PARANAUUA,  Francisco  Villela  Barbosa
(pah-rah-nah-gwah'),  Marquis  of,  Brazilian  states
man,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  20  Nov.,  1769;  d.  there,  11
Sept.,  1846.  He  was  graduated  in  mathematics  at
the  University  of  Coimbra  in  1790,  entered  the
royal  navy  at  Lisbon  in  1797.  and  served  for  four
years,  participating  in  the  siege  of  Tunis  and  in
the  capture  of  Algerian  pirates  in  the  Mediter
ranean.  He  was  appointed  in  1801  assistant  pro
fessor  of  the  Royal  naval  academy,  but  asked  to  be
transferred  to  the  engineer  corps,  which  he  entered
with  the  rank  of  lieutenant,  and  was  for  some  time
an  assistant  professor  of  astronomy  and  navigation,
and  afterward  professor  of  geometry.  He  returned
to  Brazil  in  1823,  and  when  the  success  of  the
Portuguese  revolution  of  1820  was  followed  by  the
meeting  of  the  constituent  assembly  he  was  ap
pointed  a  member  of  that  body.  After  the  inde
pendence  of  Brazil  was  declared,  Barbosa  was
appointed  minister  of  the  navy  in  December,  1829,
but  he  became  unpopular  and  resigned  in  1831.
In  1840  he  was  president  of  the  senate,  and  exerted
all  his  influence  to  declare  Pedro  II.  of  age,  and
from  1841  till  1843  he  held  again  the  portfolio  of
the  navy.  He  wrote  "  Elementos  de  Geometria"
(Lisbon,  1815) ;  "  Um  pequenho  tratado  sobre
Geometria  Spherica"  (1817);  and  an  essay,  "  Sobre
a  Correccao  das  Derrotas  da  Estima,"  which  was
awarded  a  prize  and  published  by  the  Royal  geo
graphical  society  of  Lisbon  (1818).  He  wrote  also
many  poetical  compositions,  including  odes,  son
nets,  and  cantatas,  which  circulated  among  his
friends  and  gained  him  some  reputation  as  a  poet.

PARDEE,  Ario,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Chatham,
N.  Y.,  19  Nov.,  1810.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  and  then  turned  his  attention  to
engineering.  His  first  work  was  on  the  construc
tion  of  the  Delaware  and  Raritan  canal  in  New
Jersey,  during  1830-'3,  after  which  he  went  to
Pennsylvania  and  had  charge  of  an  engineering
corps,  running  the  line  for  the  Beaver  Meadow
railroad.  In  183(5  he  began  the  Hazleton  railroad,
and  settling  there  in  1840  opened  coal-mines  which,
being  located  in  the  mammoth  vein  of  the  anthra
cite  field,  proved  exceedingly  valuable.  In  1848  he


PARDO

built  a  gravity  railroad  to  Penn  Haven,  a  distance
of  fourteen  miles,  as  an  outlet  for  the  product  of
these  mines,  but  in  1854  the  Lehigh  Valley  railroad
was  opened,  which,  with  its  improved  facilities,
caused  the  abandonment  of  the  old  road  in  18(50.
Subsequently  he  became  interested  in  iron  manu
facture,  and  he  is  now  (1888)  owner  of  blast-fur
naces  at  various  localities  in  New  York,  New  Jer
sey,  Virginia,  and  Tennessee.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  in  18(51  he  fitted  out  a  military  com
pany  for  the  National  service  at  his  own  expense,
with  which  his  eldest  son,  Ario  Pardee,  Jr.,  served
and  attained  the  brevet  rank  of  brigadier-general
on  12  Jan.,  18C5.  Mr.  Pardee  became  interested  in
Lafayette  college  in  18G4,  and  through  the  influ
ence  of  William  C.  Cattell,  then  president  of  the
college,  he  gave  $20.000  for  the  endowment  of  a

Erofessorship.  At  that  time  this  amount  was  the
irgest  sum  that  had  been  given  by  one  person  to
any  educational  institution  in  Pennsylvania.  lie
soon  increased  his  gift  until  in  18(59  it  amounted
to  $200,000,  and  upon  this  basis  was  first  estab
lished  a  new  curriculum  of  scientific  and  technical
studies.  A  new  building  being  needed,  Mr.  Par-
dee  for  this  purpose  made  a  further  gift  of  $250,-
000,  to  which  he  afterward  added  $50,000  for  its


scientific  equipment,  thus  increasing  his  donations
to  $500,000.  The  building,  shown  in  the  accom
panying  illustration,  was  erected  and  called  Par-
dee  "Hall  in  his  honor.  It  was  regarded  when  fin
ished  as  "the  largest  and  most  complete  scientific
college  building  in  the  United  States,"  and  was
formally  dedicated  in  October,  1873.  It  was
burned 'in  1879,  but  has  been  rebuilt.  Mr.  Pardee
is  a  director  of  several  railroads,  including  the  Le
high  Valley  road,  and,  besides  being  an  active  offi
cer  in  various  charitable  organizations,  is  president
of  the  state  board  that  has  the  oversight  and  con
trol  of  the  second  geological  survey  of  Pennsylva
nia.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1876,  and
since  1882  has  been  president  of  the  board  of  trus
tees  of  Lafayette  college.

PARUO,  Manuel,  president  of  Peru,  b.  in
Lima  in  1834;  d.  there,  16  Nov.,  1878.  In  'his
youth  his  father  emigrated  for  political  reasons  to
Chili,  and  young  Pardo  received  his  education  in
Santiago  and  Europe,  applying  himself  specially
to  the  study  of  administrative  law  and  political
economy.  At  the  age  of  nineteen  he  was  appointed
by  the  government  of  Gen.  Jose  Rufino  Echenique
chief  clerk  of  the  bureau  of  statistics,  and  in  1858
he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  board  of  charities,
where  he  rendered  great  service.  He  afterward
engaged  in  agricultural  pursuits,  and  in  18C2
founded  the  first  bank  in  Lima.  He  was  called  in
December,  1865,  by  the  new  president,  Mariano
Prado  (q.  v.),  to  take  the  portfolio  of  the  treasury,
occupied  that  place  till  the  end  of  1866,  becoming
popular  by  his  able  and  honest  administration  of


PAREDES


PAREDES Y ARRILLAGA


645


the  exchequer,  which  had  been  mismanaged.  Dur
ing  the  yellow-fever  epidemic  in  Lima  in  1867
Pardo  was  appointed  president  of  the  Charitable
society,  and  by  his  efforts  and  fearless  self-exposure
contributed  to  check
the  disease.  He  was
elected  in  1868  presi
dent  of  the  tribunal  of
commerce,  and  in  1869
mayor  of  Lima,  and  in
1872.  by  acclamation,
became  the  candidate
of  the  Liberal  party
for  president.  He  was
elected  by  a  large  ma
jority  of  the  popular
vote,  but.  when  the  two
houses  of  congress  met
to  canvass  the  vote,  the
minister  of  war  of  the
administration  of  Jose
Balta  (q.  ?•.),  Tomas  Gu
tierrez,  who  had  vain
ly  tried  to  induce  the
president  to  annul  the
election  and  effect  a

coup  d'etat,  imprisoned  Balta,  dissolved  congress,
and  declared  himself  dictator.  Pardo,  with  others,
fled  to  the  foreign  legations,  but.  after  the  dictator
was  killed  by  the  populace,  he  returned  and  was
installed  on  2  Aug.  as  the  first  civilian  president  of
Peru.  He  was  a  man  of  literary  attainments  and
enlightened  views,  and  during  his  administration
the  country,  which  he  found  on  the  verge  of  finan
cial  ruin,  obtained  an  unwonted  degree  of  prosper
ity.  He  curtailed  the  expenditures  in  every  branch,
reduced  the  army,  promoted  the  exploration  of
navigable  streams  leading  to  the  Amazon,  and  fos
tered  literature.  In  1873  he  decreed  that  the  great
work  of  the  naturalist  and  geographer,  Antonio
Raimondi,  should  be  published  at  the  expense  of
the  government.  In  the  same  year,  in  an  interview
with  President  Ballivian.  of  Bolivia,  he  arranged  a
treaty  between  the  two  republics,  guaranteeing  the
integrity  of  their  respective  territories,  and  in  his
efforts  to  alleviate  the  financial  difficulties  of  the
country  he  promulgated  a  decree  making  the  ni
trate  deposits  of  Tarapaca  a  government  monop
oly.  This  proved  ineffective,  and  it  was  followed
in  1875  by  another  law.  authorizing  the  state  to
buy  all  the  nitrate-works.  In  1874  Xicolas  de
Pierola  (q.  r.)  rose  in  arms  in  the  department  of
Moquegua  and  occupied  a  strong  position  at  the
famous  •'  Cuesta  de  los  Angeles,"  but  Pardo  sent
forces  against  him,  and  soon  the  revolution  was
quelled.  Pardo's  administration  will  be  long  re
membered,  and  he  was  the  best  president  that
Peru  has  known.  When  his  term  of  office  came  to
an  end,  2  Aug.,  1876,  he  was  peacefully  succeeded
by  Gen.  Mariano  Prado.  Pardo  was  elected  after
ward  to  the  senate,  in  which  he  continued  as  the
leader  of  the  popular  or  civilian  party,  and  had  be
come  president  of  that  body  when,  on  entering  the
hall  of  congress,  he  was  assassinated  by  a  sergeant
of  the  Lima  garrison,  probably  at  the  instigation
of  the  military  party,  who  feared  his  preponder
ance.  His  death  was  considered  a  national  calam
ity.  Tsvo  generals  and  the  wife  of  Pierola  were
arrested  for  complicity  in  the  crime,  but  subse-
quentlv  released  for  want  of  evidence.

PAREDES,  Isrnacio  (pah-ray'-des),  Mexican
clergyman,  b.  in  San  Juan  de  los  Llanos,  20  Feb.,
1703;  d.  about  1770.  He  became  a  Jesuit,  made  a
thorough  study  of  the  Mexican  language,  and  pub
lished  ••  Catecismo  del  padre  Ripalda  y  arreglado  en  1


|  el  idioma  Mexicano  y  anadido"  (Mexico,  1758)
and  '•  Prontuario  manual  Mexicano,"  which  is  writ
ten  in  Mexican  and  is  very  rare  (1759).

PAREDES,  Jose  (rregWio,  Peruvian  scientist,
b.  in  Lima  in  1779:  d.  there,  16  Dec.,  1839.  He
studied  in  the  convent  of  Buenamuerte  under  Rev.
Francisco  Romero,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Uni  ver-
I  sity  of  San  Marcos  in  1803.  He  was  appointed
I  professor  of  geometry  in  1803,  and  was  made  ex
aminer  of  the  medical  board,  holding  this  office
from  1807  till  1813.  and  that  of  librarian  of  the
university  from  1807  till  1821.  On  10  Jan.,  1809,  he
established  with  fifty  scholars  the  class  of  mathe
matics  in  the  College  of  San  Fernando.  In  1810  he
was  elected  a  member  of  the  board  of  barristers,
and  in  the  same  year  he  was  appointed  by  the  vice
roy  Abascal  editor  of  the  "  Gaceta  Oficial."  In
1814  he  was  appointed  professor  of  mathematics  in
the  University  of  San  Marcos,  where  he  introduced
the  study  of  astronomy  applied  to  geography  and
hydrography,  and  was  chosen  in  the  same  year  cos-
mographer,  in  charge  of  the  yearly  nautical  alma
nacs.  He  visited  Chili  and  wrote  about  the  climate
and  diseases  of  that  country.  When  independence
was  finally  declared,  Paredes,  who  had  favored  the
patriot  cause,  wrote  political  articles  in  the  paper
';  El  Nuevo  Sol  de  Peru."  He  was  afterward  comp
troller-general,  minister  to  London,  deputy  to  con
gress,  and  secretary  of  the  treasury.  He  wrote
"  Modo  de  hallar  por  tres  observaciones  los  ele-
mentos  de  la  orbita  de  un  cometa"  (Lima.  1814);
"Tratado  de  Geometria  y  Trigonometria  "  (1836);
and  "Tratado  de  Aritmetica  y  Algebra"  (1838).

PAREDES  Y  ARRILLAGA,  Mariano.  Mexi
can  soldier,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1797:  d.
there  in  September,  1849.  He  became  a  cadet  in
the  Spanish  service.  6  Jan.,  1812,  and  had  become  a
captain  when,  in  March,  1821,  he  adhered  to  the
Plan  de  Iguala,  and  participated  in  the  encounters
that  preceded  the  occupation  of  Mexico  by  the
patriot  army.  In  Puebla  he  pronounced  against
Iturbide,  11  Feb.,  1823,  was  promoted  lieutenant-
colonel,  and  served  afterward  on  the  northwest
coast.  In  1835  he  commanded  a  brigade  under
Santa- Anna  against  the  revolution  of  Zacatecas,
and  he  continued  to  serve  the  Centralist  party,
taking  part  in  the  campaign  of  Morelia  in  1841,  for
which  he  was  promoted  major-general  and  military
commander  of  Jalisco.  In  August  he  pronounced
against  the  government,  together  with  Santa-Anna
and  Bravo,  but  after  the  establishment  of  a  mili
tary  dictatorship  under  the  former,  being  slighted
by  the  administration,  which  he  thought  owed  its
existence  to  him,  he  began  to  plot  against  it.  He
was  several  times  arrested,  and  at  last,  to  put  him
out  of  the  way,  he  was  sent  to  pacify  Sonora,  but
on  1  No%'.,  1844,  he  pronounced  against  the  govern
ment  with  his  army  at  Guadalajara.  Paredes  was
successful  in  overthrowing  Santa-Anna,  but,  lack
ing  the  necessary  talent  for  governing,  was  again
Jassed  over  in  the  choice  of  an  executive,  and  Gen.
ose  J.  Herrera  (q.  v.)  was  appointed.  At  the  be
ginning  of  difficulties  with  the  United  States,
Paredes  was  appointed  commander  of  the  Army  of
the  North,  but  on  his  march  to  the  seat  of  war  he
headed  a  rebellion  at  San  Luis  Potosi,  14  Dec.,
1845,  and  at  last,  on  2  Jan.,  1846,  was  elected  pro
visional  president.  His  administration  was  short
and  remarkable  for  not  taking  any  measure  to  repel
the  American  invasion,  even  after  the  defeats  of
Palo  Alto  and  Resaca  de  la  Palma  on  8  and  9  May.
Discontent  followed,  and  there  were  insurrections
everywhere,  and  when  Paredes.  on  29  July,  obtained
permission  to  march  to  the  interior  to" pacify  the
state  of  Jalisco,  the  revolt  of  the  Ciudadela  oc-


646


PAREJA


PAREPA-ROSA


curred,  by  which  he  was  imprisoned  and  afterward
banished.  He  returned  in  1847,  when  the  capital
was  occupied  by  the  U.  S.  forces,  and  although  the
government  of  Queretaro  ordered  him  to  present
himself,  he  evaded  compliance  with  the  order,  and
began  secretly  to  conspire  against  the  government.
When,  after  the  evacuation  of  the  capital  by  the
U.  S.  troops  in  June,  1848,  Father  Cenobio  Jarauta
(q.  v.)  pronounced  in  rebellion  at  Lagos,  Paredes
joined  the  revolution  openly  and  marched  to
Guanajuato,  where  the  insurgents  fortified  them
selves.  After  the  city  was  taken  by  Gen.  Busta-
mante.  and  Jarauta  had  been  shot,  Paredes  fled  and
was  for  several  months  in  hiding,  till  he  was  in
cluded  in  the  amnesty  of  April,  1849,  and  returned
to  Mexico,  where  he  died  five  months  later.

PARE  J  A,  Antonio  (pah-ray'-hah),  Spanish  naval
ofiicer,  b.  in  Spain  about  1700;  d.  in  Chilian,  Chili,
21  May,  1813.  In  1805  he  took  part  in  the  battle
of  Trafalgar  as  captain  of  the  ship  "  Argonauta."
He  went  to  Lima  in  1811  as  governor-intendant  of
the  province  of  Concepcion,  and  the  viceroy  Abas-
cal  ordered  him  to  Chiloe  and  Valdivia  to  organize
forces  for  the  conquest  of  Chili,  which  had  declared
its  independence.  With  2,000  men  he  landed  at
San  Vicente,  occupied  Talcahuano,  and  immediately
marched  upon  Concepcion,  of  which  he  took  pos
session  with  the  aid  of  the  native  militia.  He
augmented  his  forces  and  at  once  marched  upon
Santiago,  but  met  a  strong  resistance  and  retired
to  Chilian.  Talcahuano  was  recovered  by  the  In
dependents,  who  also  captured  the  frigate  "  Tomas,"
which  was  coming  from  Callao  with  re-enforce
ments  to  the  aid  of  Pareja,  and  the  latter,  grieved
by  these  reverses,  fell  sick  and  died  shortly  after
ward. — His  son,  Jose,  Spanish  naval  officer,  b.  in
Lima  about  1812;  d.  at  sea,  near  the  coast  of  Chili,
28  Nov.,  1865,  went  to  Spain  and  entered  the  navy,
attaining  the  rank  of  vice-admiral.  He  was  sent
to  the  Pacific  in  1864  to  relieve  Admiral  Pinzon,
whose  seizure  of  the  Chincha  islands  was  disap
proved  in  Madrid,  and  signed  on  2  Feb.,  1865,  a
treaty  that  occasioned  a  general  revolution  in  Peru
and  the  fall  of  the  government  of  Gen.  Pexet.
Chili  having  declared  in  favor  of  Peru,  Pareja  went
to  Valparaiso  on  17  Sept.,  and  his  demand  for  sat
isfaction  having  been  refused,  he  declared  war
against  Chili  on  the  24th.  On  17  Nov.  an  armed
launch  of  the  frigate  "  Resolution  "  was  captured
by  the  Chilian  steamer  "  Independencia"  near  Tal
cahuano,  and  on  the  26th  of  the  same  month  the
gun-boat  "  Covadonga,"  with  the  admiral's  cor
respondence,  was  taken  by  the  Chilian  steamer
"  Esmeralda ''  off  Papudo,  and  these  events,  to
gether  with  the  general  failure  of  his  operations
on  the  Pacific  coast,  so  affected  the  admiral's  mind
that  he  committed  suicide  on  board  his  flag-ship.

PAREJA,  Francisco,  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in
Aunon,  New  Castile;  d.  in  Mexico,  25  July,  1628.
He  became  a  Franciscan  friar,  and,  with  others  of
his  order,  went  in  1593  to  Havana,  and  in  1594  to
St.  Augustine,  Fla.,  as  a  missionary.  During  the
remainder  of  his  life  he  was  a  teacher  of  the  Timu-
qua  Indians,  in  whose  language  he  published  cate
chisms  (1612  and  1617);  a  "  Confesionario  "  (1613);
and  a  gram  mar .  and  vocabulary  (Mexico,  1614).

PARENT,  Etienne,  Canadian  journalist,  b.  in
Beauport,  near  Quebec,  2  May,  1801 ;  d.  in  Ottawa,
Can.,  23  Dec.,  1874.  He  received  his  education  in
the  Seminary  of  Quebec  and  in  the  College  of  Nico-
let,  and  in  1822  became  editor  of  the  '•Canadien,"
the  oldest  French  journal  in  the  province.  He
held  the  post  till  1825,  when  he  began  to  study
law.  Soon  after  his  admission  to  the  bar  he  left
the  profession,  and  was  appointed  translator  to  the


legislative  assembly  of  Lower  Canada,  and  after
ward  librarian.  In  1831  he  resigned  those  offices
and  resumed  the  direction  of  the  "  Canadien,"
which  he  kept  till  1842.  He  was  imprisoned  in
1837  for  expressing  extreme  political  opinions  in
his  newspaper.  At  the  union  of  the  provinces  in
1841  he  was  elected  to  parliament  for  Saguenay,
but  he  resigned  in  1842  to  become  clerk  of  the  ex
ecutive  council,  which  post  he  held  till  1847,  when
he  was  appointed  assistant  secretary  for  Lower
Canada.  He  still  continued  to  write  for  the  "  Cana
dien,"  which  for  a  long  time  was,  under  his  inspira
tion,  a  powerful  weapon  of  the  French-Canadian
party.  He  gave  a  great  number  of  public  lectures
on  practical  subjects,  and  was  to  some  extent  the
originator  of  this  mode  of  instruction  in  Canada.
His  principal  lectures,  delivered  before  the  Canadi
an  institute  and  published  in  the  "  Repertoire  na
tional  "  of  1848,  are  entitled  "  L'Industrie  comme
moyen  de  conserver  notre  nationalite,"  "  Impor
tance  de  1'etude  de  1'economie  politique,"  "  Du
travail  chez  1'homme,''  "  Du  pretre  et  du  spiritual-
isme  dans  leur  rapport  avec  societe,"  and  "  Con
siderations  sur  notre  systeme  d'education  populaire
sur  1'cducation  en  general,  et  les  moyens  legislatifs
d'y  pourvoir."  Some  of  his  papers  in  the  "  Foyer
Canadien  "  had  much  influence  on  the  industry  of
the  country.  The  principal  are  "  De  1'importanco
et  des  devoirs  du  commerce."  "  De  I'lntelligence
dans  ses  rapports  avec  la  societe,"  and  "  Considera
tions  sur  le  sort  des  classes  ouvrieres."

PARENT,  Pierre,  French  pilot,  b.  in  Saint
Jean  de  Lnz ;  lived  about  the  beginning  of  the
15th  century.  lie  is  claimed  by  some  authors  as
the  discoverer  of  Newfoundland  and  Canada.
Says  Amans  Monteil  in  his  "  Traitc  des  materiaux
manuscrits  "  (Paris,  1836)  :  "  About  the  year  1400
he  was  blown  within  sight  of  an  unknown  land,
where  he  descried  the  mouth  of  a  great  river
(probably  the  St.  Lawrence),  and  afterward  landed
upon  a  large  island,  where  he  found  big  fishes
which  he  named  baccalaos."  This  story,  strange
as  it  is,  may  not  be  quite  void  of  foundation.  It
is  said  by  many  writers  that  about  a  century  be
fore  the  discovery  of  America  by  Columbus  the
Basques,  the  Normans,  and  the  Bretons  were  ex
tensively  engaged  in  the  Newfoundland  fisheries.
"  Sebastian  Cabot  named  Labrador  and  Newfound
land  Baccalaos,"  says  Peter  Martyr,  "  because,  in  the,
seas  thereabout,  he  found  so  great  multitudes  of
certain  big  fishes,  which  the  inhabitants  call  bac
calaos,  that  they  sometimes  stayed  his  ships."  i4  In
the  original  Basque,  baccalaos  is  a  word  for  a  cod
fish,"  says  Francis  Park  man  in  his  "  Pioneers  of
France  in  the  New  World,"  "  and  if  Cabot  found  it
in  use  among  the  inhabitants  of  Newfoundland,  it
is  hard  to  escape  the  conclusion  that  Basques  had
been  there  before  him."  See  also  the  "  Relation  "
of  Marc  Lescarbot  (1609) ;  "  Novus  orbis  "  of  John
Laet(1828);  the  "  Histoire  des  navigateurs  Fran-
cais  "  of  Leon  Guerin  (Paris,  1846) ;  "  Histoire  des
navigateurs  Normands  "  of  Estancelin  (Paris,  1832) ;
"  Ocean  decades  "  of  Peter  Martyr  (Alcala,  1530) ;
"Navigation"  of  Jchan  Parmentier  (1631);  and
the  "Historia  general"  of  Herrera.

PAREPA-ROSA,  Enphrosyne,  singer,  b.  in
Edinburgh,  Scotland,  7  May,  1836;  d.  in  London,
England,  21  Jan.,  1874.  Her  mother  was  Elizabeth
Seguin,  a  singer,  sister  of  Arthur  Edward  Seguin,
and  her  father,  Demetrius  Parepa.  Baron  de  Boyescu,
a  Wallachian  boyar,  who  died  while  she  was  an
infant.  She  was  educated  for  the  operatic  stage
under  eminent  masters,  made  her  debut  at  Malta
when  she  was  sixteen  years  old,  sang  with  success
in  the  Italian  cities  and  in  Madrid,  and  in  1857


PARET


PARK


647


appeared  in  London.  Her  voice  was  a  soprano  of
immense  volume,  with  a  compass  of  two  octaves  and
a  half,  reaching  to  D  in  alt,  and  her  execution  was
good  ;  yet  in  opera  her  success  was  only  moderate.
She  therefore  turned  to  oratorio  and  concert  sing
ing,  achieving  a  pronounced  success,  and  took  part
in  the  Handel  revival  in  England.  In  1803  she
married  Capt.  Henry  De  Wolfe  Carvell,  a  British
army  officer,  who  died  sixteen  months  later.  In
1860  she  came  to  the  United  States  on  a  concert-
tour  with  Carl  Rosa,  making  her  first  appearance
in  Boston,  on  20  Sept.,  in  concert.  She  sang  oper
atic  arias,  songs  of  the  great  German  composers,
and  English  ballads,  subsequently  performed  in
Handel's  "  Messiah  "  and  "  Samson,"  and  finally  in
Mozart's  "  Marriage  of  Figaro,"  Weber's  "Oberon,"
and  other  operas,  which  were  given  with  English
words.  With  Carl  Rosa,  whom  she  married  in  New
York  in  February,  1807,  she  established  the  Parepa-
Rosa  English  opera  company.  She  became  popular
with  the  American  public,  and  did  much  to  elevate
its  musical  taste.  In  June,  1869,  she  sang  at  the
Peace  jubilee  in  Boston.  In  the  winter  of  1870  she
appeared  in  Italian  opera  at  Cairo,  Egypt,  being
prevented  by  illness  from  fulfilling  an  engagement
in  London.  '  In  the  autumn  of  1871  she  and  her
husband  returned  to  the  United  States  with  their
company,  and  in  the  following  year  she  made  a
concert  tour.  She  went  to  England  in  1873,  and
was  preparing  to  produce  an  English  version  of
Wagner's  "  Lohengrin,"  when  she  died.

PARET,  William,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  New
York  city,  23  Sept.,  1826.  He  was  graduated  at
Hobart  college  in  1849.  studied  for  orders  under  the
personal  supervision  of  Bishop  William  H.  Delan-
cey,  was  made  deacon  in  1852.  and  ordained  priest
in"  18-33.  He  was  rector  successively  of  churches
in  Clyde.  N.  Y..  in  1852-'4,  Pierrepont  Manor,
X.  Y.,'  1854-'64,  East  Saginaw.  Mich.,  in  1864-'6,
Elmira,  X.  Y.,  in  1866-'8,  Williamsport,  Pa.,  in
1808-76,  and  Washington.  D.  C.,  in  1876-'84.  In
the  last-named  year  he  was  elected  to  the  see  of
Maryland  to  succeed  Bishop  William  Pinkney,  who
died  in  1883,  and  was  consecrated  in  the  Church  of
the  Epiphany,  Washington,  D.  C.,  8  Jan.,  1885,  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Hobart  in  1867,
and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  the  same  institution  in
1886. — His  brother,  Thomas  Duiikiu,  inventor,  b.
in  Xew  Y^ork  city,  20  Dec.,  1837,  was  educated  first
in  classical  schools  in  his  native  city,  and  from  1860
till  1865  studied  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh,
Scotland,  giving  special  attention  to  chemistry.
While  still  a  student  he  began  a  series  of  experi
ments,  chemical  and  mechanical,  the  main  object
of  which  was  the  utilization  of  waste  products,
especially  the  transformation  of  animal  substances,
like  hide,  horn,  tortoise-shell,  and  leather.  He  de
veloped  processes  for  the  treatment  of  waste  leather
which  fitted  it  for  the  lining  of  petroleum-barrels
and  fire-proof  safes,  and  for  use,  tinder  the  name  of
"tanite,"  as  a  substitute  for  jet  and  ebonite  in  the
manufacture  of  jewelry  and  fancy  articles,  and  as
a  base  for  solid  emery-wheels.  He  has  taken  a
leading  part  in  the  development  and  extension  of
grinding  processes,  and  has  been  president  of  the
Tanite.  company  at  Stroudsburg.  Pa.,  which  manu
factures  emery-wheels,  since  its  organization  in
1867.  He  has  contributed  many  technical  articles
to  scientific  periodicals.

PARISH,  Elijah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lebanon,
Conn.,  7  Nov.,  1702;  d.  in  Byfield.  Mass.,  15  Oct.,
1825.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1785.
studied  theology,  and  on  20  Dec.,  1787,  was  settled
as  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  at  Byfield,
with  which  he  remained  connected  till  his  death.


The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  given  him  by  Dartmouth
in  1807.  He  accepted  the  Hopkinsonian  system  of
theology,  and  in  politics  was  a  strong  Fe'deralist.
In  1810  he  delivered  the  annual  election  sermon,  in
which  he  assailed  the  Xational  administration  with
such  acrimony  that  the  legislature  declined  to  print
the  discourse.  It  was  published  by  subscription
(Boston,  1810),  and  widely  circulated  and  discussed.
Some  of  his  violent  political  sermons  were  quoted
by  Mathew  Carey  in  his  ''Olive  Branch  "  (Philadel
phia,  1814).  Dr.  Parish  published  eighteen  occa
sional  sermons  and  three  orations,  and,  conjointly
with  Rev.  Jedediah  Morse,  a  "  Gazetteer  of  the
Eastern  and  Western  Continents"  (Cliarlestown,
1802);  "Compendious  History  of  Xew  England"
(Xewburyport,  1809);  and  "Sacred  Geography,  or
Gazetteer  of  the  Bible  "  (1813).  He  was  the  author
also  of  '•  A  Xew  System  of  Modern  Geography,  or
a  General  Description  of  all  the  Considerable
Countries  of  the  World  "  (Xewburyport,  1810).  In
conjunction  with  Rev.  David  McClure  he  published
"  Memoirs  of  Eleazer  Wheelock "  (Xewburyport,
1811).  A  volume  of  Dr.  Parish's  "  Sermons,  with  a
Brief  Memoir,"  was  issued  after  his  death  (1826).

PARISH,  Sir  Woodbine,  English  diplomatist,
b.  in  England,  14  Sept..  1790;  d.  there,  16  Aug.,
1882.  He  was  British  charge  d'affaires  at  Buenos
Ayres,  and  published  "  Buenos  Ayres  and  the  Prov
inces  of  the  Rio  de  la  Plata"  (London,  1839).

PARK,  Calvin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Xorth bridge,
Mass.,  11  Sept.,  1774;  d.  in  Stoughton,  Mass.,  5
Jan.,  1847.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1797,
taught  for  three  years,  while  studying  theology,
became  a  tutor  in  the  college  in  1800,  and  in  1804
was  elected  professor  of  languages.  In  1811  he  was
transferred  to  the  chair  of  moral  philosophy  and
metaphysics.  While  connected  with  the  university
he  preached  every  Sunday.  In  1825  he  resigned  his
professorship,  and  in  the  following  year  he  was  in
stalled  as  pastor  of  the  Evangelical  Congregational
church  at  Stoughton.  He  retired  from  the  pastorate
in  1840.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Brown  in  1818. — His  son,  Edwards  Amasa. theo
logian,  b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  29  Dec..  1808,  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1826,  and  at  Andover  theo
logical  seminary  in  1831.  For  two  years  he  was
pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  at  Braintree,
Mass.  In  1835  he  became  professor  of  moral  and
intellectual  philosophy  and  of  Hebrew  literature
at  Amherst.  and  in  1836  he  was  called  to  the  pro
fessorship  of  sacred  rhetoric  in  Andover  seminary.
In  1847  he  exchange^!  this  chair  for  the  professor
ship  of  Christian  theology,  and  in  1881  he  was
retired  as  emeritus  professor.  The  degree  of  D.  D.
was  conferred  on  him  by  Harvard  in  1844  and  by
Brown  in  1846.  Dr.  Park  has  been  active  as  an
exponent  of  the  doctrines  that  are  embodied  in  the
Andover  creed  and  called  the  Xew  England  system
of  theology.  He  began  to  write  for  reviews  in
1828.  In  1844  he  established,  with  Bela  B.  Ed
wards,  the  '•  Bibliotheca  Sacra,"  of  which  he  was
editor-in-chief  till  1851,  and  one  of  the  principal
editors  for  forty  years.  In  1842,  and  again  in  1862,
he  went  to  Germany,  remaining  about  a  year  each
time,  and  in  1869-'70  he  travelled  through  Europe
and  the  East.  Besides  numerous  review  articles
and  contributions  to  biblical  and  theological  lexi
cons  and  cyclopa?dias.  Dr.  Park  has  published  me
morial  sketches  of  Charles  S.  Storrs  (Boston.  1833);
Moses  Stuart  (Andover.  1852);  Bela  B.  Edwards
(1852);  Joseph  S.  Clark  (Boston,  1861);  Richard  S.
Storrs  (1874);  Samuel  C.  Jackson  (Andover,  1878);
and  Leonard  Woods  (1880) ;  also  memoirs  of  Samuel
Hopkins,  Bela  B.  Edwards,  and  Xathanael  Emmons,
which  were  prefixed  to  their  works,  that  of  Dr.


648


PARK


PARKE


Emmons  being  also  published  separately  (Boston.
1861).  He  was  one  of  the  translators  and  editors
of  "  Selections  from  German  Literature  "  (Andover,
1839).  He  edited  the  "  Writings  of  Rev.  William
Bradford  Homer''  (Boston,  1842),  preparing  an
introductory  essay  for  the  second  edition  (1849);
also  "  The  Atonement,"  consisting  of  discourses  of
several  divines,  to  which  he  prefixed  an  essay  on
the  "  Rise  of  the  Edwardsian  Theory  of  the  Atone
ment"  (Boston,  1800).  His  other  publications  in
clude  a  sermon  on  "  The  Theology  of  the  Intellect
and  of  the  Feelings  "  (Boston,  1850);  an  "  Election
Sermon"  (1851);  a  pamphlet  on  -'The  Associate
Creed  of  Andover  Theological  Seminary  "  (1883) ;
and  a  volume  of  "  Discourses  on  some  Theological
Doctrines  as  Related  to  the  Religious  Character"
(Andover,  1885).  He  was  associated  with  Austin
Phelps  and  Lowell  Mason  in  the  compilation  of
"  The  Sabbath  Hymn-Book"  (New  York,  1858).  and.
with  Dr.  Phelps" and  Daniel  L.  Furber,  published
'•  Hymns  and  Choirs"  (Andover,  1800),  to  which  he
contributed  an  essay  on  "  The  Text  of  Hymns."

PARK,  James,"  iron-master,  b.  in  Pittsburg,
Pa..  11  Jan.,  1820;  d.  in  Alleghany,  Pa.,  21  April,
1883.  He  received  a  common-school  education,
and  in  1837  began  his  business  career.  In  1802  he
turned  his  attention  to  the  manufacture  of  steel  in
Pittsburg,  and  his  firm,  Park,  Brother  and  Co.,
was  among  the  first  to  manufacture  crucible  cast-
steel  in  the  United  States.  He  was  one  of  the  syn
dicate  that  purchased  the  patents  of  William  Kelly.
(q.  v.),  and  so  was  interested  in  the  introduction  of
the  Bessemer  process  for  converting  iron  into  steel,
becoming  in  1815(5  a  member  of  the  Pneumatic  steel
association.  In  1803  he  was  the  first  to  introduce
the  Siemens  gas-furnace  into  this  country.  He  had
a  high  reputation  as  a  progressive  leader  among
iron-masters,  and  was  active  in  the  American  insti
tute  of  mining  engineers.  Mr.  Park  showed  great
courage  in  July.  1877.  in  facing  the  rioters  during
the  labor  troubles  of  the  year,  and  making  an  ear
nest  appeal  to  them  at  the  Union  depot.  He  was  a
trustee  of  the  University  of  western  Pennsylvania,
chairman  of  one  of  the  first  law  and  order  associa
tions  in  the  United  States,  and  a  member  of  vari
ous  religious  and  temperance  bodies.

PARK,  John,  journalist,  b.  in  Windham,  N.  II.,
7  Jan.,  1775;  d.  in  Worcester,  Mass..  2  March,
1852.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1791,
was  preceptor  at  Framingham  academy  in  1793,
studied  medicine,  and  was  assistant  surgeon  in  the
British  army  at  Port  an  Prince.  Santo  Domingo,
and  from  14  Oct.,  1799,  till  6  July,  1801,  surgeon
of  the  U.  S.  ship  "  Warren."  In  1803  he  estab
lished  at  Newburyport,  Mass.,  the  "New  England
Repertory,"  a  semi-weekly  Federalist  journal,  which
he  afterward  transferred  to  Boston.  In  1811  he
disposed  of  his  newspaper  and  established  at  Bos
ton  a  high-school  for  young  women,  which  he  con
ducted  with  great  success  for  twenty  years.  In
1814  he  published  the  Boston  "Spectator."

PARK,  Roswell,  educator,  b.  in  Lebanon,  Conn.,
1  Oct.,  1807;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  16  July,  1869.
He  entered  Hamilton  college,  but  left  on  receiving
an  appointment  as  a  cadet  in  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1831.  The
same  year  he  passed  the  final  examinations  at
Union  college,  and  received  the  degree  of  B.  A.
He  was  at  once  commissioned  as  2d  lieutenant  of
engineers,  and  employed  on  fortifications  at  New
port  and  Boston,  and  afterward  on  the  Delaware
breakwater  until  he  resigned,  30  Sept.,  1836.  He
was  then  appointed  professor  of  chemistry  and
natural  history  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
but  in  July,  1842,  he  resigned  in  order  to  fit  him


self  for  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church.  He  was  ordained  priest  in  1843,  and
taught  in  Annapolis,  Md.,  for  the  next  two  years.
In  1845  he  became  principal  of  Christ  church  hall,
a  classical  school  in  Pomfret,  Conn.,  which  he  con
ducted  till  1852,  when  he  was  called  to  the  presi
dency  of  Racine  college,  Wis.,  after  previously  de
clining  the  same  office  in  Norwich  university,  Vt.,
which  conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1850.  He  served  as  president  for  seven  years,  and
then  as  chancellor  till  1803,  when  he  went  to
Chicago  and  founded  a  literary  and  scientific
school  called  Immanuel  hall,  of  which  he  was  rector
and  proprietor  till  his  death.  He  published  "Se
lections  of  Juvenile  and  Miscellaneous  Poems"
(Philadelphia,  1836);  "Sketch  of  the  History  of
West  Point"  (1840);  "Pantology,  or  Systematic
Survey  of  Human  Knowledge  "  (1841) ;  "  Handbook
for  American  Travellers  in  Europe  "  (New  York,
1853):  and  "Jerusalem  and  other  Poems"  (1K57).

PARK,  Trenor  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Wood-
ford,  Vt.,  8  Dec.,  1823 :  d.  at  sea,  13  Dec.,  1882.
When  he  was  three  years  old  he  was  taken  by  his
parents  to  Bennington,  Vt.,  where  he  received  a
limited  education,  being  compelled  to  labor  from
his  childhood,  but  entered  a  law-office  at  the  age
of  sixteen,  and  at  twenty-one  was  admitted  to  the
bar.  He  married  a  daughter  of  Ililand  Hall,  and
when  the  latter  was  made  chairman  of  the  U.  S.
land  commission  in  California,  his  son-in-law  re
moved  to  San  Francisco,  attained  eminence  at  the
bar,  and.  engaging  in  real  estate  operations,  ac
quired  a  large  fortune.  He  took  an  active  part  as
attorney  of  the  vigilance  committee  in  the  repres
sion  of  lawlessness  in  San  Francisco,  was  a  candi
date  for  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  increased  his  wealth
through  association  with  John  C.  Fremont  in  the
control  of  the  Mariposa  estate  and  gold-mines.  In
18(54  he  retired  from  business  and  returned  In
Bennington,  but  he  soon  embarked  in  banking  and
railroad  enterprises,  and  undertook  to  establish
direct  communication  by  rail  between  New  York
and  Montreal.  He  was  part  owner  of  the  Emma
mine  in  1872,  and  was  successful  in  a  legal  con
troversy  that  grew  out  of  his  management.  He
was  for  several  years  a  director  of  the  Pacific  mail
steamship  company,  and  purchased  a  controlling
interest  in  the  Panama  railroad,  of  which  he  was
president  from  1874  till  his  death.  Mr.  Park  was
active  in  the  erection  of  the  Bennington  battle
monument.  He  gave  an  art  gallery  to  the  Univer
sity  of  Vermont,  and  founded  a  free  library  and  a
home  for  destitute  children  at  Bennington.

PARKE,  Benjamin,  b.  in  New  Jersey,  2  Sept.,
1777  ;  d.  in  Salem,  Ind.,  12  July,  1835.  He  re
ceived  a  common-school  education,  and  at  the  age
of  twenty  removed  to  Lexington,  Ky.,  where  he
studied  law  with  James  Brown,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar.  In  1801  he  settled  in  Vincennes,  Ind.,
and  was  soon  afterward  appointed  attorney-general
of  the  territory.  He  was  a  member  of  the  first  ter
ritorial  legislature  in  1805,  and  was  elected  a  dele
gate  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  and  re-elected  at
the  close  of  the  term,  serving  from  12  Dec.,  1805,
till  1  March,  1808,  when  he  resigned  on  being  ap
pointed  judge  of  the  U.  S.  territorial  court  for
Indiana.  In  1811  Judge  Parke  raised  a  company
of  dragoons,  fought  at  the  battle  of  Tippecanoe,
and  succeeded  to  the  command  of  the  cavalry.  He
befriended  the  public  library  at  Vincennes.  assisted
in  establishing  Vincennes  university,  and  was  one
of  the  principal  founders  and  the  first  president  of
the  Indiana  historical  society.

PARKE,  John,  poet,  b.  in  Dover,  Del.,  7  April,
1754;  d.  near  there,  11  Dec.,  1789.  He  was  edu-


PARKE


PARKER


649


cated  at  the  College  of  Philadelphia.  At  the  be
ginning  of  the  Revolutionary  war  he  entered  the
Continental  army,  and  he  served  in  the  quarter
master's  department,  and  was  with  Washington's
army  till  the  close  of  hostilities  attaining  the  rank
of  lieutenant-colonel.  After  the  peace  he  lived  for
some  time  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  and  afterward  in
Virginia.  Col.  Parke  published  "  The  Lyric  Works
of  Horace,  translated  into  English  Verse,  to  which
are  added  a  Number  of  Original  Poems  "  (Philadel
phia,  1786).  The  volume  was  issued  under  the
pen-name  of  "  A  Native  of  America."  The  work
was  dedicated  to  Gen.  Washington,  and  the  trans-  |
lations.  which  are  in  rhymed  verse,  are  paraphrased
by  the  substitution  of  American  public  characters
for  the  Roman  worthies  to  whom  Horace  addressed
his  odes,  and  by  the  application  of  descriptive  pas
sages  and  allusions  to  local  and  contemporary  con
ditions.  The  ode  that  celebrates  the  return  of
Augustus  from  Spain  is  made  to  apply  to  Wash-  ]
ington's  victorious  return  from  Virginia.  Besides  j
Parke's  own  productions,  the  volume  contains
poems  by  some  of  his  friends,  and  parodies  by  John
Wilcocks,  a  young  British  officer,  and  preserves
some  elegant  translations  from  Anacreon's  odes
and  Ovid's  elegies,  made  more  than  fifty  years  be
fore  by  the  prothonotary  of  the  New  Castle  court,
David  French  (q.  v.).

PARKE,  John  (Jrnbb,  soldier,  b.  in  Chester
county.  Pa.,  22  Sept.,  1827.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1849.  and  assigned
to  the  topographical  engineers.  In  1849-'50  he

was  engaged  in  de
termining  the  start
ing  -  point  of  the
boundary-  line  be
tween  Iowa  and
Minnesota,  and  sub
sequently  on  the
survey  of  the  Little
Colorado  river,  and
in  charge  of  surveys
for  a  Pacific  rail
road  on  the  thirty-
second  parallel.  He
became  1st  lieuten
ant  of  topographi
cal  engineers  on  1
July,  1856,  and  was
chief  astronomer
and  surveyor  in  the
delimitation  of  the

northwestern  boundary  between  the  United  States
and  British  America  from  2  March,  1857,  till  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war.  He  was  promoted  cap
tain  of  topographical  engineers  on  9  Sept.,  1861,
and  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on
23  Nov.  In  the  beginning  of  1862  he  accom
panied  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside's  expedition  to
North  Carolina,  receiving  the  brevet  of  lieuten
ant-colonel  in  the  U.  S.  army  for  services  in  the
capture  of  Fort  Macon.  He  was  promoted  major-
general  of  volunteers  on  18  July.  1862.  and  served
as  chief  of  staff  of  the  9th  corps  during  the  Mary
land  campaign,  being  engaged  at  South  Mountain
and  Antietam.  and  in  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy  to
Warrenton.  When  Gen.  Burnside  took  command
of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  Gen.  Parke  was  re
tained  as  his  chief  of  staff,  and  was  present  at  the
battle  of  Fredericksburg.  He  participated  in  the
movement  of  the  9th  corps  into  Kentucky,  and
commanded  it  on  the  march  to  Vicksburg.  arriv
ing  before  the  surrender.  In  the  reoccupation  of
Jackson,  Miss.,  he  was  in  command  of  the  left
wing  of  Gen.  Sherman's  army,  receiving  the  brevet


of  colonel  for  his  part  in  the  operations.  In  the
East  Tennessee  campaign  he  was  engaged  at  Blue
Spring  in  the  defence  of  Knoxville.  for  which  he
was  subsequently  brevetted  brigadier-general,  and
in  the  following  operations  against  Gen.  James
Longstreet,  after  Gen.  Burnside  resumed  command
of  the  corps,  he  led  one  of  its  divisions,  and  in  the
Richmond  campaign  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac
he  was  engaged  at  the  battle  of  the  Wilderness  and
the  combats  around  Spottsylvania,  but  was  th^ft
disabled  by  illness  until  13  Aug.,  1864,  when  he  re
sumed  command  of  the  9th  corps  before  Peters
burg.  He  was  brevetted  major-general  in  the  U.  S.
army  for  repelling  the  enemy's  assault  on  Fort
Stead  man.  and  took  part  in  the  pursuit  of  Lee's
army  until  it  surrendered.  He  had  been  commis
sioned  as  major  in  the  corps  of  engineers  on  17
June,  1864.  After  commanding  the  districts  of
Alexandria  and  southern  New  York,  he  resumed
charge  of  the  northwestern  boundary  survey  on  28
Sept.,  1866.  He  superintended  the  repair  and  con
struction  of  fortifications  in  Maryland  in  1867-'8,
and  was  on  duty  in  the  office  of  the  chief  of  engi
neers  at  Washington,  D.  C..  from  1  June,  1868.
He  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  of  engineers
on  4  March.  1879,  and  colonel  on  17  March,  1884,
and  in  June,  1887,  was  appointed  superintendent
of  the  U.  S.  military  academy.  He  is  the  author
of  reports  in  "Explorations  and  Surveys  for  a
Railroad  Route  from  the  Mississippi  River  to  the
Pacific  Ocean"  (Washington,  1854-'5);  also  of
•'Compilations  of  Laws  of  the  United  States  relat
ing  to  Public  Works  for  the  Improvement  of
Rivers  and  Harbors"  (1877;  revised  ed.,  1887),  and
"  Laws  relating  to  the  Construction  of  Bridges  over
Navigable  Waters  "  (1882  ;  revised  ed.,  1887).

PARKE.  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newton,
Mass.,  12  March.  1705;  d.' in  Westerly,  R.  I.,  1
March,  1777.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1724,  studied  theology,  and  was  ordained  in  1732.
From  1733  till  1740  he  labored  as  a  missionary
among  the  Indians  and  English  settlers  of  Rhode
Island,  residing  at  Westerly,  where  he  organized  a
church,  in  connection  with  which  he  established  a
Sunday-school  in  1752.  nearly  thirty  years  before
the  experiment  was  made  in  England.  He  was
pastor  at  Southold.  R.  I.,  from  1752  till  1756,  but
afterward  returned  to  Westerly.

PARKE,  Thomas,  physician,  b.  in  Chester
county.  Pa.,  6  Aug.,  1749;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  9
Jan.,  1835.  He  became  a  pupil  of  Robert  Proud,
the  historian,  studied  medicine  under  Dr.  Cadwala-
der  Evans,  and  in  17  TO  received  from  the  College
of  Philadelphia  the  degree  of  bachelor  of  medicine.
In  1771  he  visited  Europe,  where  he  attended  clini
cal  practice  at  Guy's  and  St.  Thomas's  hospitals,
London,  and  a  course  of  lectures  at  Edinburgh,
returning  to  Philadelphia  in  1773,  where  he  engaged
in  practice,  attaining  to  eminence  in  his  profession.
In  1777  he  became  a  physician  at  the  Pennsylvania
hospital,  which  post  he  held  for  half  a  century.  In
1787  he  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  College  of
physicians  of  Philadelphia,  and  from  1818  until  his
death  he  was  president  of  this  body,  and  was  the
last  survivor  of  its  founders.  He  was  a  member  of
the  American  philosophical  society  as  early  as
1774,  in  1795-'6  held  the  office  of  curator,  and
was  a  director  of  the  Philadelphia  library  from
1778  until  his  death.

PARKER,  Amasa  Jnnius,  b.  in  Sharon,  Conn.,
2  June,  1807.  His  father,  Daniel,  was  for  many  years
a  Congregational  clergyman,  and  subsequently  a
successful  teacher  in  Greenville,  N.  Y.,  and  else
where.  The  son  went  to  Union  in  the  summer  of
1825,  passed  an  examination  on  the  whole  course,


650


PARKER


PARKER


and  received  his  degree  \yith  the  class  of  that  year.
lie  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Delhi,  N.  Y.,  in  1828,
and  settled  in  practice  there  as  the  partner  of  his
uncle,  Amasa  Parker.  He  was  in  the  legislature
in  1834,  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in
1830,  serving  one  term,  was  appointed  circuit  judge
and  vice-chancellor  of  the  3d  district  of  New  York
in  1844.  and  held  office  till  1847.  He  was  then
elevated  to  the  supreme  bench  of  the  state.  He  re
sumed  practice  in  1855  in  Albany,  was  an  unsuc
cessful  candidate  for  governor  in  1850,  and  again
in  1858,  and  declined  the  office  of  U.  8.  district  at
torney  for  the  southern  district  of  New  York  in
1859.  Since  his  retirement  from  the  bench  he  has
occupied  no  public  office,  except  that  of  a  delegate
to  the  state  constitutional  conventions  in  1807
and  in  1808.  but  continues  in  the  full  practice  of
his  profession,  in  which  he  takes  high  rank.  He
was  an  active  advocate  of  the  reforms  by  which
the  court  of  chancery  was  abolished,  law  and  equity
powers  vested  in  the  same  tribunal,  and  the  prac
tice  of  the  courts  simplified.  In  1853  he  visited
England,  and,  at  the  request  of  Lord  Brougham,
addressed  the  Law-reform  club  on  that  subject  at
its  annual  meeting.  He  has  occupied  many  offices
of  trust,  including  the  presidency  of  the  board  of
trustees  of  Albany  medical  college,  was  a  regent  of
the  University  of  New  York  in  1835-'44,  and  is  a
trustee  of  Cornell  and  of  Union.  He  has  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  His  publications  include  six
volumes  of  law  reports  (Albany,  1855-'09).  He  has
also  assisted  in  preparing  the  "  Revised  Statutes"
(3  vols.,  1859),  and  edited  "  The  Reports  of  the  De
cisions  in  Criminal  Cases''  (1858-'77).

PARKER,  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in  Shirley,  Mass.,
29  Jan.,  1782;  d.  in  Washington.  1).  C.,  5  April,
184G.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1801,
read  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Charles-
town,  Mass.  He  became  chief  clerk  in  the  U.  S.
war  department  in  1810,  adjutant  and  inspector-
general,  22  Nov.,  1814,  paymaster-general  in  1821,
and  in  1841  he  returned  to  the  war  department  as
chief  clerk.  He  published  an  ''Army  Register"
(Washington.  D.  C.,  1810). — His  brother,  Leonard
Moody,  lawyer,  b.  in  Shirley,  Mass.,  9  Jan.,  1789;
d.  there,  25  Aug.,  1854,  was  graduated  at  Dart
mouth  in  1808,  began  the  practice  of  law  in  Charles-
town,  Mass.,  was  judge-advocate  in  the  U.  8.  army
in  1812-'14,  and  after  the  war  resumed  his  profes
sion.  He  was  naval  officer  of  Boston  in  1830-'4,
retired  at  the  latter  date,  and  for  many  years  after
ward  was  a  member  of  the  legislature.

PARKER,  Edward  Griffin,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bos
ton,  Mass.,  10  Nov.,  1825 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  30
March,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1847,
studied  law  under  Rufus  Choate.  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1849,  and  practised  in  Boston  till  the  be
ginning  of  the  civil  war.  In  1857-'8  he  edited  the
political  department  of  the  Boston  "Traveller."
He  became  a  volunteer  aide  on  Gen.  Benjamin  F.
Butler's  staff  in  1801,  and  the  next  year  was  adju
tant-general  and  chief  of  staff  to 'Gen.  John  II.
Martmdale  during  his  command  of  the  Department
of  Washington.  He  settled  in  New  York  after  the
war,  and  was  in  charge  of  the  American  literary
bureau  of  reference.  He  contributed  frequently  to
the  press,  and  published  "The  Golden  Age  of
American  Oratory"  (Boston,  1857)  and  "Reminis
cences  of  Rufus  Choate  "  (New  York,  1860).

PARKER,  Edward  Latwycke,  clergyman,  b.
in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  28  July,  1785  ;  d.  in  'London
derry,  Conn.,  14  July,  1850.  He  was  graduated  at
Dartmouth  in  1807,  and  studied  divinity  at  Hano
ver,  N.  H.,  and  subsequently  at  Thetford,  Vt.,  and
Salem.  Mass.  From  1810  until  his  death  he  was


pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  London
derry,  Conn.  He  published  ten  occasional  sermons,
and  left  a  "History  of  Londonderry,"  which  was
printed,  with  a  memoir  (Boston,  1857).

PARKER,  Ely  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  the  In
dian  reservation,  Tonawanda,  N.  Y.,  in  1828.  Ho
is  a  full-blooded  Seneca  Indian,  and  chief  of  the
Six  Nations.  After  receiving  a  careful  education
in  schools  in  New  York  state,  he  adopted  the  pro
fession  of  civil  engineering,  and  settled  temporarily
in  Galena.  111.,  where  he  was  the  personal  friend  of
Ulysses  S.  Grant,  and  subsequently,  during  the
civil  war,  he  became  a  member  of  the  general's
staff.  He  was  appointed  assistant  adjutant-gen
eral  with  the  rank  of  captain  in  May,  1803,  and
was  afterward  secretary  to  Gen.  Grant  until  the
close  of  the  war.  In  that  capacity  he  was  present
at  Lee's  surrender,  and  made  the  first  engrossed
copy  of  the  terms  of  capitulation.  He  was  ap
pointed  1st  lieutenant  of  U.  S.  cavalry  in  1800,
resigning  in  1809.  He  was  brevettcd  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  on  9  April,  1805,  and  captain,
major,  lieutenant-colonel,  colonel,  and  brigadier-
general,  U.  S.  army.  2  March.  1807.  He  became
commissioner  of  Indian  affairs  in  1809.  but  retired
in  1871  to  devote  himself  to  his  profession.

PARKER,  Foxliall  Alexander,  naval  officer,
b.  in  New  York  city.  5  Aug..  1821  ;  d.  in  Annapo
lis,  Md..  10  June,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at  the
naval  school  in  Philadelphia  in  1843,  served  against
the  Florida  Indians,  and  was  commissioned  lieu
tenant,  21  Sept.,  1850.  He  was  executive  officer  at
the  Washington  navy-yard  in  1801-'2.  co-operated
with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  on  several  occasions
in  command  of  seamen,  built  Fort  Dahlgren,  and
drilled  2,000  seamen  in  the  exercise  of  artillery
and  small  arms,  thereby  promoting  the  success  of
Admiral  Andrew  II.  Foote's  operations  with  the
Mississippi  flotilla.  He  became  commander  on  16
July,  1802,  had  charge  of  the  steam  gun-boat  "Ma-
haska  "  in  active  service  off  Wilmington  and  York-
town,  and  of  the  "  Wabash,"  off  Charleston,  from
June  to  September,  1803,  and  from  the  latter  date
till  the  close  of  the  war  commanded  the  Potomac
flotilla,  which  consisted  at  one  time  of  forty-two
vessels,  and  frequently  engaged  the  enemy.  In  July,
180(5,  he  was  promoted  captain  for  "good  service
during  the  rebellion."  He  became  commodore  in
1872,  was  on  special  duty  in  Washington  in  August
of  that  year  to  draw  up  a  code  of  signals  for  steam
tactics,  and  in  1873-'6  was  chief  signal  officer  of
the  navy.  He  was  chief  of  staff  of  the  united  fleets
under  Admiral  Augustus  L.  Case  that  assembled
for  instruction  in  the  Florida  waters  in  December,
1874,  and  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  U.  S.
naval  institute.  He  died  while  superintendent  of
the  U.  S.  naval  academy,  to  which  he  was  ap
pointed  in  1878.  He  was  for  many  years  a  con
tributor  to  newspapers  and  magazines,  and  pub
lished  "Fleet  Tactics  Under  Steam  "(New  York,
1803);  "Squadron  Tactics  Under  Steam  "  (1803) ;
"  The  Naval  Howitzer  Afloat  "  (1865) ;  "  The  Naval
Howitzer  Ashore"  (1805) — all  of  which  are  text
books  in  the  U.  S.  naval  academy;  "The  Fleets  of
the  World:  The  Galley  Period  "'(1870) ;  and  "The
Battle  of  Mobile  Bay  and  the  Capture  of  Forts
Powell,  Gaines.  and  Morgan,  under  the  Command
of  David  G.  Farragut  and  Gordon  Granger"  (Bos
ton,  1878).— His  brother.  William  Harwar,  naval
officer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  8  Oct.,  1820,  was  grad
uated  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1848,  became
a  lieutenant  in  1855,  and  in  1801  entered  the  Con
federate  service.  He  has  published  "  Instructions
for  Naval  Light  Artillery"  (New  York,  1802)  and
"Recollections  of  a  Naval  Officer"  (1883).


PARKER


PARKER


651


PARKER,  Francis  TVayland,  educator,  h.  in
Bedford.  X.  II.,  9  Oct.,  1837.  He  was  educated  in
the  public  schools  and  at  the  University  of  Berlin,
and  taught  during  his  early  manhood,  but  at  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  enlisted  as  a  private  in
the  4th  regiment  of  New  Hampshire  volunteers,
from  which  lie  was  mustered  out  in  1805  as  lieu
tenant-colonel.  He  then  resumed  teaching,  was
superintendent  of  public  schools  in  Quincy.  Mass.,
supervisor  of  the  Boston  public  schools,  and  sub
sequently  principal  of  the  Cook  county  normal
school.  111.  Dartmouth  gave  him  the  degree  of
M.  A.  in  188C.  lie  has  published  "  Talks  on  Teach
ing  "  (Xew  York,  1883) ;  "  The  Practical  Teacher  "
(1884) ;  "  Course  in  Arithmetic  "  (1884) ;  and  •'  How
to  Teach  Geography"  (1883).

PARKER,  Henry,  president  of  Georgia,  b.
near  Savannah,  Ga.,  about  1690 ;  d.  in  the  isle  of
Hope,  Ga.,  after  1777.  He  was  bailiff  of  Savannah
in  1734,  which  office  at  that  time  was  identical
with  that  of  magistrate,  and  shortly  afterward  he
colonized  the  isle  of  Hope.  When  the  province
was  divided  into  two  counties  in  1741,  he  be
came  an  assistant  to  Sir  William  Stephens,  presi
dent  of  the  Savannah  province,  succeeding  him  in
1750.  In  that  year  he  presided  over  the  first  as
sembly  in  Georgia,  in  which  the  executive  and  the
members  addressed  each  other  according  to  parlia
mentary  formalities.  When  the  province  surren
dered  the  charter  in  1754,  he  resigned  the  gover
norship  and  retired  to  his  plantation  on  the  isle  of
Hope,  where  lie  died  at  an  advanced  age.

PARKER,  Sir  Hyde,  British  naval  officer,  b.
in  England  in  1739;  d.  in  Copenhagen,  Denmark,
7  March.  1807.  He  was  the  second  son  of  Vice-
admiral  Hyde  Parker,  and  went  to  sea  under  his
father  at  an  early  age.  He  became  post  captain
in  1703,  served  on  the  "  Phoenix,"  on  the  American
station,  in  1770.  and  participated  in  the  attack  on
Xew  York.  With  a  small  squadron  he  conveyed
the  force  that  captured  Savannah  in  1778,  for
which  service  he  was  knighted  the  next  year.  He
became  rear-admiral  of  the  White  in  1793,  and
was  at  the  surrender  of  Toulon  and  the  reduction
of  Corsica.  lift  became  rear-admiral  of  the  Red  in
1799.  was  in  command  at  Jamaica,  W.  I.,  and  in
1807  led  the  attack  on  Copenhagen,  Denmark.

PARKER,  Isaac,  jurist,  b.  in  Boston.  Mass.,
17  June,  1708:  d.  there,  26  May.  1830.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1786,  and,  after  teaching
lor  several  years,  studied  law  and  settled  in  Cas-
tine.  Me.,  where  he  attained  to  eminence  in  his
profession.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Fed
eralist  in  1796,  served  one  term,  and  was  U.  S.
marshal  for  the  district  of  Maine  in  1797-1801.
He  subsequently  removed  to  Portland,  in  1806  was
appointed  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Massa
chusetts,  in  which  state  he  then  settled,  and  from
1814  until  his  death  was  presiding  justice  of  that
body.  He  was  professor  of  law  at  Harvard  in
1816-'27,  president  of  the  Massachusetts  constitu
tional  convention  in  1820.  and  took  a  spirited  part
in  debate  when  he  was  relieved  from  the  duties  of
presiding  officer.  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  in  1814.  '•  His  fame,"  says  Chief-Justice
Story,  "  must  rest  on  the  printed  reports  of  his
own  decisions.  These  will  go  down  to  future  ages."
He  published  an  "  Oration  on  Washington  "  (Bos
ton,  1800)  and  a  "Sketch  of  the  Character  of
Chief-Justice  Parsons  "  (1813).

PARKER.  James,  legislator,  b.  in  Bethlehem,
Hunterdon  co.,  X.  J..  3  March,  1776:  d.  in  Perth
Amboy,  X.  J..  1  April,  1868.  His  father,  James,
was  one  of  the  provincial  council  before  the  Revo
lution,  an  active  member  of  the  board  of  proprie


tors  of  the  colony,  and  the  owner  of  large  landed
property.  James  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1791,  and  became  a  merchant  in  Xew  York  city,
but  on  the  death  of  his  father  returned  to  Perth
Amboy,  X.  J.  He  was  in  the  legislature  in  1806-?28,
commissioner  to  fix  the  boundary-line  between
Xew  Jersey  and  Xew  York  in  1827-"9.  and  collec
tor  of  the  port  of  Perth  Amboy  in  1829-'30.  He
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Federalist  in  1832,
served  two  terms,  and  vas  in  the  State  constitu
tional  convention  in  1844.  He  was  a  vice-presi
dent  of  the  Xew  Jersey  historical  society  for
many  years,  its  president  i'rom  1864  till  his  death,
was  active  in  the  cause  of  education,  and  gave
!  the  land  to  Rutgers  college  on  which  its  buildings
now  stand.  During  his  legislative  career  he  origi
nated  the  law  that  put  an  end  to  the  local  slave-
trade  in  1819,  the  one  that  established  the  school
fund,  and  the  provisions  of  the  present  law  that
regulates  the  partition  of  real  estate  in  Xew  Jersey
and  the  rights  of  aliens  to  possess  it. — PI  is  son,
Cortlandt,  lawyer,  b.  in  Perth  Amboy,  X.  J.,
27  June,  1818,  was  graduated  at  Rutgers  in  1836,
1  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  attained  to  eminence  in
that  profession.  He  was  one  of  the  revisers  of  the
,  laws  of  Xew  Jersey  in  1875,  and  a  commissioner  to
settle  the  boundaries  between  that  state  and  Dela
ware.  He  was  successively  offered  the  judgeship
of  the  court  of  Alabama  claims  by  President  Grant,
the  mission  to  Russia  by  President  Hayes,  and  that
to  Austria  by  President  Arthur,  but  declined  them
all.  He  was  several  times  an  unsuccessful  candi
date  for  attorney-general  of  Xew  Jersey  and  for
the  U.  S.  senate.  Rutgers  and  Princeton  gave  him
I  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1866.

PARKER,  Joel,  jurist,  b.  in  Jaffrey.  X.  H..  25
;  Jan.,  1795;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  17  Aug.,  1875.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1811,  and  be-
'  gan  the  practice  of  law  in  Keene.  X.  H..  in  1815.
I  He  was  in  the  legislature  in  1824-'6,  appointed  as-
I  sociate  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  Xew  Hamp-
i  shire  in  1833,  and became  chief  justice  in 1836.
In  1840  he  was  chairman  of  the  committee  to  revise
1  the  laws  of  the  state. In  1847-'57  he  was  professor
r  of  medical  jurisprudence  at  Dartmouth,  and  from
[  1847  until  his  death  he  was  professor  of  law  at
|  Harvard. His  publications,  exclusive  of law  re
ports  and  periodical  essays,  include  an  address  on
••  Progress  "  (Hanover,  X.  II.,  1840) ;  "  Daniel  Web
ster  as  a  Jurist."  an  address  to  the  Harvard  law-
school  (Cambridge.  Mass.,  1853) ;  "  A  Charge  to  the
Grand  Jury  on  the  Uncertainty  of  Law  "(1854);
"The Non-Extension  of  Slavery"  (1856):  "Per
sonal  Liberty  Laws  and  Slavery  in  the  Territories  "
(1861):  ''The  Right  of  Secession"  (1861);  "Con
stitutional Law" (1862); '-Habeas Corpus and
Martial Law" (Philadelphia, 1862); "The War
Powers of Congress and the  President  "  (1863)  ;
'•  Revolution  and  Construction  "  (Xew  York.  1866) ;
"The  Three  Powers  of  Government"  (1869);  and
"Conflict  of  Decisions"  (Cambridge,  18751).

PARKER,  Joel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bethel,  Vt.,
27  Aug.,  1799;  d.  in  Xew 'York  city.  2  May.  1873.
He  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  in  1824.  studied  at
Auburn  theological  seminary,  and  in  1826  was  or
dained  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Roches
ter,  X.  Y.  He  organized  "the  Dey  street  church  in
Xew  York  city  in  1830,  was  pastor  in  Xew  Orleans
in  1832-'7,  and,  returning  to  Xew  York,  officiated
at  the  Broadway  tabernacle.  He  became  president
of  Union  theological  seminary  and  professor  of
sacred  rhetoric  there  in  1840.  served  two  years  and
was  subsequently  pastor  in  Philadelphia,  and  in
1854- '63  of  the  Bleecker  street  Presbyterian  church,
Xew  York  city.  His  last  pastorate  was  in  Newark,


652


PARKER


PARKER


N.  J.  Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1839.*  Dr.  Parker  was  a  frequent  contributor  to
the  religious  press,  at  one  time  was  associate  edi
tor  of  he  "  Presbyterian  Quarterly  Review,"  and
published  "  Lectures  on  Unitarianism  "  (New  York,
1829) ;  "  Morals  for  a  Young  Student "  (1832) ;  "  In
vitations  to  True  Happiness"  (1843);  "Reasonings
of  a  Pastor"  (1849);  "  Notes  on  Twelve  Psalms"
(1849) ;  "  Sermons  "  (1852) ;  and  "  Pastor's  Initiatory
Catechism  "  (1855).  He  also  edited  the  "  Sermons
of  Rev.  John  W.  Adams,"  with  a  memoir  (1851).

P4.RKER,  Joel,  governor  of  New  Jersey,  b.
near  Freehold,  N.  J.,  24  Nov.,  1816;  d.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  2  Jan.,  1888.  His  father,  Charles,
was  a  member  of  the  New  Jersey  legislature  for

several  years,  and
served  one  term
as  state  treasur
er.  Joel  removed
with  his  father  to
Trenton  in  1821,
was  graduated
at  Princeton  in
1839,  studied  law
under  Chief-Jus
tice  Henry  W.
Green,  and  set
tled  in  Freehold.
N.  J.  He  began
his  political  ca
reer  in  1844  as
a  Democratic
speaker,  and  was
in  the  assembly
in  1847-'50,  prosecuting  attorney  in  1852-'?,  and
a  presidential  elector  in  I860,  casting  his  vote
for  Stephen  A.  Douglas.  He  had  been  commis
sioned  brigadier- general  of  militia  in  1857.  and  in
1861  became  major-general.  He  had  ardently  op
posed  the  civil  war,  but  when  it  began  he  active
ly  supported  the  National  government.  lie  was
elected  governor  of  New  Jersey  in  1862,  as  a  Demo
crat,  served  till  1866,  and  during  his  occupation
of  that  office  conducted  the  affairs  of  state  with
prudence  and  ability.  During  Lee's  invasion  of
Pennsylvania  in  1863  he  supplied  several  organized
regiments  of  New  Jersey  volunteers  that  were  sent
to  the  protection  of  that  state,  but  when  a  levy  of
12,000  men  was  made  on  New  Jersey  in  1864,  to
make  good  a  supposed  deficiency  in  her  former
quotas,  lie  obtained  from  President  Lincoln  the
withdrawal  of  the  order.  Gov.  Parker  also  estab
lished  a  method  of  settlement  of  the  war  debt,  so
that  not  a  bond  of  the  state  of  New  Jersey  was  sold
below  par,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war  in  1865  there
was  a  surplus  of  $200,000  in  the  state  treasury.  He
took  strong  grounds  in  favor  of  an  amnesty  toward
those  that  had  taken  part  in  the  war  against  the
National  government.  In  1868  the  New  Jersey
delegation  to  the  National  Democratic  convention,
in  New  York  city,  cast  their  full  vote  for  him  in
every  ballot  for  the  presidential  nomination.  He
was  again  elected  governor  in  1870,  and  at  the
conclusion  of  his  term  became  attorney-general  of
the  state.  He  was  chosen  a  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  New  Jersey  in  1880,  and  was  re-elected  in
1887,  presiding  over  the  central  circuit  of  the  state.
In  1883  he  declined  the  nomination  for  governor.
Rutgers  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1872.

PARKER,  John,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  24  Jan.,  1749 ;  d.
on  his  plantation  near  there,  20  April,  1822.  He
was  educated  abroad,  and  graduated  at  the  Middle
Temple,  London,  in  1775.  He  returned  to  South
Carolina  the  next  year,  settled  on  his  rice-planta


tion,  and  engaged  in  planting.  In  1786-'8  he  served
in  the  Continental  congress.  Mr.  Parker  was  the
brother-in-law  of  Arthur  Middleton.

PARKER,  John  Adams,  artist,  b.  in  New  York
city,  29  Nov.,  1829.  He  received  his  education  at
New  York  university,  and  was  a  merchant  from
1850  till  1857.  He 'then  studied  art,  exhibiting
first  at  the  Academy  of  design  in  1858,  since  which
time  he  has  been  a  regular  contributor.  He  was
made  an  associate  of  the  academy  in  1869.  and  is  a
member  of  the  Brooklyn  art  association  and  one  of
the  founders  of  the  Brooklyn  art  club.  Since  1856
he  has  resided  in  that  city.  Mountain  scenery  has
especially  claimed  his  attention,  and  the  Adiron-
dacks.  the  Catskills,  and  the  White  mountains  have
furnished  him  with  most  of  the  subjects  for  his
paintings.  They  include"  Twilight  in  the  Adiron
dacks"  (1876);  '"Winter"  (1879):  "Winter  Twi
light"  (1880):  "Landscape  in  the  Adirondacks —
Twilight "  (1882) ;  "  Winter  Evening  "  (1884) :  "  Tlio
Gothics — Adirondacks  "  (1885) :  and  "  Close  of  a
November  Day,  Ausable  Pond.  Adirondacks  "  (1886).

PARKER,'  Linus,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Rome,  N.
Y.,  in  1829;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  5  March,
1885.  He  went  to  the  south  in  his  youth,  and  be
came  a  clerk  in  New  Orleans,  where  he  studied
Latin  and  Greek  before  daylight  in  the  morning
and  after  his  return  from  business  in  the  evening.
He  soon  became  a  Christian,  had  great  gifts  as  an
exhorter,  and  before  he  was  twenty-one  years  of
age  entered  the  Louisiana  conference.  He  was
kept  four  years  on  circuits,  during  which  he  was
ordained  deacon  and  then  elder.  His  abilities  were
immediately  recognized,  and  he  was  transferred  to
New  Orleans,  continuing  there  as  pastor  of  the
various  chief  stations  of  his  church  until  he  was
appointed  presiding  elder  of  the  district  that  in
cludes  that  city.  He  was  also  editor  of  the  New
Orleans  "Christian  Advocate"  for  some  time.
Early  in  his  ministry  he  was  elected  a  delegate  to
the  general  conference,  and  sat  in  its  quadrennial
sessions  from  1870  till  1882,  inclusive.  In  the  latter
year  he  was  elected  a  bishop,  lie  excelled  both  as
a  writer  and  a  speaker.

PARKER,  Nah inn,  senator,  b.  in  Cheshire
county,  N.  II..  4  March,  1760;  d.  in  Fitzwilliam,
N.  II.,  12  Nov..  1839.  He  was  state  councillor  in
1805-'7,  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1806,
and  served  from  1807  till  1810,  when  he  resigned.
He  was  justice  of  the  court  of  common  jJeas  in
1813-'16,  judge  of  the  court  of  sessions  of  Cheshire
county  in  1821,  and  president  of  the  New  Hamp
shire  senate  in  1828.

PARKER,  Permelia  Jane  Marsh,  author,  b.
in  Milan,  Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y.,  16  June,  1836.  Her
father  was  Joseph  Marsh,  a  Campbellite  minister,
who  adopted  the  views  of  William  Miller  and  was
a  leader  in  the  "  Second  Advent  movement "  in
1843-'50.  She  was  educated  in  Rochester,  N.  Y..
and  in  1856  married  George  T.  Parker,  a  lawyer  of
that  city.  Mrs.  Parker  is  a  frequent  contributor  to
"  The  Churchman  "  and  other  publications  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church,  and  is  the  author  of
"  Toiling  and  Hoping,"  a  novel  (New  York,  1856) ;
"  The  Boy  Missionary  "  (1859) :  "  Losing  the  Way  "
(1860);  ""Under  His  Banner  "  (1862) ;  "The  Mor
gan  Boys  "  (1859) ;  "  Rochester,  a  Story  Histori
cal  "  (Rochester,  1884);  "The  Midnight  Cry."  a
novel  founded  on  the  Millerite  movement  (New
York,  1886) ;  "  Life  of  S.  F.  B.  Morse  "  (1887) :  and
"  Papers  Relating  to  the  Genesee  Country  "  (1888).

PARKER,  Sir  Peter,  bart.,  British  naval  officer,
b.  in  England  in  1721;  d.  there.  21  Dec.,  1811.
He  became  a  post-captain  in  1747,  and  in  1775  in
the  "  Bristol,"  of  fifty  guns,  left  England  with  a


PARKER


653


squadron  and  proceeded  to  Charleston,  S.  C.,  in
order  to  co-operate  with  Sir  Henry  Clinton  in  his
attack  on  that  city.  Arriving  on  28  June,  1776,  he
made  an  unsuccessful  assault  on  Fort  Moultrie,
which  resulted  in  great  loss  of  life  and  damage
to  his  ships,  and  to  the  final  abandonment  of  the
enterprise.  He  was  subsequently  knighted  for  his
bravery  in  this  affair.  lie  aided  Lord  Howe  in
the  capture  of  New  York,  commanded  the  squad
ron  that  took  possession  of  Rhode  Island  in  the
latter  part  of  1776,  and  held  the  chief  command
on  the  Jamaica  station  in  1777-'82.  He  was  made
a  baronet  in  1782,  subsequently  became  command-
er-in-chief  at  Portsmouth,  England,  was  member
of  parliament  for  Maldon  and  admiral  of  the
White,  and,  on  the  death  of  Lord  Howe,  succeeded
him  as  admiral  of  the  fleet. — His  grandson,  Sir
Peter,  hart..  British  naval  officer,  b.  in  England
in  1786;  d.  near  Moorefields,  Georgetown  Cross-
Roads.  Md..  30  Aug.,  1814,  was  educated  at  West
minster  school,  entered  the  navy  at  an  early  age
under  his  grandfather,  and  rose  rapidly,  serving
with  Lord  Xelson,  the  Earl  of  St.  Vincent,  and
other  noted  officers.  He  was  placed  in  charge  of
the  frigate  "Menelaus"in  1810,  commanded  her
on  the  Bermuda  station  in  1814,  and  in  the  spring
of  that  year  went  to  Chesapeake  bay  for  the  pur
pose  of  patrolling  those  waters  and  blockading  Bal
timore  harbor.  Previous  to  his  American  service
he  had  been  noted  for  his  magnanimity,  but  under
the  direction  of  his  superior  officer,  Sir  George
Cockburn,  he  was  unnecessarily  cruel  and  exas
perating  to  the  Americans,  frequently  sending
parties  ashore  to  plunder  private  as  well  as  public-
property,  and  wantonly  destroying  every  house  that
was  suspected  to  be  the  residence  of  a  military
man.  He  swept  domestic  commerce  from  the  bay,
and  boasted  that  during  the  month  of  his  blockad
ing  service  he  had  not  permitted  a  single  American
boat  to  cross  the  Chesapeake.  After  the  fall  of
Washington,  D.  C.,  he  was  ordered  down  the  bay,
but  he  said  :  "  I  must  have  a  frolic  with  the  Yan
kees  first,"  and  accordingly,  after  a  dinner  with
his  officers  on  the  night  of  30  Aug.,  he  landed  a
force  of  seamen  and  marines  from  the  "  Menelaus  "
and  attacked  a  body  of  Maryland  militia  that  was
camped  near  Chestertown,  Md.  After  a  hand-to-
hand  fight  of  about  an  hour,  the  British  were  re
pelled,  and  Sir  Peter  was  mortally  wounded,  dying
before  he  could  be  carried  to  the  ship.  His  body
was  taken  to  Bermuda,  and  subsequently  to  Eng
land,  receiving  a  public  funeral  and  military  honors
in  both  countries.  Lord  Byron,  who  was  his  first
cousin,  wrote  a  poetic  eulogy  to  his  memory.  See  a
memoir  of  him  by  Sir  George  Dallas  (London,  1815).
PARKER,  Peter,  clergyman,  b.  in  Framing-
ham,  Mass..  18  June,  1804  :  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C..
10  Jan.,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1831,
and  at  the  medical  department  there  in  1834.  and,
having  also  studied  theology,  was  ordained  the
same  year,  and  sent  to  China  as  a  missionary  by  the
American  board.  On  his  arrival  he  established  a
hospital  at  Canton,  which  was  originally  intended
for  the  treatment  of  diseases  of  the  eye,  but  soon
included  patients  with  other  maladies,  and  2.000
were  admitted  the  first  year.  Dr.  Parker's  skill  as
a  surgeon  caused  the  fame  of  the  hospital  to  spread
rapidly :  he  also  preached  to  its  inmates,  and  trained
several  natives  in  medicine  and  surgery.  During
the  war  with  England  in  1840  he  left  China  and
visited  the  United  States,  closing  the  hospital  in
his  absence,  but  returning  in  1842.  he  opened  it
with  a  largely  increased  force.  He  resigned  his
connection  with  the  American  board  in  1845.  and
while  in  charge  of  the  hospital  became  secretary


and  interpreter  to  the  U.  S.  embassy,  acting  as
charge  d'affaires  in  the  absence  of  the  U.  S.  minis
ter.  He  again  visited  this  country  in  1855  on
account  of  the  failure  of  his  health,  but,  by  the
special  request  of  the  U.  S.  government,  returned
to  China  the  same  year  as  commissioner,  with  full
power  to  revise  the  treaty  of  1844,  acting  in  this
capacity  till  1857,  when  he  finally  resigned  and  re
turned  home.  He  became  a  regent  of  the  Smith
sonian  institution  in  1868.  a  corporate  member  of
the  American  board  in  1871.  and  was  a  delegate  of
the  Evangelical  alliance  to  Russia  the  same  year  to
memorialize  the  emperor  in  behalf  of  religious
liberty  in  the  Baltic  provinces.  He  was  president
of  the  Washington  branch  of  the  Evangelical  alli
ance  in  1887.  He  published  "  Journal  of  an  Expe
dition  from  Singapore  to  Japan  "  (London,  1838) ;
"  A  Statement  Respecting  Hospitals  in  China "
(1841):  and  '-Eulogy  on  Henry  Wilson"  (Washing
ton,  D.  C..  1880).

PARKER,  Richard  Elliott,  senator,  b.  in
Westmoreland  county,  Va.,  27  Dec.,  1783  ;  d.  in
Richmond,  Va.,  9  Sept..  1840.  He  studied  law,  and
practised  his  profession  for  many  years  in  his  na
tive  county.  He  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as
a  Democrat  in  1836  to  succeed  Benjamin  Watkins
Lee,  but  resigned  the  next  year  to  become  a  judge
on  the  court  of  appeals  of  Virginia.

PARKER,  Samuel,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Ports
mouth,  X.  H.,  17  Aug.,  1744 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
6  Dec.,  1804.  His  father.  William,  was  an  eminent
lawyer,  and  a  judge  of  the  superior  court  at  the
opening  of  the  Revolution.  Samuel  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1764,  engaged  in  teaching  while  pre
paring  for  orders,  and  in  October,  1773,  was  offered
the  assistant  rectorship  of  Trinity  church,  Boston,
He  accordingly  went  to  England,  was  made  deacon
in  the  chapel  of  Fulham  palace.  London,  24  Feb.,
1774,  by  Dr.  Terrich,  lord  bishop  of  London,
and  ordained  priest  three  days  later  by  the  same
dignitary.  He  returned  home  in  November,  1774,
and  entered  at  once  upon  his  duties.  At  the  be
ginning  of  the  Revolution  he  sided  with  his  coun
trymen,  was  the  only  Episcopal  clergyman  to  re
main  at  his  post,  and  in  1779  became  rector  of  the
parish.  After  the  war  he  was  active  in  seeking  to
revive  and  aid  scattered  Episcopal  churches,  and
was  agent  of  the  Society  for  the  propagation  of  the
gospel.  In  1803  he  was  unanimously  elected  to
succeed  Bishop  Bass  in  the  episcopate  of  Massa
chusetts,  and  he  was  consecrated  in  Trinity  church,
New  York  city,  16  Sept.,  1804.  On  returning
home  he  was  prostrated  by  an  attack  of  the  gout,
from  which  he  never  recovered,  and  thus  was  never
able  to  discharge  any  of  the  duties  of  his  office.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  Univer
sity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1789.  Dr.  Parker  published
an""  Annual  "Election  Sermon  before  the  Legisla
ture  of  Massachusetts'"  (1793) :  a  '•  Sermon  for  the
Benefit  of  the  Boston  Female  Asylum  "  (1803);  and
several  other  occasional  discourses. — His  youngest
son,  Richard  Green,  educator,  b.  in  Boston  in
1798 ;  d.  in  1869,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1817.
His  subsequent  life  was  devoted  to  education,
chiefly  in  New  England.  He  was  not  only  a
thorough  practical  teacher  in  grammar-schools  and
a  private  school  of  his  own,  but  was  also  a  volu
minous  author  of  text-books.  Among  them  are
"Natural  Philosophy"  (1837);  "Aids  to  English
Composition  "  (Boston,  1832) ;  and  "  National  Series
of  Readers,"  with  James  M.  Watson  (completed  in
1858).  He  was  also  the  author  of  a  "  History  of  the
Grammar-School  in  East  Parish.  Roxbury"  (Bos
ton.  1826)  and  "  Tribute  to  the  Life  and  Character
of  Jonas  Chickering  "  (1854).— Samuel's  grandson,


654


PARKER


PARKER


James  Cutter  Dunn,  musician,  b.  in  Boston,  2
June,  1828,  is  the  son  of  Samuel  H.  Parker.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1848.  and  studied
music  at  the  Leipsic  conservatory  in  1851-'4.  He
has  been  professor  of  piano-forte  and  harmony  in
the  Boston  university  college  of  music  and  in  the
New  England  conservatory.  Since  1864  he  has
been  organist  in  Trinity  church.  Boston,  and  he
has  also  been  organist  to  the  Handel  and  Haydn
society.  He  has  written  a  "  Manual  of  Harmony  "
(Boston,  1855)  and  "  Theoretical  and  Practical
Harmony"  (Boston,  1870),  translated  Ernst  F.  E.
Riehter's  '•  Manual  of  Harmony  ''  (Boston),  and  has
published  collections  of  music,  besides  numerous
original  compositions.

PARKER.  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ashfield,
Mass.,  23  April,  1779;  d.  in  Ithaca.  N.  Y.,  24  March.
1806.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1806
and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1810,  lie-
came  a  missionary  in  western  New  York,  and  sub
sequently  was  in  charge  of  Congregational  churches
in  Massachusetts  and  New  York.  Mr.  Parker
originated  the  mission  of  the  American  board  in
Oregon,  travelled  there  in  1835-'7,  subsequently
lectured  in  many  eastern  states  on  the  character
of  that  territory,  and  did  much  to  establish  the
claims  of  the  U.  S.  government  to  the  lands,  and
to  induce  emigrants  to  settle  there.  He  is  also
said  to  have  been  the  first  to  suggest  the  possi
bility  of  constructing  a  railroad  through  the
Rocky  mountains  to  the  Pacific  ocean.  He  pub
lished  "Exploring  Tour  Beyond  the  Rocky  Moun
tains"  (Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  1833). — His  son,"  Henry
Webster,  clergyman,  b.  in  Danby,  N.  Y.,  7  Sept.,
1824,  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  184:3,  studied
theology,  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the
Presbyterian  church,  and  has  been  a  pastor  in
western  and  central  New  York  and  in  Massachu
setts.  He  studied  at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school
of  Harvard  in  1864—'5,  became  professor  of  chemis
try  in  Iowa  college  in  the  latter  year,  was  professor
of  mental  science  and  natural  history  in  Massachu
setts  agricultural  college  in  1870-'(),  and  since
1879  has  occupied  a  similar  chair  in  Iowa  college.
He  has  published  ''Story  of  a  Soul,"  a  poem  (Au
burn,  N.  Y.,  1850)  and '"Verse"  (Boston,  1862),
and  has  contributed  largely  to  the  magazines. —
His  wife,  Helen  Fitcli,  author,  b.  in  Auburn.
N.  Y.,  20  Dec.,  1827;  d.  in  Amherst,  Mass.,  4  Dec.,
1874,  was  educated  at  Auburn  female  seminary,
and  married  Mr.  Parker  in  1852.  Her  publications
include  "  Sunrise  and  Sunset"  (Auburn,  1854);
"Morning  Stars  of  the  New  World''  (New  York,
1834) ;  "  Rambles  after  Land  Shells "  (Boston,
1863);  "Missions  and  Martyrs  of  Madagascar"
(1864);  "Frank's  Search  for  Sea-Shells"  (1866);
"Constance  of  Aylmer."  a  tale  of  the  17th  century
(New  York,  1869) ;  "  Blind  Florette  "  (Boston,  1871) ;
and  "  Arthur's  Aquarium  "  (1872).

PARKER,  Theodore,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lexing
ton,  Mass.,  24  Aug.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Florence,  Italy,  10
May,  1860.  His  grandfather,  Capt.  John  Parker,
commanded  the  company  of  minute-men  that  were
fired  on  by  the  British' troops  on  19  April,  1775.
Theodore  was  the  youngest  of  eleven  children.
From  the  father,  a  Unitarian  and  Federalist,  he
inherited  independence  of  mind,  courage,  and  love
of  speculation  ;  from  his  mother,  depth  of  religious
feeling.  The  family  were  poor,  and  the  boy  was
brought  up  to  labor  on  the  farm.  At  the  age  of
six  he  was  sent  to  the  district  school,  which  was
then  taught  by  young  students  from  Harvard.
The  instruction  was  never  systematic,  quite  rudi-
mental,  and  very  meagre,  but  the  boy's  thirst  for
knowledge  overcame  all  obstacles.  At  eight  he


had  read  translations  of  Homer  and  Plutarch,  to
gether  with  such  other  works  in  prose  and  verse  as
were  accessible,  including  Rollin's  "Ancient  His
tory."  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  was  allowed  to  go
to  a  school  at  Lexington  for  one  quarter,  an  ex
pensive  indulgence,  costing  four  dollars.  Here  he
began  algebra,  and  ex
tended  his  knowledge
of  Latin  and  Greek.
At  the  age  of  seven
teen  he  taught  himself.
No  school  could  give-
him  enough.  He  stud
ied  all  the  time,  and
remembered  all  he
learned,  for  his  mem
ory  was  as  amazing  as
his  hunger  for  acquisi
tion.  This  year  militia
duties  were  added,  and
Theodore  threw  himself
into  these  with  his  usual
ardor,  rose  to  rank  in
his  company,  and  learned  how  to  fight.
time  he  was  the  light  of  his  home,  charming  among
his  mates,  exuberant,  joyous,  a  pure,  natural  boy  in
all  his  instincts.  One  day  in  August,  1830,  having
obtained  leave  of  absence  from  his  father,  he  walked
to  Cambridge,  was  examined,  admitted,  walked
back,  and  told  his  unsuspecting  father,  then  in  bed,
that  he  had  entered  Harvard  college.  For  a  year  he
stayed  at  home  and  worked  on  the  farm,  but  kept
up  with  his  class,  and  went  to  Cambridge  only  to
be  examined.  Under  these  circumstances  he  could
not  obtain  his  bachelor's  degree,  and  that  of  A.  M.
was  conferred  on  him  as  a  mark  of  honor  in  1840.
In  March,  1831,  he  became  assistant  teacher  in
a  private  school  in  Boston,  and  toiled  ten  hours  a
day.  In  1832  he  undertook  a  private  school  at
Watertown.  There  he  remained  ten  years,  becom
ing  intimate  with  Convers  Francis,  the  large-
minded  Unitarian  minister  there,  reading  his  books,
teaching  in  his  Sunday-school  with  Lydia  Cabot,
whom  he  afterward  married,  and  working  his
way  toward  the  ministry.  While  in  Watertown
he  read  Cicero,  Herodotus,  Thucydides,  Pindar,
Theocritus,  Bion,  Moschus,  and  vEschylus;  wrote
a  history  of  the  Jews  for  his  Sunday-school  class,
studied  French  metaphysics,  began  Hebrew  in
Charlestown,  whither  he  walked  on  Saturdays  to
meet  Mr.  Seixas,  a  Jew,  and  began  the  pursuit  of
theology.  In  1834  he  went  to  the  divinity-school,
and  his  religious  feeling  took  a  conservative  turn
at  that  time.  He  seemed  rather  over-weighted
with  erudition,  though  by  no  means  dry.  II  is
first  venture  in  preaching  was  at  Watertown  from
the  pulpit  of  his  friend,  Mr.  Francis.  Then  fol
lowed  a  period  of  "  candidating  "  at  Barnstable,
Concord,  Waltham,  Leominster,  and  elsewhere.  In
June,  1837,  he  was  ordained  as  minister  at  West
Roxbury.  This  was  a  season  of  study,  friendship,
social  intercourse,  intellectual  companionship,  solid
achievement  in  thought,  unconscious  preparation
for  the  work  he  was  to  do.  Here  he  gradually  be
came  known  as  an  iconoclast.  He  was  at  West
Roxbury  about  seven  years,  until  February,  1845.
During  that  time  the  Unitarian  controversy  was
begun,  the  overworked  student  had  passed  a  year
in  Europe,  examining,  meditating,  resolving,  clear
ing  his  purpose,  and  making  sure  of  his  calling,
and  the  future  career  of  the  "  heresiarch "  was
pretty  well  marked  out.  In  January,  1845,  a  small
company  of  gentlemen  met  and  passed  a  resolu
tion  "  that  the  Rev.  Theodore  Parker  shall  have  a
chance  to  be  heard  in  Boston."  This  was  the  be-


PARKER


PARKER


655


pinning  of  the  ministry  at  the  Mclocleon,  which
began  formally  in  December.  In  that  month  an
invitation  from  Boston — a  society  having  been
formed — was  accepted.  On  3  Jan.,  1846,  a  letter
resigning  the  charge  at  West  Roxbury  was  written,
and  the  installation  took  place  the  next  day.  The
preaching  at  the  Melodeon  had  been  most  success
ful,  and  it  remained  only  to  withdraw  entirely,  as
he  had  in  part,  from  his  old  parish,  and  to  reside
in  the  city.  The  ministrations  at  the  Melodeon
lasted  about  seven  years,  until  21  Nov.,  1852,  when
the  society  took  possession  of  the  Music  hall,  then
just  completed.  Here  his  fame  culminated.  He
had  met,  at  Brook  Farm,  which  lay  close  to  him  at
West  Roxbury,  the  finest,  most  cultivated,  most
ardent  intellects  of  the  day;  he  had  made  the  ac
quaintance  of  delightful  people;  he  had  studied
and  talked  a  great  deal :  he  had  been  brought  face
to  face  with  practical  problems  of  society.  He  was
independent  of  sectarian  bonds,  he  stood  alone,  he
could  bring  his  forces  to  bear  without  fear  of
wounding  souls  belonging  to  the  regular  Unitarian
communion,  and  he  was  thoroughly  imbued  with
the  modern  spirit.  His  work  ran  very  swiftly.  No
doubt  he  was  helped  by  the  reform  movements  of
the  time,  the  love  of  poverty  played  its  part,  the
natural  sympathy  with  an  outcast  centred  on  him,
the  passion  for  controversy  drew  many,  and  the
heretics  saw  their  opportunity.  But  all  these  com
bined  will  not  explain  his  success.  True,  he  had
no  grace  of  person,  no  beauty  of  feature,  no  charm
of  expression,  no  music  of  voice,  no  power  of  ges
ture;  his  clear,  steady,  penetrating,  blue  eye  was
concealed  by  glasses.  Still,  notwithstanding  these
disadvantages,  his  intensity  of  conviction,  his  mass
of  knowledge,  his  warmth  and  breadth  of  feeling,
his  picturesqucness  of  language,  his  frankness  of
avowal,  fascinated  young  and  old.  He  had  no
secrets.  He  was  ready  for  any  emergency.  He
shrank  from  no  toil.  His  interest  in  the  people
was  genuine,  hearty,  anil  disinterested.  He  aimed
constantly  at  the 'elevation  of  his  kind  through
religion,  morality,  and  education.  He  was  in
terested  in  everything  that  concerned  social  ad
vancement.  Peace,  temperance,  the  claims  of
morals,  the  treatment  of  animosity,  poverty,  and
the  rights  of  labor,  engaged  his  thought.  He  did
not  neglect  spiritualism  or  socialism,  but  devoted
to  these  subjects  a  vast  deal  of  consideration.  Mr.
Parker's  interest  in  slavery  began  early.  In  1841
he  delivered  a  sermon  on  the  subject,  which  was
published,  but  it  was  not  until  1845  that  his  share  in
the  matter  became  engrossing.  Then  slavery  be
came  prominent  in  National  politics,  and  menaced
seriously  republican  institutions ;  then  men  began
to  talk" of  the  "slave  power."  Wendell  Phillips
somewhere  tells  of  Theodore's  first  alliance  with
the  Abolitionists,  not  in  theory,  for  he  did  not
agree  with  their  policy,  but  in  opposition  to  the

!>revailing  sentiment.  It  was  at  the  close  of  a
ong  convention.  There  had  been  hard  work.
Phillips  had  been  among  the  speakers,  Parker
among  the  listeners.  As  they  left  the  hall,  the  lat
ter  joined  him,  took  his  arm,  and  said :  "  Hence
forth  you  may  consider  my  presence  by  your  side."
And  faithfully  he  kept  his  promise.  Probably  no
one — not  Garrison,  not  Phillips  himself — did  more
to  awaken  and  enlighten  the  conscience  of  the
north.  By  speeches,  sermons,  letters,  tracts,  and
lectures  he  scattered  abroad  republican  ideas.  As
a  critic  of  pro-slavery  champions,  as  a  shielder  of
fugitives,  as  an  encourager  of  fainting  hearts,  he
was  felt  as  a  warrior.  His  labors  were  incessant
and  prodigious.  He  was  preacher,  pastor,  visitor
among  the  poor,  the  downtrodden,  and  the  guilty;


writer,  platform  speaker,  lyceum  lecturer,  and  al
ways  an  omnivorous  reader.  His  lecturing  engage
ments  numbered  sometimes  seventy  or  eighty  in  a
season.  In  1849  he  established  the  "  Massachusetts
Quarterly  Review,"  a  worthy  successor  of  the
"  Dial,"  but  more  muscular  and  practical — "  a  tre
mendous  journal,  with  ability  in  its  arms  and
piety  in  its  heart."  The  editorship  was  pressed
upon  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  and  Charles  Sumner,
but  devolved  at  last  on  Parker,  who  was  obliged
also  to  write  many  of  the  articles,  as  his  contribu
tors  failed  him.  The  "  Quarterly,"  thanks  to  him,
lived  three  years,  and  died  at  length  quite  as
much  through  the  stress  of  political  exigency  as
through  the  want  of  support,  though  that  was  in
sufficient.  The  fugitive-slave  bill  was  passed  in
1850,  and  entailed  a  vast  deal  of  toil  and  excite
ment.  He  took  more  than  one  man's  share  of  both,
was  a  leader  of  the  committee  of  vigilance,  planned
escapes,  and  entertained  runaway  slaves.  During
the  fearful  agitations  incident  to  the  escape  of
William  and  Ellen  Craft,  the  chase  after  Shadrach,
the  return  of  Sims,  and  the  surrender  of  Burns,  his
energies  were  unintermitting.  Then  came  the
struggle  with  the  slave-holders  in  the  west,  when
John  Brown  came  to  the  front,  in  which  he  bore  an
active  part,  being  an  early  friend  and  helper  of  the
hero  of  Ossawattomie.  But  for  extraordinary
strength  in  youth,  a  buoyant  temperament,  love  of
fun  and  jest,  fondness  for  work,  moderation  in  eat
ing  and  drinking,  sufficient  sleep,  exercise  in  the
open  air,  and  capacity  for  natural  enjoyment,  such
excessive  labor  must  have  exhausted  even  his
vitality.  These  supported  him,  and  but  for  an  un
fortunate  experience  he  might  have  lived  to  an  old
age.  Indeed,  he  expected  to  do  so.  He  used  to  say
that  if  he  safely  passed  forty-nine  he  should  live
to  be  eighty.  But  he  inherited  a  tendency  to  con
sumption.  In  the  winter  of  1857,  during  a  lectur
ing  tour  through  central  New  York,  he  took  a
severe  cold,  which
finally,  in  spite  of
all  his  friends  could
do,  settled  upon  his
lungs.  On  the  morn
ing  of  9  Jan.,  1859.
he  had  an  attack
of  bleeding  at  the
lungs.  At  once  he
was  taken  to  Santa
Cruz,  and  in  May  he
left  the  island  tor
Southampton.  The
summer  was  spent
in  Switzerland,  and
in  the  autumn  he
went  to  Rome.  The
season  being  wet,  he
steadily  lost  ground,
and  could  with  dif
ficulty  reach  Flor
ence,  where  he  died.  He  lies  in
cemetery  there.  (See  illustration.)

Theodore  Parker's  system  was  simple.  It  was,
so  far  as  it  was  worked" out,  theism  based  on  tran
scendental  principles.  The  belief  in  God  and  the
belief  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul  were  cardinal
with  him ;  all  else  in  the  domain  of  speculative
theology  he  was  ready  to  let  go.  lie  followed
criticism  up  to  this  line;  there  he  stood  stoutly  for
the  defence.  He  was  a  deeply  religious  man.  but
he  was  not  a  Christian  believer.  He  regarded  him
self  as  a  teacher  of  new  ideas,  and  said  that  the
faith  of  the  next  thousand  years  would  be  essen
tially  like  his.  It  is  sometimes  said  that  Parker


656


PARKER


PARKER


was  simply  a  deist ;  but  they  who  say  this  must
take  into  account  the  strong  sweep  of  his  personal
aspiration,  the  weight  of  his  convictions,  his  devo
tion  to  humanity,  the  enormous  volume  of  his  feel
ings.  There  is  no  deist  whom  he  even  remotely  re
sembled.  Lord  Herbert  of  Cherbury,  Shaftesbury,
Bolingbroke,  Hobbes,  Hume,  suggest  oppositions
only.  Parker  affirmed  and  denied  merely  in  order
to  make  his  affirmation  more  clear.  He  was  a
great  believer,  less  a  thinker  than  a  doer.  His
bulky  resources  were  so  much  fuel  to  his  flame.
His  sympathies  were  all  modern ;  he  looked  con
stantly  forward,  and  was  prevented  only  by  his
plain,  common  sense  from  accepting  every  scheme
of  his  generation  that  wore  a  hopeful  aspect.  lint
he  saw  the  weak  points  in  reforms  that  he  himself
aided.  He  criticised  women  while  working  for
their  elevation,  and  laughed  at  negroes  while  toil
ing  against  their  bondage.  He  was  not  {esthetic,
and  had  no  taste  in  painting,  sculpture,  music,
poetry,  or  the  delicacies  of  literature.  lie  knew
about  them  as  he  knew  about  everything,  but  his
power  was  moral  and  religious,  and  it  was  insepa
rable  from  his  temperament,  which  was  human  and
practical  on  the  side  of  social  experiment.  lie  be
queathed  his  library  of  13,000  volumes  to  the  Boston
public  library,  He  was  a  prolific  author,  publishing
books,  pamphlets,  sermons,  essays  without  number,
but  never  with  a  literary,  always  with  a  philan
thropic,  intention.  His  publications  include  "Mis
cellaneous  Writings"  (Boston,  1843);  "Sermons  on
Theism,  Atheism,  and  Popular  Theology"  (1852);
"  Occasional  Sermons  and  Speeches  "  (2  vols.,  1852) ;
"  Additional  Speeches  and  Addresses "  (2  vols.,
1855);  "Trial  of  Theodore  Parker  for  the  Mis
demeanor  of  a  Speech  in  Paneuil  Hall  against  Kid
napping,"  a  defence  that  he  had  prepared  to  de
liver  in  case  he  should  be  tried  for  his  part  in  the
Anthony  Burns  case  (1855);  and  "Experience
as  a  Minister."  His  "  Discourse  on  Matters  per
taining  to  Religion  "  (1842)  still  presents  the  best
example  of  his  theological  method  ;  his  "  Ten  Ser
mons  of  Religion  "  (1853)  the  best  summary  of
results.  His  complete  works  were  edited  by  Fran
ces  Power  Cobbe  (12  vols.,  London,  1863-'5) ;
(10  vols.,  Boston,  1870).  A  volume  of  "  Prayers  "
was  issued  in  1862,  and  one  entitled  "Historic
Americans"  in  1870.  It  included  discourses  on
Franklin,  Washington,  Adams,  and  Jefferson.
"  Lessons  from  the  World  of  Matter  and  the
World  of  Mind,"  selected  from  notes  of  his  unpub
lished  sermons,  by  Rufus  Leighton.  was  edited
by  Frances  P.  Cobbe  (London,  1865).  See  also
"  Theodore  Parker  sa  vie  et  ses  oeuvres,"  by
Albert  Reville  (Paris,  1865).  On  the  death  of  Mrs.
Parker  in  1880,  Franklin  B.  Sanborn  was  made
literary  executor,  and  he,  it  is  said,  intends  to  issue
some  new  material.  Mr.  Parker's  life  has  been
presented  several  times  ;  most  comprehensively  by
John  Weiss  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1864),  and  by  Oc-
tavius  B.  Frothingham  (Boston,  1874).  Studies  of
him  have  been  made  in  French  and  English.
There  is  a  fragment  of  autobiography  and  innu
merable  references  to  him  as  the  founder  of  a  new
school  in  theology.  There  are  busts  of  Parker  by
William  W.  Story  and  Robert  Hart.

PARKER,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wiltshire.
England,  8  June,  1595;  d.  in  Newbury.  Mass.,  24
April,  1677.  His  father,  Robert,  was  an  eminent
Puritan  divine,  who  was  exiled  for  his  religious
opinions.  Thomas,  who  was  a  student  at  Oxford
at  that  time,  joined  him  in  Holland,  and  was  gradu
ated  at  the  University  of  Leyden  in  1614.  He  sub
sequently  returned  to  England,  taught  in  Newbury
for  a  time,  and  in  1634  sailed  for  New  England


with  his  relatives,  James  and  Nicholas  Noyes  (q.  v.\
with  whom  he  founded  the  town  of  Newbury,
Mass.,  was  installed  its  first  pastor,  and  continued
in  that  charge  until  his  death,  "  the  beauty,  holi
ness,  charity,  and  humbleness  of  his  life,"  says  Cot
ton  Mather, "  giving  his  people  a  perpetual  and  most
lively  commentary  on  his  doctrine."  With  James
Noyes  he  also  prepared  students  for  Harvard,  re
fusing  all  compensation  for  his  services.  During
his  pastorate  a  bitter  controversy  on  the  subject  of
church  government  divided  his  parish.  During  his
later  life  he  was  totally  blind,  but  could  teach  the
languages  with  ease  from  memory.  A  contempo
rary  writer  says  :  "  On  one  occasion  certain  clergy
men,  who  were  dissatisfied  with  his  opinions,  came
to  reason  with  him.  They  addressed  him  in  Eng
lish,  he  replied  in  Latin ;  they  followed  him  in
Latin,  he  responded  in  Greek  ;  they  managed  a  re
ply ;  he  then  spoke  Arabic,  whither  they  durst  not
go."  The  river  on  whose  banks  he  first  landed  is
named  in  his  honor.  lie  published  "A  Letter  on
Church  Government"  (1644);  "  The  Prophesies  of
Daniel  Expounded"  (1649);  "Mcthodus  Gratia'
Pivinav'  (1657);  and  "Theses  de  Traductionc  Pec-
cat  oris  nd  Vitam  "  (1664).

PARKER,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Frederick
county,  Va.,  in  1753;  d.  there,  24  Jan.,  1820.  Ik-
was  captain  of  a  volunteer  company  during  the
Revolution,  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  infantry  in
1799,  and  in  1800  was  mustered  out  of  service.  He
was  appointed  colonel  of  the  12th  infantry  in  1812,
commissioned  brigadier-general  in  March,  1813.
and  resigned  the  next  year.

PARKER,  Willard, surgeon, b.  in  Ilillsborough.
N.  H..  2  Sept.,  1800;  d.  in  New  York  city,  25
April,  1884.  His  ancestors  emigrated  to  Massa
chusetts  in  1640  and  settled  in  Chelmsford,  to
which  place  his
father  returned
when  Willard  was
five  years  old.  He
taught  in  the  dis
trict  schools  to  ob
tain  means  to  en
ter  Harvard,where
he  was  graduated
in  1826.  He  then
opened  a  school  in
Charlestown  with
the  intention  of
studying  for  the
ministry,  but  sub
sequently  decided
to  adopt  the  pro
fession  of  medi
cine,  became  the
private  pupil  of

Dr.  John  C.  Warren,  attended  medical  lectures  in
Boston,  and  took  his  degree  at  Harvard  in  1830.
The  year  before  he  had  been  appointed  lecturer  on
anatomy  in  the  Vermont  medical  college,  and  im
mediately  after  his  graduation  he*became  professor
of  the  same  branch  in  Berkshire  medical  college,
Pittsfield,  Mass.  Three  years  later  he  accepted
the  chair  of  surgery  there,  which  he  held  till  1836,
when  he  removed  to  Cincinnati.  Ohio,  to  become
professor  of  surgery  in  the  medical  college  of  that
city.  He  spent  several  months  in  Europe  in  1837,
and  in  1839  settled  in  New  York  city,  with  the  ap
pointment  of  professor  of  surgery  in' the  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons,  which  he  held  for  thirty
years,  subsequently  accepting  the  chair  of  clinical
surgery,  which  he  resigned  a  few  months  before
his  death.  During  the  next  ten  years  he  established
a  large  and  lucrative  practice,  and  took  the  highest


PARKER


PARKMAN


G57


rank  in his  profession. ITis  remarkable success
was  based  on  great  knowledge  and  skill,  and  his
mode  of  treatment,  which inspired the  absolute
faith  of  his  patients. All  the  important  operations
that  are  only  undertaken  by  great  surgeons  were
performed  by  him  with  more  than  ordinary  suc
cess. He made  many  important discoveries in
practical  surgery,  including  that,  of  cystotomy  and
that  for  the  cure  of  abscess  of  the  appendix  ver-
miformis. His operation for laceration of the
perinceum  during  parturition  is  regarded  as  an  im
portant  advance  in  the  science  of  surgery. He  was
the  first  in  this  country  to  call  attention  to  the
phenomena  of  the  concussion  of  the  nerves  as  dis
tinguished  from  that  of  the  nerve-centres,  and  in
1854  was  also  the  first  to  describe  and  report  cases
of  malignant  pustule. In  the  spring  of  1840,  ap
preciating  the  want  of  practical  demonstration  in
teaching surgery,  and  the  difficulty  in  securing
cases  for  illustration  in  colleges  that  were  uncon
nected  with  hospitals,  he  visited  with  his  students
two  or  three  of  the  city  dispensaries,  selected  in
teresting  cases,  and  had  them  taken  to  the  College
of  physicians  and  surgeons,  where  the  anatomical
theatre  offered superior advantages for  making
diagnoses  and performing  operations  before  the
class. This  was the first college clinic in the
United  States. He  was  active  in  the  organization
of  the  New  York  pathological  society  in  1843,  of
that  for  the  relief  of  widows  and  orphans  of  medi
cal  men  in  1846,  and  of  the  New  York  academy  of
medicine  in  1847,  becoming  its  president  in  1856,
and  holding  office  for  many  years. In  1840,  with
Dr.  James  R.  Wood,  he  secured  the  necessary  legis
lation  to  reorganize  the  city  almshouse  into  what  is
now  Bellevue  hospital,  and  was  appointed  one  of  its
visiting  surgeons. In  1856  he  was  chosen  to  a  simi
lar  post  in  the  New  York  hospital. In  1864-'6  he
was  active  in  procuring  legislation  to  create  the
New  York  city  board  of  health,  made  many  visits  to
Albany  in  its  behalf,  and  was  one  of  its  members
from  its  organization. On  the  death  in  1865  of  Dr.
Valentine  Mott,  who  was  president  of  the  New  York
state  inebriate  asylum  at  Binghamton,  Dr.  Parker
was  appointed  his  successor,  and  became  interested
in  this  field  of  work. His  administration  proved
eminently  successful,  his  treatment  of  his  patients
being  based  on  the  theory  that  alcohol  is  essential
ly  a  poison,  that  it  cannot  be  considered  as  food,
and  should  be  used  only  in  exceptional  cases  and
under  the  advice  of  a  physician. Dr.  Parker  con
tinued  to  practise  within  two  years  of  his  death,
and  was  consulting  surgeon  to  Bellevue,  Mount
Sinai,  St. Luke's,  Roosevelt,  and  the  New  York
hospitals. He  was  a  member  of  many  foreign  and
domestic  professional  bodies,  active  in  benevolent
and  religious  organizations,  and  the  friend  of  edu
cation. As  a  teacher  he  enjoyed  the  highest  suc
cess,  his  fine  personal  presence  and  affable  man
ners  winning  the  regard  of  his  pupils,  and  his  direct
and  lucid  way  of  imparting  information  securing
their  attention. Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  in  1870. The  Willard  Parker  hospital  for
contagious  diseases  was  erected  and  named  in  his
honor. Few American surgeons have filled so
acceptably  so  large  a  number  of  responsible  offices.
His  extensive  practice  prevented  his  giving  much
time  to  writing,  and  even  the  reports  of  his  cases
have  been  made  by  other  physicians,  bivt  he  pub
lished several monographs in medical journals,
among  which  are  "Cystotomy  "  (1850) :  "Sponta
neous  Fractures"  (1852):  "On" the  High  Operation
for  Stone  in  the  Female  "  (1855) :  "  The  Concussion
of  Nerves  "  (1856) ;  "  Ligature  of  the  Subclavian
Artery"  (1864);  and  a  lecture  on  "Cancer"  (1873).


PARKHURST,  Charles  Henry,  clergyman,  b.
in  Framingham,  Mass.,  17  April,  1842.  He  was
graduated  at  Amherst  in  1866,  studied  theology  at
Halle  in  1869.  and  at  Leipsic  in  1872-'3,  and  was
principal  of  the  high-school  in  Amherst  in  1867,
and  professor  in  Williston  seminary,  Easthampton.
Mass.,  in  1870-'!.  He  was  pastor  of  the  Congre
gational  church  at  Lenox.  Mass.,  from  1874  till
1880,  when  he  was  called  to  the  Madison  Square
Presbyterian  church,  New  York  city.  He  has  writ
ten  for  various  magazines,  and  is  the  author  of
"The  Forms  of  the  Latin  Verb,  Illustrated  by
Sanscrit"  (Boston,  1870);  "  The  Blind  Man's  Creed,
and  other  Sermons"  (New  York,  1883);  and  "  Pat
tern  in  the  Mount,  and  other  Sermons"  (1885).

PARKINSON,  Richard,  English  agriculturist,
b.  in  Lincolnshire,  England,  in  1748:  d.  in  Osgar-
by,  England,  23  Feb.,  1815.  He  became  a  farmer,
was  interested  in  improved  methods,  and  was  en
couraged  by  Sir  John  Sinclair,  president  of  the
Board  of  agriculture,  who  recommended  him  to
George  Washington.  He  left  England  3  Sept.,
1798.  and  was  for  some  time  in  the  employ  of
Washington  as  an  agriculturist  at  Mount  Vernon,
and  resided  at  Orange  Hill,  near  Baltimore.  "  Par
kinson."  says  Prof.  John  Donaldson,  "  has  always
been  reckoned  one  of  the  best  practical  writers
on  agriculture  to  the  time  in  which  he  lived,  and,
our  opinion  thinks,  very  justly."  He  published
"The  Experienced  Farmer"  (2  vols.,  London,
1798;  enlarged  ed.,  with  an  autobiography,  1807);
"A  Tour  in  America,  1798-1800,"  containing  remi
niscences  of  Gen.  Washington  (2  vols,  1805) ;  "  The
English  Practice  of  Farming"  (1806);  "Gypsum
as  a  Manure  "  (1808) ;"  Breeding  and  Management
of  Live-Stock, "  a  standard  work  (2  vols..  1809) ;
"  Survey  of  Rutlandshire"  (1809);  and  "Survey  of
Huntingdonshire"  (1811).

PARKINSON,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in
Frederick  county,  Md.,  8  Nov.,  1774;  d.  in  New
York  city,  10  March.  1848.  He  was  employed  for
several  years  as  a  clerk  and  a  teacher,  and  on  1
April,  1798,  was  ordained  as  a  Baptist  minister.
In  1801  he  was  chosen  chaplain  to  congress,  and
he  was  re-elected  for  two  successive  years.  In
April,  1805,  he  became  pastor  of  the  1st  Baptist
church,  New  York  city,  where  he  remained  till  his
resignation  in  1840,  and  in  1841  he  was  appointed
pastor  of  the  Bethesda  Baptist  church  in  New  York,
which  relationship  he  retained  till  his  death.  Dur
ing  his  period  of  greatest  activity  as  a  preacher  his
usefulness  was  much  impaired  by  reports  that  re
flected  on  his  moral  character,  and,  though  a  legal
investigation  resulted  favorably  to  him,  his  future
ministry  was  to  a  great  extent  a  failure.  He  pub
lished  "Ecclesiastical  History"  (New  York,  1813);
"  Public  Ministry  of  the  World,"  a  treatise  (1818);
and  "Sermons  on  Deut: XXXII."  (2  vols.,  1831).

PARKMAN,  Ebenezer,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bos
ton,  Mass.,  5  Sept.,  1703  ;  d.  in  Westborough,  Mass.,
9  Dec.,  1789.  He  was  the  first  minister  of  West-
borough,  serving  from  28  Oct.,  1724,  till  his  death,
and  was  the  author  of  "Reformers  and  Interces
sors  "  (Boston,  1752) ;  "  Convention  Sermon  "  (1761) ;
and  a  short  account  of  Westborough,  which  is  in
the  "  Massachusetts  Historical  Collections." — His
grandson,  Francis,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
4  June,  1788;  d.  there,  12  Nov..  1852,  was  gradu
ated  at  Harvard  in  1807,  and  studied  theology  un
der  Dr.  William  E.  Channing  and  at  Edinburgh
university.  He  was  ordained  in  December,  1813,
and  from  1813  till  1849  he  was  pastor  of  the  New
north  church  (Unitarian)  in  Boston.  In  1829  he
founded  the  professorship  of  pulpit  eloquence  and
pastoral  care  in  the  theological  department  of  Har-


658


PARMELEE


PARRA


vard,  and  when  the  Society  for  the  relief  of  aged
and  indigent  Unitarian  clergymen  was  formed  in
1849  he  contributed  freely  to  its  support,  and  was
its  first  vice-president,  which  post  he  held  till  his
death.  He  was  president  of  the  convention  of
Unitarian  ministers  that  met  at  Baltimore  in  1852.
He  bequeathed  a  part  of  his  library  to  Harvard,
which  conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  I).  D.  in
1834.  He  published  "  The  Offering  of  Sympathy  "
(1829),  and  some  occasional  sermons  and  addresses.
—Francis's  brother,  George,  physician,  b.  in  Bos
ton  in  1791 ;  d.  there  in  November,  1849,  was  gradu
ated  at  Harvard  in  1809,  and  in  medicine  at  the
University  of  Aberdeen,  Scotland,  in  1813.  He
gave  the  "ground  on  which  the  Harvard  medical
school  in  Boston  stands.  Dr.  Parkman  was  mur
dered  in  the  college  building  by  Prof.  John  W.
Webster  (q.  r.).  He  published  "'Proposals  for  es
tablishing  a  Retreat  for  the  Insane  "  (Boston,  1814)
and  a  treatise  on  "  Insanity  and  the  Management
of  the  Insane  "  (1817).  See  "  Trial  of  Webster  for
the  Murder  of  Dr.  Parkman"  (Boston,  1850).—
Francis's  son,  Francis,  author,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
1C  Sept.,  1823,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1844,
and  studied  law  for  two  years,  but  abandoned  it  in

1840.  He  travelled
in  Europe  in  the
latter  part  of  1843
and  the  beginning
of  1844,  and  in  1846
set  out  to  explore
the  Rocky  moun
tains.  He  lived
for  several  months
among  the  Dakota
Indians  and  the
still  wilder  and  re
moter  tribes,  and
incurred  hardships
and  privations  that
made  him  an  in-
valid.  An  account
of  this  expedition
was  given  in  a  series  of  articles  in  the  "Knicker
bocker  Magazine,"  which  were  subsequently  col
lected  and  published  in  book-form.  He  afterward
engaged  in  literary  work  almost  exclusively,  and,
notwithstanding  his  impaired  health,  accompanied
by  partial  blindness,  has  attained  high  rank  as  a
historian  and  writer.  Mr.  Parkman  visited  France
in  1858,  1868,  1872,  1880.  and  1881.  to  examine  the
French  archives  in  connection  with  his  historical
labors.  In  1871-'2  he  was  professor  of  horticulture
in  the  agricultural  school  of  Harvard.  His  chief
work  has  been  a  series  of  volumes  intended  to  il
lustrate  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  French  dominion
in  America,  which  are  distinguished  for  brilliant
style  and  accurate  research.  Mr.  Parkman  is  now
(1888)  writing  the  volume  of  the  New  France  series
covering  the  period  between  1700  and  1750.  This,
with  a  few  additions  to  earlier  volumes,  will  com
plete  the  series,  which  will  then  form  one  continu
ous  work.  His  publications  are  "  The  California
and  Oregon  Trail"  (New  York,  1849);  "The  Con
spiracy  of  Pontiac"  (Boston,  1851);  "Pioneers  of
France  in  the  New  World  "  (1865) ;  "  The  Book  of
Roses  "  (1866) ;  "  Jesuits  in  North  America  "  (1867) ;
"Discovery  of  the  Great  West"  (1869);  "The  Old
Regime  in  Canada  "  (1874) ;  "  Count  Frontenac  and
New  France  under  Louis  XIV."  (1877) ;  and  "  Mont-
calm  and  Wolfe  "  (1884).

PARMELEE,  Theodore  Nelson,  journalist,  b.
in  Connecticut  in  1804;  d.  in  Branford,  Conn.,  3
July,  1874.  He  edited  the  "Middlesex  County
Gazette, '  Washington  correspondent  of  the  New


York  "  Herald  "  during  the  Van  Buren  and  Tyler
administrations,  and  was  on  terms  of  intimate  ac
quaintanceship  with  President  Tyler  and  the  chief
public  men  of  the  time.  He  was  editor  for  several
years  of  the  Buffalo  "Commercial,"  and  author  of
some  of  the  biographies  in  the  volume  "Men  of
Progress"  (1872),of  aseriesof  political  reminiscences
that  were  published  in  "  Harper's  Magazine,"  under
the  title  "Recollections  of  an  Old  Stager,"  and  of
numerous  fugitive  articles.

PARMENTIER.  Aiiguste  Henry  (par-mon-
tyay),  French  historian,  b.  in  Sancerre  in  1752 ;  d.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  about  1816.  He  was  the  son
of  poor  laborers,  but,  having  rescued  a  clergyman
from  a  mad  bull,  obtained  a  fellowship  in  a  semi
nary.  He  was  ordained  a  priest  in  1786,and  stationed
in  Paris,  but,  refusing  in  1791  to  take  the  oath  of
allegiance  to  the  civil  constitution  of  the  clergy,  he
emigrated  to  the  United  States,  where  at  times  he
was  forced  to  earn  his  living  as  a  laborer.  He  be
came  afterward  secretary  to  a  wealthy  resident  of
Montreal,  who  bequeathed  him  a  competency  in
1799.  He  then  devoted  his  time  to  historical  re
searches,  and  published  "  llistoire  des  pionniers
francais  dans  I'Ameriqiie  du  Nord"  (3  vols.,  Phila
delphia,  1812)  and  "  Histoire  de  la  colonie  1'ran-
caise  en  Louisiane  "  (2  vols.,  1815).

PARMENTIER,  Jehan  (par-mon-tyay),  French
navigator,  b.  in  Dieppe  in  1494;  d.  in  Sumatra  in
1530.  He  followed  the  profession  of  a  pilot,  and
was  among  the  first  that  visited  Brazil.  Entering
the  service  of  the  famous  Dieppe  merchant,  Ango,
he  was  employed  by  the  latter  in  missions  of  ex
ploration  along  the  coast  of  South  America,  and
discovered,  in  1520,  the  island  of  Pernambuco.  In
1527  he  proposed  to  Ango  to  reach  the  western
coast  of  America  by  way  of  China  and  the  Indies,
and,  being  given  the  command  of  an  expedition,  had
already  advanced  about  1,000  miles  east  of  Suma
tra  when  he  was  compelled  by  hurricanes  to  return
to  that  island.  A  second  expedition,  undertaken
in  1529,  was  still  more  unfortunate,  as  Parmentier
was  caught  by  currents  and  wrecked  off  Sumatra
in  the  early  part  of  1530.  A  narrative  of  his  travels
in  verse  was  published  after  his  death  under  the
title  "Navigation  de  Jehan  Parmentier,  matelot  do
Dieppe,  contenant  les  mervcilles  de  la  nier,  du
ciel  ct  de  la  terre"  (Paris.  1531 ;  reprinted  in  1832).

PARRA,  Antonio  de  la  (par'-rah),  Portuguese
naturalist,  b.  in  Lisbon  about  the  middle  of  the
18th  century ;  d.  early  in  the  19th.  In  1781  he
went  to  Cuba,  commissioned  by  the  Spanish  gov
ernment  to  collect  objects  for  the  Museum  of  natu
ral  history  of  Madrid.  He  published  a  notable
work  on  Cuban  ichthyology  with  the  title  "  Peces  y
crustaceos  de  la  isla  de  Cuba"  (Havana,  1787).
This  work,  the  first  ever  written  and  published  in
Cuba  upon  this  branch  of  natural  history,  and  now
very  rare,  has  been  translated  into  French.

PARRA,  Francisco,  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in
Galicia  about  1500;  d.  in  Yucatan  in  1560.  He
went  in  his  youth  to  New  Spain,  where  he  entered
the  convent  of  Mexico,  and  volunteered  for  the
missions  of  Guatemala.  There  he  labored  assidu
ously  in  the  conversion  of  the  natives,  learned  the
three  principal  dialects  of  the  country,  and,  to  be
able  to  write  in  them,  invented  five  new  characters,
which  were  afterward  adopted  by  Domingo  Vico
and  Francisco  Moran  in  their  works.  Parra  became
president  of  the  province  of  Guatemala  and  visitor
of  that  of  Yucatan.  He  wrote  "  Vocabulario  Tri-
lingue  Guatemalteco,  de  los  tres  principales  Idio-
mas :  Kakchiquel,  Quiche  y  Tzutuchil,"  the  original
manuscript  or  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  library
of  San  Francisco  in  Guatemala.


PARRENO

PARRENO,  Jose  Julian  (par-rain'-yo),  Cuban
clergyman,  b.  in  Havana  in  1728 ;  d.  in  Rome,
Italy,  1  Nov.,  178(5.  He  entered  the  Society  of
Jesus  in  1745,  and  taught  rhetoric  and  philosophy
in  Mexico,  and  theology  in  Puebla  de  los  Angeles.
He  afterward  devoted  himself  to  missionary  labors,
giving  special  attention  to  the  negroes.  The  de
cree  expellinir  the  Jesuits  from  the  Spanish  colo
nies  forced  him  to  leave  his  native  country  and
take  refuge  in  Italy.  He  published  "  Carta  a  los
Seuores  Habaneros,  sobre  el  buen  trato  de  los
Negros  "  (Rome) :  "  De  scribendi  Cacohete  "  ;  and
"Anales  de  cuatro  afios  desde  1782  hasta  1785."

PARRIS,  Albion  Keith,  senator,  b.  in  Auburn,
Mo.,  19  Jan.,  1788;  d.  in  Portland,  Me.,  11  Feb.,
1857.  His  father,  Samuel  (1753-1847),  was  an
officer  of  the  Revolution,  and  for  several  years
judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  and  a  member
of  the  legislature  of  Maine.  The  son  engaged  in
fanning  until  the  age  of  fourteen,  and  was  gradu
ated  at  Dartmouth  in  1806.  He  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1809,  and  began  practice  at
Paris,  Me.  He  was  prosecuting  attorney  for  Oxford
county  in  1811,  a  member  of  the  state  assembly  in
1813,  state  senator  in  1814,  and  a  member  of  con
gress  in  1815-'19.  having  been  chosen  as  a  Democrat.
He  was  appointed  judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court
in  1818,  at  which  time  he  removed  to  Portland,
and  in  1819  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  State  constitu
tional  convention  and  a  member  of  the  committee
for  drawing  up  the  constitution.  In  1820  he  was
appointed  judge  of  probate  for  Cumberland  county.
He  was  governor  in  1821-'6.  U.  S.  senator  from
1820  till  1828.  when  he  resigned,  judge  of  the  su
preme  court  of  Maine  in  1828-'3G,  and  second  comp
troller  of  the  U.  S.  treasury  in  1836-'50.  He  retired
to  Portland  in  1850,  and  in  1852  was  elected  mayor.

PARRIS,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  London,
England,  in  1(553;  d.  in  Sud'bury.  Mass.,  27  Feb.,
1720.  He  studied  at  Harvard,  but  was  not  gradu
ated,  and  after  engaging  in  mercantile  business  in
Boston  was  ordained,  and  became  the  first  minister
of  Danvers,  then  a  part  of  Salem,  Mass.  He  held
this  charge  from  19  Nov.,  1689,  till  June,  1690.
The  Salem  witchcraft  delusion  originated  in  his
family  in  1693.  His  daughter  and  his  niece,  Abi
gail  Williams,  girls  about  twelve  years  of  age,  ac
cused  Tituba,  a  South  American'  slave,  living  in
the  house  as  a  servant,  of  bewitching  them.  Mr.
Parris  beat  Tituba  until  she  was  forced  to  confess
herself  a  witch,  and  John,  her  husband,  became,
through  fear,  the  acciiser  of  others.  The  delusion
spread,  many  were  apprehended,  most  of  whom
were  imprisoned,  and  others  accused,  among  the
latter  being  the  wife  of  Gov.  William  Phips.  Dur
ing  the  sixteen  months'  preValence  of  the  delusion
at  Salem  nineteen  persons  were  hanged,  and  one.
Gyles  Cary,  pressed  to  death.  As  Mr.  Parris  had
been  an  active  prosecutor  in  the  witchcraft  cases,
his  church,  in  April,  1693.  brought  charges  against
him.  He  confessed  his  error,  and  in  1696  was  dis
missed  and  left  the  place.  After  preaching  two  or
three  years  at  Stow,  lie  removed  to  Concord,  and
he  also  preached  six  months  in  Dunstable  in  1711.
See  "  Life  and  Character  of  Rev.  Samuel  Parris.  of
Salem  Village,  and  his  Connection  with  the  Witch
craft  Delusion  of  1692,"  a  sketch  read  before  the
Essex  institute  by  Samuel  Page  Fowler  (1857).

PARRISH,  John,  preacher,  b.  in  Baltimore
county.  Mil.,  7  Nov.,  1729;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Mil.,  21
Oct.,  1807.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Society  of
Friends,  and  followed  Anthony  Benezet  in  plead
ing  the  cause  of  the  African  race.  He  published
"  Remarks  on  the  Slavery  of  the  Black  People  "
(Philadelphia,  1806). — His  nephew,  Joseph,  physi-


PARRISH


659


cian.  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  2  Sept.,  1779 ;  d.  there,
18  March,  1840,  followed  the  business  of  a  hatter
until  he  was  of  age,  when,  yielding  to  his  own  incli
nations,  he  became  a  student  under  Dr.  Caspar  VVis-
tar,  and  was  graduated  at  the  medical  department
of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1805.  He  was
appointed  resident  physician  of  the  yellow-fever
hospital  in  the  autumn  of  that  year,  and  in  1806  one
of  the  physicians  of  the  Philadelphia  dispensary,
which  post  he  held  until  1812.  He  was  also  surgeon
to  the  Philadelphia  almshouse  from  1806  until  1822,
of  the  Pennsylvania  hospital  in  1816-'29,  and  con
sulting  physician  to  the  Philadelphia  dispensary  in
1835-'40.  Dr.  Fairish  achieved  reputation  by  his
scientific  attainments,  which  were  somewhat  un
usual  in  that  time.  Among  his  experiments  were
a  series  that  led  to  a  proof  of  the  harmlessness  of
the  "poplar  worm,"  supposed  at  that  time  to  be
exceedingly  venomous.  In  1807  he  began  the  de
livery  of  a  popular  course  of  lectures  on  chemistry,
which  he  subsequently  repeated  at  various  times.
Notwithstanding  his  large  practice,  he  also  re
ceived  medical  students,  and  at  one  time  had  thirty
under  his  instruction.  Dr.  Parrish  was  associated
in  the  organization  and  subsequent  management  of
the  Wills  hospital  lor  the  lame  and  blind,  and  was
president  of  the  board  of  managers  in  that  institu
tion  from  its  beginning  until  his  death.  He  was
active  in  the  proceedings  of  the  College  of  physi
cians  and  in  the  medical  society  of  Philadelphia.
He  contributed  largely  to  the  medical  journals,
and  was  one  of  the  editors  of  "  The  North  Ameri
can  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal."  His  books  in
clude  "Practical  Observations  on  Strangulated
Hernia  and  some  of  the  Diseases  of  the  Urinary
Organs  "  (Philadelphia,  1836),  and  an  edition  of
William  Lawrence's  "  Treatise  on  Hernia,''  with  an
appendix.  Says  Dr.  George  B.  Wood  in  his  "  Me
moir  of  the  Life  and  Character  of  Joseph  Parrish  "
(Philadelphia,  1840):  "  Perhaps  no  one  was  person
ally  known  more  extensively  in  the  city,  or  had
connected  himself  by  a  greater  variety  of  beneficent
services  with  every  ramification  of  society."—
Joseph's  son,  Isaac',  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  19  March,  1811;  d.  there,  31  July,  1852,  was
graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1832,  alter  studying
under  his  father.  He  became  one  of  the  surgeons
of  Wills  hospital  in  1834,  and  also  acquired  an  ex
tensive  practice.  He  was  active  in  the  Philadelphia
college  of  physicians,  and  in  the  state  and  national
medical  societies,  contributing  papers  to  their
transactions.  Dr.  Parrish  also  wrote  largely  for
the  medical  journals  of  his  time.  See  "  Memoir
of  Isaac  Parrish,  M.  D.,"  by  Dr.  Samuel  Jackson
(Philadelphia,  1853). — Another  son,  Joseph,  phy
sician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  11  Nov.,  1818,  was
graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1844,  and  then  settled
in  Burlington,  N.  J.  He  .returned  to  his  native
city  in  1855,  and  in  1856  was  called  to  fill  the
chair  of  obstetrics  in  Philadelphia  medical  college,
but  soon  resigned  to  go  abroad.  While  he  was  in
Rome  his  attention  was  directed  to  the  imperfect
management  of  the  insane  hospital,  and  by  address
ing  the  pope  he  succeeded  in  rectifying  the  abuse.
On  his  return  in  1857  he  was  appointed  superin
tendent  of  the  Pennsylvania  training-school  for
feeble-minded  children,  and  this  institution,  with
its  buildings,  grew  up  under  his  management.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  ser
vice  of  the  U.  S.  sanitary  commission,  for  which,
under  orders  from  the  president,  he  visited  many
hospitals  and  camps  with  orders  for  supplies  and
hospital  stores.  Dr.  Parrish  also  had  charge  of  the


660


PARRTSII


PARROTT


sanitary  posts  of  White  House  and  City  Point,  and
subsequently  visited  the  governors  of  the  loyal
states,  whom  he  aided  in  the  organization  of  auxil
iary  associations  for  the  continued  supply  of  hos
pital  stores.  When  the  war  was  over  he  established
and  conducted  for  seven  years  the  Pennsylvania
sanitarium  for  the  treatment  of  alcoholic  and
opium  inebriety.  In  1875  he  settled  in  Burlington,
N.  J.,  where  he  has  since  continued  in  charge  of  a
home  for  nervous  invalids.  He  has  been  most
active  in  relation  to  the  care  of  inebriates,  and  in
1872  he  was  summoned  before  the  committee  on
habitual  drunkards  of  the  British  house  of  com
mons.  His  advice  and  recommendations  were  ap
proved  and  adopted  by  the  committee,  and  were
made  the  basis  of  a  law  that  is  now  in  existence.
He  issued  the  first  call  for  the  meeting  that  re
sulted  in  the  formation  of  the  American  association
for  the  cure  of  inebriates,  and  has  since  been  presi
dent  of  that  organization.  Dr.  Parrish  was  vice-
president  of  the  International  congress  on  inebriety
in  England  in  1882,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the
International  medical  congress  in  Washington  in
1887.  He  is  also  a  member  of  scientific  societies
both  at  home  and  abroad.  In  1848  he  established
the  "  New  Jersey  Medical  and  Surgical  Reporter,''
which  is  now  issued  from  Philadelphia  without  the
state  prefix  and  under  new  management.  He  also
edited  "  The  Sanitary  Commission  Bulletin,"  and
has  been  associated  in  the  control  of  other  publica
tions,  such  as  the  Hartford  "  Quarterly  Journal  of
Inebriety."  Dr.  Parrish  is  the  author  of  many
papers  and  addresses  on  topics  pertaining  to  that
branch  of  medical  science,  and  "  Alcoholic  Inebriety
from  a  Medical  Standpoint "  (Philadelphia,  1883).
— Another  son,  Edward,  pharmacist,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  31  May,  1822  ;  d.  in  Fort  Sill,  Indian
territory,  9  Sept.,  1872,  studied  at  a  Friends'
school,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Philadelphia  col
lege  of  pharmacy  in  1842.  He  then  purchased  a
drug-store,  and  engaged  in  the  active  practice  of
his  profession.  In  1849  he  established  a  school  of
practical  pharmacy.  He  was  elected  to  member
ship  in  the  College  of  pharmacy  in  1843,  in  1845  a
trustee,  and  in  1854  secretary  of  the  college.  lie
was  chosen  to  the  professorship  of  materia  medica
in  1804,  and  in  1867  exchanged  his  chair  with  Prof.
John  M.  Maisch  (q.  r.),  taking  that  of  practical
pharmacy,  on  which  branch  he  continued  to  lecture
until  his  death.  Prof.  Parrish  was  active  in  the
movement  that  led  to  the  founding  of  Swarthmore
college,  and  was  its  first  president  in  1868-'70.  In
August,  1872,  he  was  appointed  commissioner  to
the  Indians  with  a  view  toward  establishing  peace,
but  he  was  attacked  by  malarial  fever  and  died.
He  was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  revision  of
the  U.  S.  pharmacopoeia  in  1850  and  1860.  Prof.
Parrish  joined  the  American  pharmaceutical  asso
ciation  at  its  first  meeting  in  1852,  and  fdled  vari
ous  olh'ccs,  including  that  of  president  in  1868.  He
was  also  a  member  of  other  societies,  and  was
elected  to  honorary  membership  in  associations  in
Great  Britain.  His  contributions  to  the  "Ameri
can  Journal  of  Pharmacy  "  are  more  than  forty  in
number.  He  published  "An  Introduction  to  Prac
tical  Pharmacy"  (Philadelphia,  1856),  which  has
since  passed  through  five  editions  ;  "  The  Phantom
Bouquet,  a  Popular  Treatise  on  the  Art  of  Skele
tonizing  Leaves  and  Seed  Vessels,  and  adapting
them  to  Embellish  the  Home  of  Taste "  (1863) :
and  "An  Essay  on  Education"  (1866). — The  first
Joseph's  grandson,  Stephen,  artist,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  9  July,  1846,  was  engaged  in  mercantile  pur
suits  until  his  thirtieth  year,  when  he  applied  him
self  to  art,  taking  a  year's  tuition  from  a  local


;  teacher.  In  1878  he  first  exhibited  at  the  Pennsyl
vania  academy  in  Philadelphia,  and  in  1879  at  the
National  academy,  New  York.  He  soon  turned  his
attention  also  to  etching,  and  in  December,  1879,
produced  his  first  plate.  Since  then  he  has  applied
himself  to  both  branches  of  art,  exhibiting  in  New
York,  Boston,  Philadelphia.  London,  Liverpool,
Paris,  Munich,  Dresden,  and  Vienna.  lie  is  a
member  of  the  New  York  etching  club  and  the
Society  of  painter-etchers  of  London.  In  1885-'6
he  travelled  in  Europe.  His  etchings  include
"Northern  Moorland"  and  "Low  Tide — Bay  of
Fundy"  (1882);  "('oast  of  New  Brunswick,"
"  Winter  Evening — Windsor.  N.  S.,"  and  "  Bethle
hem  "  (1884);  "London  Bridge"  and  "On  the
Thames"  (1886);  and  "A  Gloucestar  Wharf"
(1887).  Among  his  paintings  are  "  November "
(1880);  "In  Winter  Quarters  "  (1884);  "  Low  Tide
— Evening"  (1885);  "On  the  Ranee,  Brittany"
(188(5);  and  "The  Road  to  Perry's  Peak."  He
has  also  made  etchings  of  several  of  his  pictures.

PARROTT,  Enoch  Grcenleaf,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Portsmouth.  N.  11..  10  Dec.,  1814:  d.  in  New
York  city.  10  May,  1879.  lie  entered  the  U.  S.
navy  as  a  midshipman  in  1831.  became  lieutenant
in  1841,  and  was  engaged  under  Com.  Matthew  C.
Perry  against  Bendy  and  the  neighboring  towns
on  the  west  coast  of  Africa  in  1843.  He  served  on
the  "Congress"  during  the  war  with  Mexico,  and
was  on  JohnC.  Fremont's  expedition  from  Monterey
to  Los  Angeles,  and  at  the  capture  of  Guay mas  and
Mazatlan.  lie  was  commissioned  commander  in
18(51,  was  with  the  expedition  that  destroyed  the
Norfolk  navy-yard,  and  in  the  brig  "  Perry  "  cap
tured  the  Confederate  privateer  "  Savannah,"  for
which  he  received  the  commendation  of  the  navy
department.  He  commanded  the  "Augusta"  in
1861-'3.  participated  in  the  battle  of  Port  Royal,
engaged  the  Confederate  rams  at  the  time  of  their
sortie  from  Charleston,  and  commanded  the  "Ca-
nonicus,"  of  the  North  Atlantic  squadron,  in  the
engagements  with  the  iron-dads  on  James  river  in
1864,  and  in  the  fights  with  Howett's  battery.  He
commanded  the  "  Monadnock  "  in  the  attacks  on
Fort  Fisher  in  December,  1864,  and  January,  1865,
and  was  at  the  surrender  of  Charleston,  S.  C.  He
was  commissioned  captain  in  1866,  commodore  in
1870,  rear-admiral  in  1873,  and  was  retired  in  1874.

PARROTT,  John  Francis,  senator,  b.  in  Green
land,  N.  II.,  in  1768;  d.  there,  9  July,  1836.  lie
received  a  public-school  education,  was  in  the  legis
lature  in  1811-'12,  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo
crat  in  1816,  serving  one  term,  and  was  a  member
of  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1819-'25.

PARROTT,  Robert  Parker,  inventor,  b.  in
Lee,  N.  H.,  5  Oct.,  1804;  d.  in  Cold  Spring,  N.  Y.,
24  Dec.,  1877.  Pie  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1824,  assigned  to  the  artillery,
and  till  1829  was  on  duty  at  West  Point  as  assist
ant  professor  of  natural  and  experimental  philoso
phy  in  1824-'6.  and  of  mathematics  till  1828,  and
then  as  principal  assistant  in  the  former  subjects.
He  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant,  27  Aug.,  1831,
and  served  in  garrison  till  1834,  then  on  ordnance
duty  till  1835,  and  on  the  staff  during  operations
in  the  Creek  nation  in  1836.  On  13  Jan.,  1836,  he
was  made  captain  of  ordnance,  and  assigned  to
duty  in  the  ordnance  bureau  at  Washington,  but
on  31  Oct.  of  that  year  he  resigned  his  commission
and  became  superintendent  of  the  West  Point  iron
and  cannon  foundry  at  C'old  Spring,  Putnam  co.,
N.  Y.  While  in  charge  of  this  institution  he  de
vised  and  perfected,  by  long  and  costly  experi
ments,  the  system  of  rifled  cannon  and  projectiles
that  is  known  by  his  name.  These  were  used  ex-


PARRY


P  ARSE  V  A  L-DESC  HEXES


661


tensively  by  the  U.  S.  government  during  the  civil
war.  and  were  first  put  to  the  test  of  actual  warfare
at  Bull  Run.  Parrott's  guns  are  of  cast-iron,  and
in  the  larger  calibres  are  hollow-cast  on  the  plan
invented  by  Gen.  Thomas  J.  Rodman,  and  cooled
from  the  inside,  as  in  his  method,  by  a  stream  of
cold  water  running  through  the  bore.  They  are
strengthened  by  shrinking  a  hoop  or  barrel  of
wrought-iron  over  that  part  of  the  re-enforce  that
surrounds  the  charge.  Some  Parrott  guns  have
shown  wonderful  .endurance.  During  Gilmore's
operations  against  Charleston  a  thirty-pounder  on
Cumming's  point  was  fired  4,60(5  times  before
bursting.  Others  have  burst,  owing  probably  to
the  wedging  of  the  projectile  in  the  bore.  During
the  war  Capt.  Parrott  refused  to  enrich  himself
by  charging  the  government,  an  extravagant  price
for  his  guns,  and  at  its  close  he  voluntarily  can
celled  a  large  contract  that  had  recently  been
awarded  him.  From  1844  till  1847  he  served  as
first  judge  of  the  Putnam  county  court  of  common
pleas.  His  connection  with  the  West  Point  foun
dry  lasted  till  1807,  after  which  he  was  president
or  director  of  various  industrial  enterprises.

PARRY,  Caleb,  soldier,  b.  in  Pennsylvania
about  1733 ;  d.  on  Long  Island,  X.  Y.,  27  Aug.,  1776.
He  was  one  of  the  first  to  take  up  arms  in  the
cause  of  independence,  assisted  in  raising  Col.  At-
lee's  "  musketry  battalion,"  was  commissioned  lieu
tenant-colonel.  3  March.  1776,  and  with  his  troops
took  part  in  the  battle  of  Long  Island,  in  the  midst
of  which,  while  he  was  cheering  on  his  men.  he  met
instant  death.  In  consideration  of  his  services,  his
widow  and  children  received  from  Pennsylvania
2,000  acres  in  Westmoreland  county.  Pa.

PARRY,  Thomas,  colonial  Anglican  bishop, b. in
Denbighshire,  England,  in  1795;  d.  in  London,  16
March,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Oxford,  held  a
fellowship  in  Baliol  college,  and  was  subsequently
the  incumbent  of  St.  Leonard's,  Colchester,  till
1824,  when  he  became  archdeacon  of  Antigua,  W.  I.
He  was  appointed  bishop  of  Barbadoes  in  1842.
He  published  "  A  Practical  Exposition  of  St.  Paul's
Epistle  to  the  Romans "  (London.  1832);  "Paro
chial  Sermons  in  the  West  Indies  "  (1837) ;  "  Three
Charges  to  the  Clergy  of  Barbadoes"  (1843-'6);
and  "  Sermons  on  Ordination  Vows"  (1846;  with
additions,  1857).  His  wife  is  the  author  of  "  Young
Christians'  Sunday  Evenings"  (London,  1838-'57),
and  othf-r  popular  religious  works  for  the  young.

PARRY.  Sir  William  Edward,  British  navi
gator,  b.  in  Bath.  England,  19  Dec.,  1790;  d.  in
Ems.  Germany.  8  July,  1855.  He  entered  the  navy
in  1803,  became  lieutenant  in  1810,  served  on  the
North  America  station  in  1812-'17,  and  then  joined
Capt.  John  Ross's  arctic  expedition  as  commander
of  the  "  Alexander."  They  left  England  in  April,
1818,  and  proceeded  to  Lancaster  sound,  which
they  navigated  for  about  sixty  miles,  when  Ross,
imagining  that  the  way  was  closed  before  them  by
a  range  of  mountains,  gave  orders  to  return,  al
though  Parry  insisted  that  the  mountains  were
an  optical  delusion.  In  the  spring  of  1819. he  was
appointed  to  the  command  of  an  expedition  that
consisted  of  the  "  Hecla  "  and  the  "  Griper,"  and,
reaching  Lancaster  sound  on  13  July,  sailed  through
it.  He  explored  and  named  Barrow  strait.  Prince
Regent  inlet,  and  Wellington  channel,  and  enter
ing  what  has  since  been  called  Parry  or  Melville
sound  on  4  Sept..  reached  longitude  110°  west,
thereby  earning  a  reward  of  £5,000  that  was  offered
by  parliament  to  the  first  ship's  company  that
should  attain  that  meridian.  After  being  frozen
in  for  ten  months,  the  ships  were  released  on  10
Aug.,  1820,  but  the  ice  prevented  farther  progress


westward,  and  Parry  returned  to  England.  On  his
arrival  he  was  commissioned  commander,  and
elected  a  member  of  the  Royal  society,  and  the  nar
rative  of  his  adventures  was  published  by  the
admiralty.  He  sailed  on  another  arctic  expedition
in  May,  1821,  and  was  twice  frozen  in  for  several
months,  but  made  many  explorations  and  dis
coveries  by  sea  and  land.  He  became  captain  on
8  Xov.  of  that  year,  and  in  1823  was  appointed
acting  hydrographer  to  the  admiralty.  He  again
set  out  with  the  "  Hecla  "  and  the  '•  Fury  "  in  May,
1824,  but  was  obliged  to  abandon  one  of  his  vessels,
and  returned  to  England,  having  accomplished
little  or  nothing.  He  set  sail  for  Spitzbergen  in
the  "Hecla,"  27  March,  1827,  left  the  vessel  in
harbor  with  part  of  the  crew,  and  with  the  remain
der  and  Lieut.  James  C.  Ross  started  for  the  pole
in  two  boats  that  could  be  used  also  as  sledges.
The  party  sailed  for  eighty  miles  through  an  open
sea,  then  reached  a  surface  that  was  half  covered
with  water,  on  which  walking  and  sailing  were
equally  difficult,  and  with  great  labor  reached  lati
tude  82°  45'  north,  which  was  the  nearest  point  to
the  pole  that  up  to  that  time  had  been  attained  by
any  explorer.  At  the  end  of  September  they  ar
rived  in  England,  and  Parry  resumed  his  duties  as
hydrographer  to  the  admiralty.  In  1829  he  was
knighted  and  received  the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.  from
Oxford.  He  occupied  many  posts  of  trust  and
honor  until  his  retirement  in  1846.  He  became
admiral  of  the  White  in  1852,  and  the  next  year
was  made  lieutenant-governor  of  Greenwich  hospi
tal.  He  published  "  Arctic  Voyages "  (7  vols.,
1821-'7:  abridged  ed.,  Xew  York,  1841);  "The
Parental  Character  of  God  "  (1842) ;  "  Xautical  As
tronomy  ";  and  a  "  Lecture  on  Seamen."  See  his
life  by  his  son,  Rev.  Edward  Parry  (London,  1857).

PARSCHALL,  Nathaniel,  editor,  b.  in  Knox-
ville,  Tenn.,  4  April.  1804;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo..  13
Dec..  1866.  He  was  early  left  an  orphan,  and  en
tered  a  printing-office.  About  1814  he  went  to
St.  Louis  and  was  apprenticed  to  Joseph  Charless,
of  the  "  Missouri  Gazette."  He  became  part  pro
prietor  and  editor  of  the  "  Missouri  Republican  "
with  Edward  Charless  in  1827.  and  continued  so
for  ten  years,  when  he  engaged  in  business  that
was  connected  with  the  transfer  of  lands.  This
was  unsuccessful,  and  in  1840  he  established  the
"  Xew  Era,"  and  for  a  time  was  also  clerk  of  the
probate  court  of  St.  Louis.  In  1843  he  returned
to  the  "  Republican  "  as  co-editor,  becoming  later
editor-in-chief,  which  place  he  held  until  his  death.
The  paper,  which  was  conspicuous  for  its  ability,
advocated  slavery  and  opposed  the  principles  of
the  Republican  party.

PARSE  VAL-DESCHENES,  Alexander  Fer
dinand  (par-seh-val-day-shain),  French  sailor,  b.
in  Paris.  France,  27  Xov.,  1790;  d.  there.  10  June,
1860.  He  followed  his  relative,  Admiral  Latouche-
Treville,  to  Toulon  in  1804,  and  embarked  as  a
volunteer  on  board  the  "  Bucentaure."  He  took
part  in  the  capture  of  Fort  Le  Diamant  in  Mar
tinique,  and  on  his  return  to  Europe  rose  rapidly  in
the  service.  He  was  employed  in  a  dydrographic
survey  of  Brittany  in  1815,  and  in  1817  as  com
mander  of  the  "  Sauterelle,"  which  formed  part  of
the  expedition  that  was  sent  to  resume  possession
of  French  Guiana.  He  had  charge  of  the  local
station  of  this  colony  for  two  years.  His  success
in  floating  the  frigate  "L'Africaine."  which  was
stranded  on  the  coast  of  Xewfoundland,  gained
him  the  cross  of  chevalier  of  the  Legion  of  honor
in  1822.  From  1827  till  1839  he  commanded  vari
ous  vessels,  and  took  part  in  1838  in  {he  operations
against  Vera  Cruz  and  the  capture  of  San  Juan


662


PARSONS


d'Ulua,  and  next  year  in  the  occupation  of  the
island  of  Martin-Garcia  in  the  Argentine  Republic.
After  his  return  from  these  expeditions  he  was
made  rear-admiral  in  1840  and  vice-admiral  in
1846.  In  1854  he  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the
third  squadron  for  operations  in  the  Baltic,  dis
played  great  talents  for  organization,  and  in  De
cember  was  promoted  admiral.

PARSONS,  Anson  Virgil,  jurist,  b.  in  Gran-
ville,  Mass.,  in  1799;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  23
Sept.,  1882.  Pie  studied  law  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,
under  James  Gould,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1826,  and  settled  in  Harrisburg,  Pa,,  where  he  prac
tised  until  his  appointment  in  1840  as  president
judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  of  the  Dau
phin  judicial  district.  In  1842  he  became  secre
tary  of  the  commonwealth.  He  returned  to  the
bench  as  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  of
Philadelphia  in  1843.  During  this  service  the  fire
men's  riots  occurred,  and  as  Judge  Parsons,  by  his
rigorous  dealing  with  the  cases  before  him,  in
curred  the  enmity  of  the  lawless  element,  his  life
was  frequently  threatened.  He  resumed  practice
in  1851,  when  the  judiciary  became  elective.  With
Judge  Edward  King,  he  published  "  Select  Cases
in  Equity  "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1851-'3).

PARSONS,  Charles,  artist,  b.  in  Rowland's
Castle,  Hampshire,  England,  8  May,  1821.  He
came  to  this  country  at  an  early  age.  and  was  edu
cated  in  the  common  schools  of  New  York  city.
Later  he  learned  the  art  of  lithography,  and  be
came  a  skilful  illustrator.  Since  1861  Mr.  Par
sons  has  been  at  the  head  of  the  art  department
of  Harper  and  Brothers.  His  leisure  hours,  at
long  intervals,  have  been  devoted  to  the  painter's
art,  in  landscape  and  marine  views,  and  in  oil  and
water-colors.  He  belongs  to  the  New  York  water-
color  society,  and  is  an  associate  of  the  National
academy  of  design,  and  frequently  sends  pictures
to  their  annual  exhibitions.  Among  his  recent
paintings  are  "  An  Old  Orchard,  Long  Island "
(1844)  and  "  Amagansett,  L.  I."  (1887).

PARSONS,  Charles  Carroll,  soldier,  b.  in
Elyria,  Ohio,  in  1838 ;  d.  in  Memphis,  Tenn.,  7
Sept.,  1878.  His  father  died  when  the  son  was  an
infant,  and  he  was  brought  up  in  the  family  of  his
maternal  uncle,  a  physician  in  Elyria.  He  was
appointed  to  the  U.  S.  military  academy  by  his
cousin,  Judge  Philemon  Bliss,  then  member  of
congress  from  Ohio,  and  graduated  in  1861,  being
promoted  at  once  to  1st  lieutenant  in  the  4th  artil
lery.  He  served  in  West  Virginia,  and  then  with
the  Army  of  the  Ohio  in  Tennessee  and  Kentucky,
commanding  a  battery  after  July,  1862,  and  cover
ing  the  retreat  to  Louisville  in  September.  He
was  bre vetted  captain  for  gallantry  at  Perry ville
and  major  for  Stone  River.  From  January  till
March,  1863,  he  was  on  sick  leave,  and,  being  un
able  to  return  to  the  field,  was  assistant  professor
of  ethics  and  English  at  West  Point  till  September,
1864,  after  which  he  again  commanded  a  battery
till  the  close  of  the  war.  "  Parsons's  battery  "  was
noted  in  both  the  National  and  Confederate  armies,
and  many  stories  are  told  of  his  courage  and  dar
ing.  At  Perryville.  where  his  battery  was  tempo
rarily  served  by  partially  drilled  infantrymen,
forty  of  his  men  were  killed  by  a  furious  charge
of  the  enemy,  and  the  rest  driven  back,  but  Par
sons  remained  with  his  guns  until  he  was  dragged
from  them  by  a  huge  cavalryman  by  order  of
Gen.  McCook.  At  Stone  River  he  repelled  six
charges,  much  of  the  time  under  musketry  fire,
and  he  was  often  mentioned  in  the  official  reports.
After  the  war  he  was  on  frontier  duty,  and  in  1867
was  chief  of  artillery  in  Gen.  Winfield  S.  Hancock's


PARSONS

Indian  expedition.  He  returned  to  duty  at  West
Point  as  professor  in  1868.  and  remained  there  till
30  Dec.,  1870,  when  he  was  honorably  discharged
at  his  own  request,  and  in  1871  he  took  orders  in
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  He  held  charges
in  Memphis,  Tenn.,  Cold  Spring,  N.  Y.,  and  llo-
boken,  N.  J.,  and  then  again  in  Memphis,  till  his
death,  which  took  place  during  the  yellow-fever
epidemic  of  1878,  after  he  had  worked  untiringly
for  two  months  among  the  victims  of  the  disease,
both  as  clergyman  and  as  nurse.

PARSONS,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Amherst,
N.  H.,  28  Jan.,  1749;  d.  in  Wethersfield,  Conn.,  18
May,  1823.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1771,
and  licensed  to  preach,  and  was  pastor  t)f  the  Con
gregational  church  in  Amherst,  N.  II.,  from  1782
till  181U,  declining  the  chair  of  divinity  in  Yale  in
1795.  Brown  gave  him  the  degree  of  I).  I),  in  1800.
He  was  an  accomplished  scholar,  and  successfully
prepared  students  for  college.  He  gave  the  land
on  which  Amherst  is  built,  and  largely  contributed
to  the  establishment  of  that  institution.  He  pub
lished  the  "Annual  Election  Sermon  "  before  the
Massachusetts  legislature  (1788)  and  an  "  Ordina
tion  Sermon  "  (1795).

PARSONS,  Henry  Belts,  chemist,  b.  in  Sivas,
Asia  Minor,  20  Nov.,  1855 ;  d.  in  Tucson,  Ariz.,  21
Aug.,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at  the  school  of
pharmacy  of  the  University  of  Michigan  in  1876,
and  for  two  years  had  charge  of  the  pharmaceutical
laboratories  there,  also  delivering  lectures.  In  1878
he  became  special  assistant  in  the  chemical  divis
ion  of  the  department  of  agriculture  in  Washing
ton,  and  was  professor  of  materia  medica  and
botany  in  the  National  college  of  pharmacy.  These
appointments  he  resigned  in  1881  to  accept  the
post  of  chemist-in-chief  of  a  large  drug  firm  in
New  York  city,  whose  laboratory  was  built  and
equipped  under  his  supervision.  Failing  health
led  to  his  resignation  from  this  place  in  1884,  and
he  was  then  editor  of  the  "Druggist's  Circular"
until  his  death.  He  was  a  trustee  of  the  New  York
college  of  pharmacy,  and  a  member  of  the  com
mittee  of  revision  in  1880  of  the  "  U.  S.  Pharma
copoeia."  His  published  papers  are  numerous,
and  include  analyses  of  various  plants,  reports  on
sorghum,  with  thousands  of  analyses,  exhaustive
communications  on  berberina,  opium,  quinine,  ni
trous  ether,  the  oleates,  and  similar  topics.  His
"Method  for  the  Proximate  Analysis  of  Plants"
was  published  in  the  chief  chemical  journals  of  the
world,  and  universally  adopted,  appearing  in  all  the
text-books  on  the  subject.

PARSONS,  Jonathan,  clergyman,  b.  in  Spring
field,  Mass.,  30  Nov.,  1705;  d.  in  Newburyport,
Mass.,  19  July,  1776.  He  worked  at  a  trade  for
several  years,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1729.  and
was  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  Lyme,
Conn.,  in  1731-'45.  In  1731  he  married  Phoebe,
sister  of  Gov.  Matthew  Griswold.  At  the  time  of
his  ordination  Mr.  Parsons  was  an  Arminian,  but
about  1740  he  adopted  the  views  of  George  White-
field,  held  revival  meetings,  and  went  on  a  preach
ing  tour,  which  so  scandalized  a  part  of  his  con
gregation  that,  when  he  offered  to  resign,  his
proposition  was  almost  unanimously  accepted,
although  150  persons  had  been  added  to  his  church
in  one  year.  He  then  became  pastor  of  the  newly
organized  church  in  Newburyport,  in  which  he
continued  until  his  death.  Whitefield  died  in  his
house,  and  Mr.  Parsons  preached  his  funeral  ser
mon.  He  was  a  man  of  strong  intellect  and
accurate  scholarship,  although  of  violent  passions.
His  publications  include  numerous  letters  in
Prince's  "Christian  History"  and  "Lectures  on


PARSONS


PARSONS


663


'Justification"  (Boston,  1748):  "Good  News  from
a  Far  Country,"  said  to  have  been  the  first  book
printed  in  New  Hampshire  (Portsmouth,  N.  H.,
175(5);  a  "Funeral  Sermon  on  the  Death  of  Mr.
Ebenezer  Little  "  (Salem,  Mass.,  1768):  "Freedom
from  Ecclesiastical  and  Civil  Slavery  the  Purchase
of  Christ"  (Newburyport,  1774):  and  "Sixty  Ser
mons,"  to  which  is  affixed  his  funeral  sermon  by
Rev.  John  Searle  (2  vols.,  1779). — His  son.  Samuel
Holden,  soldier,  b.  in  Lyme,  Conn..  14  May.  1737;
drowned  in  Big  Beaver  river,  in  either  Pennsylva
nia  or  Ohio.  17  Nov.,  1789,  was  graduated  at  Har
vard  in  1750,  studied  law  under  his  uncle,  Gov.
Matthew  Griswold,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1759,  and  settled  in  Lyme,  Conn.  He  was  in  the
state  assembly  for  eighteen  consecutive  sessions,
and  among  other  important  services  settled  the
boundary  of  the  Connecticut  claims  on  the  border
of  Pennsylvania.  He  was  one  of  the  standing
committee  of  inquiry  with  the  sister  colonies  in
1773.  and  originated  the  plan  of  forming  the  first
congress,  which  subsequently  met  in  New  York
city,  and  was  the  forerunner  of  the  Continental
congress.  He  was  appointed  king's  attorney  the
same  year,  removed  to  New  London,  Conn.,  and
was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  correspondence.
Since  1770  he  had  been  major  of  the  14th  militia
regiment,  and  on  26  April,  1775,  he  was  appointed
colonel  of  the  6th  regiment,  stationed  at  Roxbury,
Mass.,  until  the  British  evacuated  Boston,  and  then
ordered  to  New  York.  While  on  a  journey  to
Hartford  he  met  Benedict  Arnold,  who  was  on  his
way  to  Massachusetts,  and  obtained  from  him  an
account  of  the  condition  of  Ticonderoga  and  the
number  of  its  cannon.  Taking  as  his  advisers
Samuel  Wyllys,  Silas  Deane.  and  three  others,  on
27  April.  1775,  Parsons  projected  a  plan  to  capture
the  fort,  and,  without  formally  consulting  the
assembly,  the  governor,  or  the  council,  obtained
money  'from  the  public  treasury  with  his  com
panions  on  his  own  receipt.  An  express  messenger
was  sent  to  Gen.  Ethan  Allen  (q.  r.)  disclosing  the
plan,  and  urging  him  to  raise  a  force  in  the  New
Hampshire  grants.  Allen  met  the  Connecticut
party  at  Bennington,  Vt.,  and  took  command.  It
had  been  re-enforced  by  volunteers  from  Berkshire,
Mass.,  and  subsequently  captured  the  fortress.
The  fifty  British  soldiers  that  were  taken  prisoners
were  sent  to  Connecticut  in  recognition  of  Parsons's
services.  He  participated  in  the  battle  of  Long
Island  in  August,  1776,  was  commissioned  briga
dier-general  the  same  month,  served  at  Harlem
Heights  and  White  Plains,  and  subsequently  was
stationed  at  Peekskill.  N.  Y.,  to  protect  the  im
portant  posts  on  North  river.  He  planned  the  ex
pedition  to  Sag  Harbor,  and  re-enforced  Washing
ton  in  New  Jersey.  He  was  in  command  of  the
troops  that  were  stationed  at  the  New  York  High
lands  in  1778-'9,  and  in  charge  of  the  construction
of  the  fortifications  at  West  Point.  In  July  of  the
latter  year  he  attacked  the  British  at  Norwalk,
Conn.,  and.  although  his  force  was  too  weak  to  pre
vent  the  destruction  of  the  fort,  he  harassed  the
enemy  until  they  retired  for  re-enforcements,  and
finally  were  compelled  to  abandon  the  attempt  to
penetrate  the  state  any  farther.  He  was  one  of
the  board  that  tried  Maj.  John  Andre.  Gen.  Par
sons  was  commissioned  major-general  in  1780,  and
succeeded  Gen.  Israel  Putnam  in  command  of  the
Connecticut  line,  serving  until  the  close  of  the  war.
He  then  resumed  the  practice  of  law  in  Middle-
town,  Conn.,  was  appointed  by  congress  a  commis
sioner  to  treat  with  the  Miami  Indians  in  1785.
and  was  an  active  member  of  the  State  constitu
tional  convention  in  1778,  and  the  same  year  was


appointed  by  Washington  the  first  judge  of  the
Northwest  territory.  He  removed  to  the  west,
settled  near  Marietta,  Ohio,  and  in  1789  was  ap
pointed  by  the  state  of  Connecticut  a  commissioner
to  treat  with  the  Wyandottes  and  other  Indian
tribes  on  Lake  Erie,  for  the  purpose  of  extinguish
ing  the  aboriginal  title  to  the  Connecticut  western
reserve.  On  his  return  to  his  home  from  this
service  his  boat  overturned  in  descending  the
rapids  of  Big  Beaver  river,  and  he  was  drowned.
It  has  recently  been  discovered,  in  a  letter  that  is
preserved  in  the  manuscript  volume  of  Sir  Henry
Clinton's  original  record  of  daily  intelligence,  now
in  the  library  of  Dr.  Thomas  Addis  Emmet,  of  New
York  city,  that  Gen.  Parsons  was  in  secret  com
munication  with  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  and  that  one
William  Heron,  a  representative  from  Fairfield  in
the  Connecticut  legislature,  was  the  intermediary
to  whom  Parsons  wrote  letters  which,  with  the
knowledge  of  their  author,  were  sent  to  the  enemy's
headquarters.  Under  date  of  8  July,  1781,  he  wrote:
••  The  five  regiments  of  our  states  are  more  than
1.200  men  deficient  of  their  complement ;  the  other
states  (except  Rhode  Island  and  New  York,  who
are  fuller)  are  nearly  in  the  same  condition.  Our
magazines  are  few  in  number.  Your  fears  for  them
are  groundless.  They  are  principally  at  West
Point,  Fishkill,  Wapping  Creek,  and  Newburg,
which  puts  them  out  of  the  enemy's  power,  except
they  attempt  their  destruction  by  a  force  sufficient
to  secure  the  Highlands,  which  they  cannot  do,
our  guards  being  sufficient  to  secure  them  from
small  parties.  The  French  troops  yesterday  en
camped  on  our  left,  near  the  Tuckeyhoe  road.
Their  number  I  have  not  had  the  opportunity  to
ascertain.  Other  matters  of  information  I  shall
be  able  to  give  you  in  a  few  days."  This  letter  was
sent  by  Heron  to  Maj.  Oliver  be  Lancey,  to  whom
Heron  wrote  that  he  had  concerted  measures  with
Parsons  by  which  he  would  receive  every  material
article  of  intelligence  from  the  American  camp.
Parsons's  treason  is  also  corroborated  by  Revolu
tionary  papers  of  Maj.  John  Kissam.  of  the  British
army.  Gen.  Parsons  published  a  valuable  and  in
teresting  paper  on  the  "  Antiquities  of  Western
States,"  in  the  2d  volume  of  the  "Transactions"
of  the  American  academy,  and  left  a  manuscript
history  of  the  Tully  family  in  Saybrook,  including
an  account  of  their  first  settlement  in  America
(Boston,  1845). — Samuel  Holden's  son,  Enoch,
financier,  b.  in  Lyme,  Conn.,  5  Nov.,  1769;  d.  in
Middletown,  Conn.,  9  July.  1846,  received  a  mercan
tile  education,  and  became  a  noted  accountant.
He  was  appointed  by  Gen.  Arthur  St.  Clair  register
and  first  clerk  of  the  first  probate  office  in  Wash
ington  county,  Ohio,  in  1789,  hut  returned  to  Con
necticut  the  next  year.  and.  settling  in  Middletown,
was  high  sheriff  of  Middlesex  county  for  twenty-
eight  years.  In  1817  he  was  appointed  by  Gov.
Oliver  Wolcott  to  arrange  for  an  adjustment  of  the
Revolutionary  claims  of  Connecticut  with  the  V.  S.
government.  "  For  many  years  he  was  president  of
the  Middlesex  national  bank.

PARSONS.  Levi.  jurist,  b.  in  Kingsboro,  N.  Y..
1  July,  1822 :  d.  in  New  York  city,  23  Oct.,  1887.
He  was  educated  at  Kingsboro  academy,  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  practised  in  Little  Falls,  N.  Y.  He
emigrated  to  California  in  1849.  settled  in  San
Francisco,  and  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the
Whig  party  in  that  city.  He  was  elected  judge  of
the  San  Francisco  district  in  1850,  subsequently
engaged  in  business,  and  built  the  Missouri.  Kan
sas,  and  Texas  railroad,  of  which  he  became  the
first  president.  He  retired  from  public  life  in  1866,
and  spent  his  subsequent  years  in  travel  and  in


664


PARSONS


PARSONS


New  York  city.  In  1880  he  endowed  the  public
library  of  Gloversville,  N.  Y.,  with  $6,800,  and
$1,000  worth  of  books  and  engravings,  and  subse
quently  he  gave  Union  college  $50,000  for  the  sup
port  of  students  from  Fulton  and  Montgomery
counties.  Union  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in
1881.  See  "Memorial  Address,"  by  Rev.  William
E.  Park  (Gloversville,  N.  Y.,  1888).

PARSONS,  Lewis  Baldwin,  benefactor,  b.  in
Williamstown,  Mass.,  30  April,  1798;  d.  in  Detroit,
Mich.,  21  Dec.,  1855.  He  accumulated  a  large
fortune  in  business  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  and  was  a
generous  contributor  to  benevolent  and  educational
enterprises.  By  the  terms  of  his  will  he  bequeathed
funds  to  found  Parsons  college,  a  co-educational
institution  in  Fairfield,  Iowa,  under  the  care  of  the
Presbyterian  church.— His  son,  Lewis  Baldwin,
soldier,  b.  in  Genesee  county,  N.  Y.,  5  April,  1818,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1840,  studied  law  at  Har
vard,  and  settled  in  Alton,  111.,  where  he  was  city
attorney  for  several  years.  He  removed  to  St.
Louis,  Mo.,  in  1853,  and  became  president  and
treasurer  of  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  railroad.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  one  of  a  com
mission  to  examine  into  the  administration  of  Gen.
John  C.  Fremont  in  Missouri.  He  became  colonel
of  volunteers,  and  was  assigned  to  the  staff  of  Gen.
Henry  W.  Halleck  in  18(52,  with  the  charge  of  rail
and  river  transportation  in  his  department,  which
was  subsequently  extended  to  cover  the  entire
country  west  of  the  Alleghanies.  In  1864  he  was
placed  in  charge  of  all  railroad  and  river  army
transportation  in  the  United  States.  In  January,
1865,  by  order  of  the  secretary  of  war.  he  personal
ly  supervised  the  transfer  of  Gen.  John  M.  Scho-
field's  army  of  20,000  men  from  Mississippi  to
Washington,  D.  C.,  a  distance  of  1,400  miles,  in  an
average  time  of  eleven  days.  For  this  service  he
was  promoted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  11
May,  1865.  In  April,  1866,  he  was  brevetted  ma
jor-general  of  volunteers.

PARSONS,  Mosby  Monroe,  soldier,  b.  in  Vir
ginia  in  1819;  d.  in  Cainargo,  Mexico,  17  Aug.,
i860.  He  removed  to  Cole  county,  Mo.,  early  in
life,  practised  law,  was  attorney-general  of  Mis
souri  in  1853-'7,  and  subsequently  became  a  mem
ber  of  the  state  senate.  He  was  a  captain  in  the
U.  S.  army  during  the  Mexican  war,  and  received
honorable  mention  for  his  service  at  Sacramento.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  acted  in  con
cert  with  Gov.  Claiborne  F.  Jackson  in  his  endeavor
to  draw  Missouri  into  the  Confederacy,  was  active
in  organizing  the  state  militia,  and  raised  a
mounted  brigade  which  he  commanded  at  Car
thage,  Springfield,  and  Pea  Ridge,  with  the  rank  of
brigadier-general,  subsequently  serving  under  Gen.
Sterling  Price  until  the  last  invasion  of  Missouri
in  1864.  The  next  year  he  went  to  Mexico,  joined
the  Republican  forces,  and  was  killed  in  an  engage
ment  with  the  imperialists.

PARSONS,  Theophilns,  jurist,  b.  in  Byfield,
Essex  co.,  Mass.,  24  Feb..  1750  :  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
30  Oct.,  1813.  His  father,  Moses,  was  a  Congrega
tional  clergyman  and  pastor  of  the  church  in  By-
field  for  more  than  forty  years.  Theophilus  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1769,  and  admitted  to
the  bar  of  Falmouth,  Mass,  (now  Portland.  Me.),
in  1774,  but  his  career  was  interrupted  by  the
almost  total  destruction  of  that  town  by  the  British
the  next  year,  and  he  returned  to  Byfield,  where  he
received  the  assistance  and  instruction  of  Judge
Edmund  Trowbridge,  and  laid  the  foundation  of
his  vast  legal  learning.  Settling  in  Newburyport,
Mass.,  he  acquired  a  lucrative  practice,  which
gradually  embraced  all  the  New  England  states.


He  possessed  much  influence  as  a  Federalist  leader
and  filled  a  number  of  important  public  posts.
In  1778  he  formed  one  of  the  "  Essex  Junto,"  a
body  of  citizens  of  Essex  county  who  opposed  the
adoption  of  the  state  constitution  that  had  been
previously  framed  by  the  Massachusetts  legisla
ture.  He  was  the  au
thor  of  the  pamphlet
called  the  "  Essex  Re
sult,"  which  contrib
uted  largely  to  the
rejection  of  the  con
stitution.  This  was
re  -  published  in  the
memoir  of  the  author
by  his  son.  He  was
a  delegate  the  next
year  to  the  body  that
framed  the  constitu
tion  that  was  finally
adopted,  and  in  1788
to  the  convention  to
ratify  the  constitution
of  the  United  States,
which  he  actively  sup
ported.  He  was  the  author  of  the  proposition  that
was  offered  by  John  Hancock,  ratifying  the  in
strument  and  "recommending  certain  amendments
known  as  the  "  Conciliatory  resolutions."  He  sub
sequently  was  occasionally  in  the  state  legislature,
but  took  no  active  part  in  public  affairs,  although
he  remained  a  consistent  Federalist.  He  removed
to  Boston  in  1800,  and  from  1806  until  his  death
was  chief  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  state.
Judge  Parsons  was  a  classical  scholar  and  a  mathe
matician  of  ability.  His  legal  decisions  threw  much
light  on  the  laws  of  pleading,  marine  insurance,  and
real  property,  and  he  rendered  substantial  service
to  the  community  by  discountenancing  delays  and
expediting  the  trial  of  causes.  He  possessed  a  re
markable  memory,  and  was  no  less  famous  for  his
wit  than  for  his  attainments.  Chief-Justice  Lemuel
Shaw  said  of  him  :  "  No  person  was  probably  more
versed  in  the  early  history,  laws,  institutions,  man
ners,  and  local  usages  of  the  settlers  of  New  Eng
land,  and  the  public  are  deeply  indebted  to  him  for
much  that  has  been  preserved  on  these  subjects  in
the  reports  of  his  judicial  decisions."  See  a  memoir
of  him  by  his  son  (Boston,  1859).  A  collection  of
his  opinions  was  published  under  the  title  of
"  Commentaries  on  the  Laws  of  the  United  States  "
(New  York,  1836). — His  son,  Theopliilns,  author,  b.
in  Newburyport,  Mass.,  17  May,  1797;  d.  in  Cam
bridge,  Mass.,  26  Jan.,  1882,  was  graduated  at  Har
vard  in  1815,  studied  law,  and  after  a  tour  abroad
settled  first  in  Taunton  and  afterward  in  Boston.
For  several  years  he  engaged  in  literary  pursuits,
and  founded  and  edited  the  "  United  States  Free
Press."  From  1847  until  his  death  he  was  Dane
professor  of  law  in  Harvard,  and  he  received  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  that  institution  in  1849.
He  was  an  early  convert  to  the  New  Jerusalem
church,  and  wrote  much  in  defence  and  exposition
of  its  doctrines.  He  published  the  memoir  of  his
father  already  mentioned  (Boston,  1859),  and  several
works  on  Swedenborgianism,  including  three  vol
umes  of  "  Essays  "  (1845) ;  "Deus  Homo  "(1867);
"  The  Infinite  and  the  Finite"  (1872) ;  and  "  Out
lines  of  the  Religion  and  Philosophy  of  Sweden-
borg  "  (1875).  But  it  is  as  a  legal  writer  that  he  is
best  known,  and  his  publications  on  that  subject
include  "  The  Law  of  Conscience  "  (2  vols.,  1853  ;
5th  ed.,  3  vols.,  1864);  "Elements  of  Mercantile
Law "  (1856) ;  "  Laws  of  Business  for  Business
Men "  (1857) ;  an  elaborate  and  comprehensive


PARSONS


PARTOX


665


treatise  on  "  Maritime  Law,"  including  the  law  of
shipping,  the  law  of  marine  insurance,  and  the  law
and  practice  of  admiralty  (2  vols.,  1859) :  "  Xotes
and  Bills  of  Exchange  "  (2  vols.,  1862) ;  "  Shipping
and  Admiralty"  (2  vols.,  1869) ;  and ''The  Politi
cal,  Personal,  and  Property  Rights  of  a  Citizen  of
the  United  States"  (1875).

PARSONS,  Thomas  William,  author,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  18  Aug.,  1819.  He  received  his
early  education  in  the  Boston  Latin-school,  and  in
1836  went  to  Italy,  where  he  studied  Italian  litera
ture,  and  translated  the  first  ten  cantos  of  Dante's
"Inferno"  (Boston,  1848).  He  then  returned  to
his  native  city,  studied  and  practised  dentistry,
and  subsequently  resided  for  several  years  in  Eng
land.  Since  1872  he  has  engaged  in  literary  pur
suits  in  Boston.  Harvard  gave  him  the  honorary
degree  of  M.  A.  in  1853.  He  has  issued  a  volume
of  poems  entitled  "Ghetto  di  Roma"  (Boston,
1854);  his  completed  translation  of  the  "  Inferno,"
which  appeared  with  illustrations  (1867) ;  "  The
Magnolia."  a  poem  (printed  privately.  1867)  :  "  The
Old  House  at  Sudbury  "  (1870) ;  and  "  The  Shadow
of  the  Obelisk"  (London,  1872).

PARSONS,  Usher,  surgeon,  b.  in  Alfred.  Me.,
8  Aug..  1788 ;  d.  in  Providence.  R.  I.,  19  Dec.,  1868.
After  receiving  an  academic  education,  he  studied
medicine  under  Dr.  John  Warren  in  Boston,  entered
the  U.  S.  navy  in  1812  as  surgeon's  mate  on  the  I
frigate  "  John  Adams,"  and  with  the  other  officers
and  the  crew  of  that  vessel  volunteered  for  service  •
on  the  lakes  in  June,  1813. He  was  acting  surgeon
on  the  flag-ship  "  Lawrence"  at  the  battle  of  Lake
Erie,  and,  in  consequence  of  the  illness  of  both  of
the  other  surgeons,  was  in  sole  charge  of  the  wound-  !
ed  of  the  squadron. For  his  conduct  on  this  occa-  •
sion  he  was  honorably  mentioned  in  the  report  of
Com.  Oliver  H.  Perry,  and  promoted  full  surgeon,  i
He  served  the  next  year  on  the  upper  lakes,  was  at  ',
the  attack  on Mackinaw,  and two  years on the  !
frigate  ••  Java," under Perry. After ten years'  j
duty  in  the  navy  he  resigned  and  settled  in  the  j
practice  of  his  profession  in  Providence,  R.  I. He  j
was  professor  of  anatomy  in  Dartmouth  in  1820-'2,
and  of  anatomy  and  surgery  in  Brown  in  1823- '8,
president  of  the  Rhode  Island  medical  society  in
1837-'9.  and  the  first  vice-president  of  the  Ameri
can medical association in 1853. He received
honorary medical degrees from Harvard, Dart
mouth, and Brown. His publications include
"The Art of making Anatomic Preparations"
(Philadelphia,  1831);  "Prize  Dissertations"  (Provi
dence.  R,  I..  1843);  "Sailor's Physician"  (1851);
"History  of  the  Battle  of  Lake  Erie"  (1852);  and
"  Life  of  Sir  William  Pepperell  "(Cambridge,  Mass.,  j
1855). — His  son.  Charles  William,  physician,  b.
in  Providence.  R.  I.,  6  Sept.,  1823,  was  graduated
at  Harvard in  1840,  and  at  the  medical depart-  i
ment  there  in  1845. He  then  settled  in  practice  in  j
Providence,  was  professor  of  physiology  in  Brown
in  1874—'82.  and  is  the  author  of  two  Fiske  fund
prize  dissertations  (Providence,  1848-'54),  and  many  j
medical  and  historical  papers.

PARSONS.  William,  surveyor,  b.  in  England  ;
d.  in  Easton,  Pa.,  in  December,  1757.  Prior  to
1722  he  was  residing  in  Philadelphia,  a  shoemaker
by  trade  and  a  member  of  Franklin's  junta  club,
in  which  he  passed  for  "  a  man  having  a  profound
knowledge  of  mathematics."  In  1743  he  was  ap
pointed  surveyor-general  of  Pennsylvania,  resign
ing  in  June.  1748.  On  the  erection  of  Northamp
ton  countv  he  was  appointed  to  an  office  there.

PARTON.  Arthur,  artist,  b.  in  Hudson.  X.  Y..
20  March.  1842.  He  studied  under  William  T.
Richards  in  1859-'61,  and  also  at  the  Pennsylvania  ;


academy  of  fine  arts  in  Philadelphia.  His  first
pictures  were  shown  in  Philadelphia  in  1862,  and
he  came  to  New  York  three  years  later,  and  since
that  time  has  exhibited  regularly  at  the  Academy
of  design,  of  which  he  was  elected  an  associate  in
1871.  and  academician  in  1884.  During  1870-'71
he  visited  Europe,  studying  in  Paris  for  some  time.
He  is  a  member  of  the  American  water-color  so
ciety,  and  the  Artists'  fund  society.  In  1886  he  re
ceived  a  gold  medal  at  the  prize  exhibition  at  the
American  art  association  for  his  "  Evening  after
the  Rain."  His  pictures  include  "  November "
(1867);  "On  the  Road  to  Mt.  Marcy"  (1873);  "A
Mountain  Brook "  (1874) ;  "  Sycamores  of  Old
Shokam,"  in  the  Amherst  college  collection  (1876);
"  Delaware  River,  near  Milford"  (1879);  "Night
fall  "  (1880) ;  "  The  Morning  Ride  "  (1884) :  "  Win
ter  on  the  Hudson"  (1885);  and  "Evening.  Har
lem  River"  (1887. — His  brother,  Ernest,  b.  in
Hudson,  X.  Y.,  17  March,  1845,  showed  a  love  for
art  at  an  early  age,  but  never  studied  under  any
master.  When  he  was  twenty  years  old  he  began
to  devote  himself  entirely  to  painting,  taking  a
studio  in  Xew  York,  where  he  remained  until
1873.  In  that  year  he  went  abroad,  and,  after
visiting  Scotland  and  Wales,  opened  a  studio  in
London,  where  his  success  decided  him  to  remain.
In  1876  he  made  sketching  tours  in  Switzerland
and  Italy,  and  he  visited  Xew  York  in  1884-'6.
He  has  exhibited  at  the  Royal  academy,  the  Gros-
venor  gallery,  the  Academy  of  design,  Xew  York,
and  the  Boston  art  institute,  where  he  received  a
medal  in  1883,  and  he  is  a  member  of  the  Royal
institute  of  painters,  London,  and  the  Artists'  fund
society.  Xew  York.  Among  his  paintings  are
"Morning  Mist"  (1873);  "Papa's  Luncheon"
(1875);  "Placid  Stream"  (1876);  "Sunny  Septem
ber  "and  "High  Hall  Garden"  (1877) :""  The  Si
lent  Pool."  "  Reflections,"  and  "  An  Bord  de  1'Eau  "
(1878) ;  "  Waning  of  the  Year,"  in  South  Kensing
ton  museum,  and  "  Mid-Day  "  (1879) ;  "  Silver  and
Gold"  (1882):  "Old  River-Side  Tree,"  "Falling
Leaves  and  Fading  Trees,"  and  "Banks  of  the
Slugwy  "  (1883):  "Where  Memory  Dwells  "  and
"Vale"  of  Light"  (1884);  "  Streatley-on-Thames"
(1885);  and  "Last  of  October "  (18^6).  —  Another
brother,  Henry  Woodbridge,  b.  in  Hudson.  X.  Y.,
28  Xov..  1858.  has  also  devoted  himself  to  painting.
Like  his  brother,  Ernest,  he  has  had  no  regular
art-instruction,  but  began  to  exhibit  in  the  Acade
my  of  design  in  1878.  He  went  to  Europe  in  1883,
and  again  in  1886,  studying  in  Paris  during  the
winter  of  1886-'7.  He  exhibited  in  the  Royal
academy,  London,  in  the  spring  of  1884.

PARTON,  James,  author,  b.  in  Canterbury,
England,  9  Feb.,  1822.  He  was  brought  to  the
United  States  when  he  was  five  years  old,  and  edu
cated  in  the  schools  of  Xew  York  city  and  at
White  Plains,  X.  Y.  After  teaching  in  Philadel
phia  and  Xew  York  city,  he  became  a  contributor
to  the  "  Home  Journal,"  with  which  he  was  con
nected  for  three  years.  He  has  spent  his  life  since
that  time  in  literary  labors,  contributing  many  ar
ticles  to  periodicals,  and  publishing  books  on  bio
graphical  subjects.  While  he  was  employed  on  the
"  Home  Journal "  he  remarked  one  day  to  a  Xew
York  publisher  that  an  interesting  story  could  be
made  out  of  the  life  of  Horace  Greeley.  When
asked  why  he  did  not  do  it,  he  said  that  it  would
require  an  expensive  journey  and  a  year  of  labor.
The  publisher  offered  to  advance  the  means,  and
he  collected  materials  from  the  lips  of  Greeley's
former  neighbors  in  Vermont  and  New  Hampshire,
and  produced  the  "  Life  of  Horace  Greeley  "  (Xew
York,  1855 ;  new  and  completed  ed.,  Boston,  1885),


C66


PARTON


PARTRIDGE


185!)-T>0).
Butler in


which  was  so  profitable  that  he  determined  to  de
vote  himself  thenceforth  to  authorship.  He  has
also  lectured  successfully  on  literary  and  political
topics.  He  resided  in  New  York  city  till  1875,  when
he  removed  to  Newbtiryport,  Mass.  His  first  book
was  followed  by  a  col
lection  of  "Humorous
Poetry  of  the  English
Language  from  Chau
cer  to  Saxe"  (1850).
Next  appeared  the
"  Life  and  Times  of
Aaron  Burr,"  prepared
from  original  sources,
in  which  he  sought  to
redeem  Burr's  reputa
tion  from  the  charges
that  attached  to  his
memory  (1857 ;  new
ed.,  1804).  In  writing
the  "Life  of  Andrew
Jackson,"  he  also  had
access  to  inedited
documents  (3  vols.,
His  subsequent  works  are  "  General
New  Orleans"  (1803:  new  ed.,  1882);
Life  and  Times  of  Benjamin  Franklin  "  (18(i4):
Manual  for  the  Instruction  of  Rings,  Rail
road  and  Political,  and  How  New  York  is  Gov
erned"  (1800);  "Famous  Americans  of  Recent
Times,"  containing  sketches  of  Henry  Clay,  Daniel
Webster,  John  C.  Calhoun.  John  Randolph,  and
others  (Boston.  1807):  "The  People's  Book  of
Biography,"  containing  eighty  short  lives  (Hart
ford,  1808) ;  "  Smoking  and  Drinking,"  an  essay  on
the  evils  of  those  practices,  reprinted  from  the
"Atlantic  Monthly"  (Boston,  1809):  a  pamphlet
entitled  "The  Danish  Islands:  Are  We  Bound  to
pay  for  Them?"  (1809);  "Topics  of  the  Time,"  a
collection  of  magazine  articles,  most  of  them  treat
ing  of  administrative  abuses  at  Washington  (1871);
"Triumphs  of  Enterprise,  Ingenuity,  and  Public
Spirit"  (Hartford,  1871);  "The  Words  of  Wash
ington  "  (1872) ;  "  Fanny  Fern :  A  Memorial  Vol
ume"  (New  York,  1873);  "Life  of  Thomas  Jeffer
son,  Third  President  of  the  United  States"  (Boston,
1874) ;  "  Taxation  of  Church  Property,"  a  pamphlet
(New  York.  1874) ;  "  Le  Parnasse  Francais,  a  Book
of  French  Poetry  from  A.  D.  1550  to  the  Present
Time"  (Boston,  1877);  "Caricature  and  Other
Comic  Art,  in  all  Times  and  Many  Lands  "  (New
York,  1877);  a  "  Life  of  Voltaire,"  which  was  the
fruit  of  several  years'  labor  (Boston,  1881) ;  "  Noted
Women  of  Europe  and  America"  (Hartford,  1883);
and  "Captains  of  Industry,  or  Men  of  Business
who  did  Something  besides  Making  Money,  a  Book
for  Young  Americans"
(Boston,  1884).  — His
wife,  Sara  Payson
Willis,  author,  b.  in
Portland.  Me.,  9  July,
1811;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  10  Oct..  1872,
was  christened  Grata
Payson,  after  the
mother  of  the  preach
er,  Edward  Payson,
but  the  name  was
changed  to  Sara.  She
was  educated  in  the
schools  of  Boston  and
at  Catherine  Beecher's
seminary  in  Hartford,
and  in  1837  married  Charles  H.  Eldredge.  cashier
of  a  bank  in  Boston.  In  1840  she  was  left  a


widow,  with  two  children,  in  straitened  circum
stances.  She  attempted  to  gain  a  livelihood  by
sewing,  then  sought  in  vain  the  post  of  a  public-
school  teacher,  and  at  last,  in  1851,  began  to  write
for  Boston  periodicals  short  articles  that  immedi
ately  attracted  attention.  For  her  first  contribu
tion  only  half  a  dollar  was  paid,  but  she  was  en
couraged  to  persevere  by  seeing  it  copied  into  many
newspapers.  New  York  publishers  soon  offered
higher  rates  for  her  sketches;  a  volume  of  them
was  brought  out,  of  which  80,000  copies  were  sold,
and  after  her  removal  to  New  York  city  in  1854
she  began  to  write  for  the  "  New  York  Ledger."
When  she  changed  her  residence  to  New  York  city
she  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Parton,  then
an  assistant  of  her  brother.  Nathaniel  P.  Willis,  in
the  office  of  the  "  Home  Journal,"  and  they  were
married  in  January,  1850.  She  always  retained  the
pen-name  of  "  Fanny  Fern,"  with  which  she  signed
her  first  piece,  and  had  made  it  famous  before  even
her  friends  knew  that  she  was  the  writer.  For  six
teen  years  she  furnished  the  "  Ledger "  with  an
article  every  week.  Her  published  works,  except
two  novels,  were  made,  up  of  the  humorous,  pa
thetic,  and  satirical  essays  and  the  short  tales  that
she  contributed  to  the  weekly  press.  Their  titles
are  "Fern  Leaves  from  Fanny's  Portfolio"  (Au
burn,  1853),  which  was  followed  by  a  second  series
(New  York,  1854) ;  "  Little  Ferns  for  Fanny's  Little
Friends"  (1854);  "Ruth  Hall,"  a  pathetic  novel
based  on  incidents  in  her  own  life  (1854);  "Fresh
Leaves  "  (1855) ;  "  Rose  Clark,"  a  novel  (1857) :  "  A
New  Story-Book  for  Children"  (1804);  "Folly  as
it  Flies"  (1808):  "The  Play- Day  Book"  (1809);
"  Ginger-  Snaps"  (1870):  and  "Caper-Sauce:  A
Volume  of  Chit-Chat"  (1872).  Most  of  her  books
were  republished  in  England,  and  there  was  issued
also  "  Life  and  Beauties  of  Fanny  Fern  "  (London.
1855).  See  "Fanny  Fern:  A  Memorial  Volume,"
containing  selections  from  her  writings,  and  a  me
moir  by  James  Parton  (New  York,  1873).

PARTRIDGE,  Alden,  educator,!),  in  Norwich,
Vt,.  in  1785 ;  d.  there,  10  Jan.,  1854.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1800,
commissioned  as  1st  lieutenant  in  the  corps  of
engineers,  and  appointed  assistant  professor  of
mathematics.  He  was  made  a  captain  on  23  July,
1810,  was  professor  of  mathematics  in  1813.  and  of
engineering  in  1813-'16.  and  in  1810-'17  was  in  com
mand  at  the  academy  during  the  absence  of  Maj.
Jonathan  Williams,  the  superintendent.  He  re
signed  his  commission  on  15  April,  1818,  and  in
1819  had  charge  of  the  exploring  survey  of  the
northwestern  boundary  of  the  United  States  under
the  provisions  of  the  treaty  of  Ghent.  In  1820  he
founded  a  military  school  at  Norwich,  Vt.  In  1822
he  was  surveyor-general  of  the  state.  He  removed
his  school  to  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1825,  but  it
was  restored  to  Norwich,  and  in  1834  was  incorpo
rated  as  Norwich  university,  of  which  he  was  presi
dent  till  1843.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Vermont
legislature  in  1833-'4  and  in  1839.  In  1840  he
founded  a  military  academy  at  Portsmouth,  Va.
He  was  also  for  some  time  the  president  of  Jeffer
son  military  college,  which  he  established  in  Missis
sippi,  and  the  founder  in  1847  of  a  military  school
at  Pembroke,  N.  H.,  in  1850  of  one  at  Harrisburg,
Pa.,  and  in  1853  of  one  at  Brandywine  Springs,
Del.  Capt.  Partridge  was  for  many  years  employed
as  instructor  of  the  militia  in  the  western  states.
He  frequently  delivered  public  lectures  on  military
subjects,  and  published  "An  Excursion"  (1822);
j  "Lecture  on  Education"  (Windsor,  1825);  "Lec-
I  tures  on  National  Defence  " ;  and  "  Journal  of  a
i  Tour  of  Cadets  "  (1827).


PARTRIDGE


PASCHALL


667


PARTRIDGE,  Georsre,  member  of  the  Con
tinental  congress,  b.  in  Duxbury,  Mass.,  8  Feb..
1740  ;  d.  there.  7  July,  1828.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1702,  and  studied  theology,  but,  instead
of  entering  the  ministry,  became  a  teacher  at  Kings
ton,  Mass.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Provincial
congress  in  1774-'5,  and  then  a  member  of  the
state  house  of  representatives  till  1779,  when  he
was  chosen  a  delegate  from  Massachusetts  to  the
Continental  congress.  Except  at  the  congress  at
Princeton  in  1788.  he  was  a  member  of  that  body
continuously  till  1785.  He  was  elected  a  member
of  the  1st  congress  of  the  United  States,  and  took
his  seat  on  the  opening  day,  but  resigned  in  1790.
He  left  a  large  part  of  his  estate  for  religious  and
charitable  purposes.

PARTRIDGE.  Oliver,  member  of  the  Colonial
congress,  b.  in  Hatfield,  Mass.,  13  June,  1712;  d.  in
Hadley,  Mass..  21  July,  1792.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1730,  studied  law.  and  became  a  success
ful  practitioner  at  Hatfield.  He  was  a  delegate  to
the  congress  that  was  called  by  the  British  govern
ment  to  meet  in  Albany.  X.  Y.,  in  June,  1754.  In
1705  he  was  a  delegate  from  Massachusetts  to  the
congress  that  assembled  in  New  York  city  to  take
action  with  regard  to  the  stamp-act,  and  voted  for
the  petition  to  the  king,  the  memorial  to  parlia
ment,  and  the  bill  of  rights.  In  1769-' 74  he  was
judge  of  common  pleas  for  Hampshire  county.
When  hostilities  with  the  mother  country  were  im
pending  he  was  at  first  opposed  to  revolution,  but
soon  he  embraced  the  American  cause.

PAR  YIN,  Theodore  Suttoii,  educator,  b.  in
Cedarville.  Cumberland  co.,  X.  J.,  15  Jan..  1817.
He  was  taken  by  his  parents  to  Cincinnati.  Ohio,  in
1829.  graduated  at  Woodward  college  in  1833.  and
studied  law  with  Timothy  Walker  and  at  Cincin
nati  law-school,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1837.
In  1838  he  went  to  Iowa  as  private  secretary  to  the
governor  of  the  territory.  Robert  Lucas.  He  was
also  secretary  of  the  legislative  council  in  1840-'!,
and  for  two  years  district  attorney  at  Muscatine.
resigning  on  his  election  as  probate  judge  in  1841.
In  l846-'56  he  was  clerk  of  the  U.  S.  district  court,
and  in  1857-'8  register  of  the  state  land-office,
which  post  he  resigned  on  his  election  as  curator
and  librarian  of  Iowa  state  university.  From  1859
till  1867  he  was  professor  of  natural  history.  He
filled  other  chairs  in  the  university,  the  last  being
that  of  political  economy,  which  was  abolished  in
1870.  He  was  a  founder  of  the  State  historical
society  in  1857,  and  in  1863-'5  its  corresponding
secretary  and  editor  of  the '•  Historical  Annals  of
Iowa."  He  has  edited  the  "  Annals  of  Iowa  Ma
sonry  "  since  1844,  and  was  editor  of  the  '•  Western
Freemason  "  in  1859-'GO.  of  the  "  Masonic  Maga
zine''  in  1860-'72,  of  the  "  Evergreen"  in  1871-'2,
and  from  1871  till  1886  of  '•  Transactions  of  the
Knights  Templar."  He  is  the  author  of  a  "  History
of  Iowa  "  (Chicago,  1877)  and  of  "  History  of  Tem-
plary  in  America"  (Cincinnati.  1887).

PARVIN,  Theophilus,  physician,  b.  in  Buenos
Ayres,  Argentine  Republic.  9  Jan.,  1829.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Indiana  in  1847,
and  at  the  medical  department  of  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1852,  and  established  himself
in  practice  in  Indianapolis.  Ind.  He  was  professor
in  the  Medical  college  of  Ohio  from  1864  till  1869,
then  in  the  medical  department  of  the  University
of  Louisville  till  1872,  and  afterward  he  filled  the
chair  of  obstetrics  and  diseases  of  women  and  chil
dren  in  Indiana  medical  college.  Since  1883  he
lias  been  a  professor  in  Jefferson  medical  college,
Philadelphia.  Dr.  Parvin  was  president  of  the
Indiana  state  medical  society  in  1861,  and  of  the


American  medical  association  in  1879.  He  has
published  "  Tne  Science  and  Art  of  Obstetrics "
(Philadelphia,  1886).  and  edited  "  Winchel  on  Dis
eases  of  Women  "  (1887).

PASCALIS-OL'VIERE,  Felix,  physician,  b.  in
Provence,  France,  about  1750 ;  d.  in  Xew  York
city  in  1840.  He  studied  medicine  in  Montpellier.
and  after  obtaining  his  degree  went  to  Santo
Domingo,  where  he  practised  with  success  and
acquired  an  extensive  knowledge  of  botany  and
other  departments  of  natural  history.  The  revolt
of  the  negroes  forced  him  to  leave  the  island  in
1793,  and  he  took  refuge  in  the  United  States,
where  he  quickly  acquired  reputation  in  the  prac
tice  of  his  profession.  He  lived  at  first  in  Phila
delphia,  but  subsequently  removed  to  Xew  York,
where  he  resided  for  more  than  thirty  years.  At
the  time  of  the  epidemic  in  Cadiz  in  1805  he  went
to  that  city,  and  afterward  to  Gibraltar  to  study
the  nature  of  the  disease.  His  observations  con
vinced  him  that  it  was  not  contagious,  and  he  gave
expression  to  his  views  in  his  writings,  although  he
had  long  held  a  different  opinion.  He  was  the
founder  of  the  Linnsean  society  of  Xew  York,  and
member  of  several  academies  and  learned  societies.
He  wrote  "  Description  of  the  Contagious  and
Epidemic  Yellow  Fever  that  reigned  in  Philadel
phia  in  1797"  (Philadelphia,  1798);  a  translation
of  the  work  of  Vicq-d'Azyr  on  "Interments,"  with
original  notes  and  observations  (Xew  York.  1823);
and  "  Eulogy  on  Hon.  S.  L.  Mitchill.  M.  D.,  before
the  Xew  York  City  and  County  Medical  Society.
1831  "  (1831).  He  also  published  many  reports  and
memoirs  on  yellow  fever,  on  the  black  color  of  the
African  races,  and  other  subjects.

PASCHAL.  George  Washington,  jurist,  b.  at
!  Skull  Shoals,  Greene  co.,  Ga,,  23  Xov..  1812 ;  d.  in
Washington.  D.  C..  16  Feb.,  1878.  He  was  edu
cated  at  Mercer  institute,  where  he  supported  him
self  by  teaching  minor  classes,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Wilkes  county.  Ga.,  in
1832.  As  a  lieutenant  of  Georgia  volunteers  he
served  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  John  E.  Wool  when
that  officer  was  charged  with  the  removal  of  the
Cherokees  from  Georgia  to  Indian  territory  in
1834-'5.  He  married  Sarah,  the  only  daughter  of
the  Cherokee  chief,  John  Ridge,  and  removed  to
Arkansas  in  1836.  He  soon  attained  reputation  at
the  bar  of  the  new  state,  and  in  1841  was  elected  a
justice  of  the  supreme  court,  serving  two  years.  In
1847  he  settled  in  Texas.  He  was  earnestly  attached
to  union  principles,  and  during  the  period  preceding
the  civil  war  he  presented  his  views  in  the  "  South
ern  Intelligencer,"  a  newspaper  that  he  established
at  Austin,  Tex.,  in  1856.  His  friend,  Samuel
Houston,  was  elected  governor  in  1859  largely
through  his  efforts.  He  removed  to  \Vashington
in  1869.  and  was  instrumental  in  founding  the  law
department  of  Georgetown  university,  which  made
him  its  first  professor  of  jurisprudence,  and  con
ferred  on  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1875.  Judge
Paschall  published  an  "Annotated  Digest  of  the
Laws  of  Texas"  (Xew  York,  1866;  new  ed.,  1873);
"Annotated  Constitution  of  the  United  States"
(Washington,  1868;  new  ed..  1876);  "  Decisions  of
the  Supreme  Court  of  Texas  "  (5  vols.,  1869-'71) ;
and  '•  Digest  of  Decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  of
Texas"  (1871-'3);  also  many  pamphlets,  articles,
and  addresses  on  constitutional  law  and  political
questions,  and  a  "  Sketch  of  the  Last  Years  of
Samuel  Houston"  in  "  Harper's  Magazine"  (1866).

PASCHALL,  Edwin,  journalist,  b.  in  Mecklen-
burgh  county.  Va.,  in  1799;  d.  near  Xolensville,
Tenn.,  5  June.  1869.  He  was  educated  as  a  lawyer,
removed  to  Tennessee  in  1833,  was  a  teacher  in


668


PASCO


PASTORIUS


Murfreesborough,  Iluntington.  Brownsville,  and
for  some  time  at  Franklin,  Williamson  co..  where
he  conducted  the  "  Western  Weekly  Review,"  and
afterward  taught  a  classical  school  near  Nashville.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  the  leading  writer  for
the  "Press  "at  Nashville,  and  in  1865-'0  for  the
Nashville  "Gazette."  lie  published  "Old  Times,
or  Tennessee  History"  (18G9).

PASCO,  Samuel,  senator,  b.  in  London,  England.
28  June,  1834.  lie  was  taken  by  his  parents  to  the
British  provinces  when  he  was  ten  years  old,  and
thence  to  Charlestown,  Mass.,  and  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1858.  He  removed  to  Florida,  and
became  principal  of  the  academy  at  Waukeenah,  at
the  same  time  studying  law.  Early  in  the  civil
war  he  enlisted  in  the  3d  Florida  infantry.  He  was
wounded  and  taken  prisoner  at  Missionary  Ridge,
and  was  detained  in  Camp  Morton  at  Indianapolis.
Ind.,  till  the  close  of  the  war.  Returning  to  Florida,
he  was  soon  elected  county  clerk,  and,  resuming  his
law  studies,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised
at  Monticello.  In  1876  he  was  made  chairman  of
the  Democratic  state  executive  committee.  In
1880  he  was  a  presidential  elector,  and  in  that  year
and  1884  he  was  proposed  as  the  Democratic  candi
date  for  governor,  but  withdrew  his  name  for  the
sake  of  party  harmony.  He  was  president  of  the
State  constitutional  convention  of  1885.  and  in
1880  was  elected  to  the  legislature,  and  chosen
speaker.  On  19  May,  1887,  he  was  elected  U.S.
senator  for  the  term  expiring  3  March,  1893.

PASSACONAWA  Y,  Indian  chief,  b.  in  southern
New  Hampshire  about  1580 :  d.  near  Litchficld,
N.  II.,  between  1(505  and  1009.  He  was  a  Merri-
mack  sachem,  and  the  sagamore  of  Pamunkog,  or
Pennacook,  holding  control  over  the  tribes  of
southern  New  Hampshire  and  part  of  Massachu
setts.  When  the  whites  first  settled  the  country
he  was  at  the  head  of  a  powerful  confederacy,  and
is  said  by  some  authorities  to  have  conveyed  to
John  Wheelwright  and  his  associates  at  Squamscut
(now  Exeter),  17  May.  1059,  a  tract  of  land  that
extended  from  Piscataqua  to  Merrimack  rivers
westward,  and  from  the  line  of  Massachusetts,
thirty  miles  north  :  but  this  deed  was  subsequently
pronounced  a  forgery.  In  1002,  in  answer  to  a  peti
tion  from  Passaconaway,  the  general  court  of  Mas
sachusetts  granted  him  a  tract  of  several  hundred
acres  near  Litchfield,  N.  H.  He  invited  the  Indian
apostle  John  Eliot  to  take  up  his  abode  near  his
tribe,  so  that  they  might  be  taught  Christianity,
and  avowed  his  own  belief  in  God.  He  was  saga
cious,  and  had  a  great  reputation  as  a  sorcerer.
He  made  a  feast  for  his  people  about  1000,  deliv
ered  a  farewell  speech,  and  exhorted  them  to  live
in  peace  with  the  English,  since  he  had  used  his
arts  as  a  "  pow-wow  "  against  them  in  vain.

PASSAVANT,  William  Alfred,  clergyman,  b.
in  Zelienople,  Butler  co.,  Pa.,  9  Oct.,  1821. "  He  was
graduated  at  Jefferson  college,  Pa.,  in  1840,  and  at
the  Lutheran  theological  seminary,  Gettysburg,  Pa.,
in  1842.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  ordained  to  the
ministry,  and  he  held  pastorates  in  Baltimore,  Md.,
in  1842-4,  and  Pittsburg,  Pa,,  in  1844-'55.  Since
then  his  time  has  been  occupied  with  editorial  du
ties,  but  chiefly  with  works  of  philanthropy.  He
has  been  instrumental  in  the  establishment  of  hos
pitals  at  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  Chicago
and  Jacksonville,  111.,  and  orphanages  at  Rochester,
Pa.,  Zelienople,  Pa.,  and  Mt.  Vernon,  N.  Y.  The
hospitals  are  under  his  special  supervision.  He-
was  the  first  to  introduce  the  order  of  deaconesses
in  any  hospital  in  this  country  in  1849,  but.  owing
to  a  lack  of  support,  his  project  failed.  He  was
the  leader  of  the  movement  that  resulted  in  the


establishment  of  Thiel  college,  Greenville,  Pa.,  in
1870,  and  has  since  then  been  one  of  its  trustees.
Dr.  Passavant  has  published  a  large  number  of  ser
mons,  addresses,  and  reports.  He  was  the  founder
of  the  "  Missionary  "  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  in  1848,  and
its  editor  until  it  was  merged,  in  1801,  into  the  "  Lu
theran  and  Missionary"  in  Philadelphia,  and  then
for  a  number  of  years  he  was  one  of  the  editors  of
the  combined  periodical.  In  1880  he  founded  the
*•  Workman,"  a  bi-weekly,  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  of
which  he  was  editor  until  1887.

PASSMORE,  Joseph  Clarkson,  clergyman,  b.
in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  4  June,  1818;  d.  in  Racine,  Wis.,
12  Aug.,  1800.  His  education  was  obtained  at
Flushing  institute,  N.  Y.,  under  Dr.  William  A.
Muhlenberg.  He  was  graduated  at  St.  Paul's  col
lege,  Long  Island,  in  1837,  and  during  1837-'8  he
was  an  instructor  in  Flushing  institute.  Then
he  studied  law  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
Lancaster,  Pa.,  in  1S42.  He  practised  law  for  sev
eral  years,  part  of  the  lime  in  Vicksburg,  Miss.,
but  in  1844  accepted  the  chair  of  professor  of  Eng
lish  literature,  philosophy,  and  political  economy
in  the  College  of  St.  James,  Md.  After  due
preparation  for  the  ministry  he  was  ordained
deacon  in  the  college  chapel  18  June,  1848,  by
Bishop  Whittingham,  and  priest,  in  Grace  church,
Elk  Ridge  Landing,  Md.,  3  June,  1849,  by  the
same  bishop.  He  held  his  professorship  till  1802
when  he  accepted  a  chair,  with  the  same  duties,
in  Racine  college,  Wis.  From  1849  till  1802  he
was  rector  of  St.  Mark's  church,  Washington
county,  Md.  He  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.
from  Columbia  in  1801.  In  connection  with  his
professorship  in  Racine  college  he  was  rector  of
St.  John's  church,  Elkhorn,  Wis..  in  1802-'0.  Dr.
Passmore  published  "  Footprints,  or  Fugitive
Poems  "  (Philadelphia,  1843):  edited  Bishop  But
ler's  "Ethical  Discourses,"  with  an  essay  on  the
author's  life  and  writings  (1855) ;  translated  the
"  PraMectiones  Academical "  of  the  poet  Kable  for
the  "True  Catholic"  (see  EVANS.  HUCJH  DAVKY)  ;
and  also  contributed  freely,  in  verse  as  well  as  prose,
to  church  periodicals.

PASTORIUS,  Francis  Daniel,  colonist,  b.  in
Sommerhauscn,  Franconia,  Germany,  20  Sept.,
1051;  d.  in  Germantown,  Pa.,  27  Sept.,  171!).  lie
was  the  son  of  a  judge  of  Windshcim,  educated  in
the  classical  and  modern  languages,  and  &11  the
science  of  his  age,  and  had  entered  upon  the  prac
tice  of  law,  when,  having  joined  the  sect  of  Pietists,
he  concerted  with  some  of  his  co-religionists  a  plan
for  emigrating  to  Pennsylvania.  They  purchased
25,000  acres,  but  abandoned  the  intention  of  colo
nizing  the  land  themselves.  Pastorius,  their  agent,
had  formed  the  acquaintance  of  William  Penn  in
England,  and  became  a  convert  to  the  Quaker  doc
trines.  He  was  engaged  by  his  associates,  who  in
1686  organized  as  the  Frankfort  land-company,
and  by  some  merchants  of  Crefeld,  who  had  secured
15,000  acres,  to  conduct  a  colony  of  German  and
Dutch  Mennonites  and  Quakers  to  Pennsylvania.
He  arrived  on  20  June,  1083,  and  on  24  Oct.  began
to  lay  out  Germantown.  He  was  until  his  death  a
man  of  influence  among  the  colonists,  was  its  first
bailiff,  and  devised  the  town-seal,  which  consisted
of  a  clover  on  one  of  whose  leaves  was  a  vine,  an
other  a  stalk  of  flax,  and  the  third  a  weaver's  spool
with  the  motto  "Vinum,  Linum,  et  Textrium."
In  1087  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  assembly.
In  1088  he  was  one  of  the  signers  of  a  protest  to
the  Friends'  yearly  meeting  at  Burlington  against
buying  and  selling  slaves,  or  holding  men  in  sla
very,  which  was  declared  to  be  "an  act  irrecon
cilable  with  the  precepts  of  the  Christian  religion."


PATCH


PATERSON


669


This  protest  began  the  struggle  against  that  insti
tution  in  this  country,  and  is  the  subject  of  John
G.  Whittier's  poem,  "The  Pennsylvania  Pilgrim."
For  many  years  he  taught  in  Gerrnantown  and
Philadelphia,  and  many  of  the  deeds  and  letters
required  by  the  German  settlers  were  written  by
him.  He  published  a  pamphlet,  consisting  in  part
of  letters  to  his  father,  and  containing  a  descrip
tion  of  the  commonwealth  and  its  government,
and  advice  to  emigrants,  entitled  "  (Jmstandige
geographische  Beschreibung  der  allerletzt  erfun-
denen  Provintz  Pennsylvania^"  (Frankfort-on-
Main,  1700).  Several  volumes  were  left  by  him  in
manuscript,  containing  philosophical  reflections,
poems,  and  notes  on  theological,  medical,  and  legal
subjects.  His  Latin  prologue  to  the  Germantown
book  of  records  has  been  translated  by  Whittier  in
the  ode  beginning  il  Hail  to  Posterity."

PATCH,  Samuel,  athlete,  b.  in 'Rhode  Island
about  1807 ;  d.  in  Rochester,  X.  Y.,  13  Nov.,  1829.
He.  followed  the  sea  early  in  life,  and  afterward
went  to  Paterson,  N.  J.,  where  he  became  a  cotton-
spinner.  In  1827  he  was  seized  with  the  mania  for
jumping  that  was  then  prevalent.  A  bridge  had
been  built  at  Paterson  over  Passaic  river,  and  Patch
declared  so  frequently  that  he  would  jump  from  it
that  he  was  placed  under  arrest,  but  made  his  first
leap  trora  the  rocks  at  the  foot  of  the  bridge  on
the  southwestern  side  of  the  chasm  that  it  spanned.
Subsequently  he  jumped  from  the  bridge  itself,  a
distance  of  eighty  or  ninety  feet,  and  in  consequence
became  the  hero  of  the  hour.  He  then  travelled
about  the  country,  leaping  from  the  yard-arms  and
bowsprits  of  vessels,  and  diving  from  top-masts,
until  he  was  attracted  to  Niagara  Falls  with  the
crowd  that  gathered  there  to  see  the  condemned
brig  "Michigan"  go  over  the  cataract  with  its
freight  of  living  animals.  Here  he  jumped  from  a
shelving  rock  midway  between  the  highest  point
on  Goat  island  and  the  water,  more  than  half  the
height  of  the  falls.  Previous  to  his  performance
at  Niagara  he  had  given  an  exhibition  at  Roches
ter,  N.  Y.,  but,  not  being  satisfied  with  the  results,
he  advertised  a  second  leap  on  his  return  from  the
former  place,  asserting  that  on  13  Nov.  he  would
jump  from  the  bank  of  the  Genesee  river  at  Gene-
see  Falls  "  into  the  abyss  below,  a  distance  of  125
feet."  The  country  people  came  in  great  numbers
to  see  the  daring  athlete.  After  a  few  words  of
showman's  bombast,  in  which  he  compared  himself
to  Napoleon  and  Wellington,  Sam  made  the  spring  ;
but,  instead  of  shooting  like  an  arrow  from  a  bow,
as  he  had  done  on  the  previous  occasion,  he  fell  so
awkwardly  that  the  spectators  were  unanimously
of  the  opinion  that  he  had  jumped  to  his  death.
Nothing  was  heard  of  him  until  the  following  St.
Patrick's  day,  when  his  body  was  found  near  the
mouth  of  the  river.  It  was  supposed  that,  after
striking  the  water,  he  had  attempted  to  swim  back
under  the  cataract,  and  had  become  entangled  in
the  roots  of  a  large  tree  that  grew  near.  His  re
mains  were  interred  in  the  village  of  Charlotte,  at
the  mouth  of  the  Genesee.  It  was  Sam's  ambition
to  jump  from  London  bridge,  and  he  had  signed
an  agreement  with  the  captain  of  a  fast-sailing
packet  to  Liverpool  to  make  the  voyage  the  fol
lowing  spring,  and  jump  from  the  yard-arm  every
fair  day.  Speculations  and  comments  on  Sam's
fate  filled  the  newspapers  for  months.

PATERSON.  John,  soldier,  b.  in  New  Britain,
Conn.,  in  1744;  d.  in  Lisle,  now  Whitney's  Point.
N.  Y.,  19  July,  1808.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1762,  taught,  practised  law,  and  was  a  justice
of  the  peace  at  New  Britain,  Conn.  He  settled
in  1774  at  Lenox.  Mass.,  and  was  a  member  of  the


first  Provincial  congress,  which  met  at  Salem  in
October,  1774,  and  of  the  next  congress  at  Cam
bridge  in  February,  1775.  He  enrolled  in  Berk
shire  county  a  regiment  of  minute-men,  which
marched  for  Boston,
armed  and  mostly
in  uniform,  eighteen
hours  after  the  ar
rival  of  the  intelli
gence  of  the  battle
of  Lexington,  and,
when  they  reached
that  place,  construct
ed  the  first  redoubt
on  the  American  line
at  Charlestown.  This
they  defended  on  the
day  of  the  battle  of
Bunker  Hill  from  a
British  attack  in  the
rear  of  the  Ameri
can  position.  After
the  British  troops
evacuated  Boston,  in
March,  1776,  Col.

Paterson's  Berkshire  regiment  was  ordered  to  New
York,  and  thence  to  Canada  for  the  purpose  of  re-
enforcing  Gen.  Benedict  Arnold.  Some  of  them
were  engaged  in  the  disastrous  battle  of  the  Cedars,
and  seventy-nine  were  there  taken  prisoners.  Re
treating  from  Canada,  they  passed  through  Crown
Point,  fortified  Mount  Independence,  and  remained
there  till  November,  1776,  marched  thence  to  Al
bany,  and  joined  Washington's  forces  at  Newtown,
Pa..*  with  only  220  men  remaining  of  the  600  that
left  New  York.  Paterson  was  recommended  to
congress  by  Gen.  Horatio  Gates  on  30  Sept.,  1776.
His  regime'nt  participated  in  the  battles  of  Trenton
and  Princeton.  He  was  made  a  brigadier-general
on  21  Feb.,  1777,  and  was  attached  to  the  northern
department.  He  performed  efficient  service  at  the
battle  of  Stillwater  and  in  the  defeat  of  Gen.  John
Burgoyne.  He  also  took  part  in  the  battle  of
Monmouth,  and  was  not  mustered  out  till  after  the
end  of  the  war.  In  September.  1783,  he  became
major-general.  During  Daniel  Shays's  rebellion  in
1786  he  commanded  a  detachment  of  Berkshire
militia  that  was  ordered  out  to  suppress  the  rising.
Afterward  he  removed  to  Lisle,  and  was  first  pre
siding  judge  of  Broome  county.  He  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  New  York  assembly  in  1792,  and  of  the
Constitutional  convention  of  1801,  and  a  member
of  congress  from  17  Oct.,  1803,  till  3  March,  1805.
His  last  years  were  spent  on  his  farm.

PATERSON,  John,  mathematician,  b.  in  Pater
son,  N.  J..  11  Jan.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Albany.  N.  Y.,  31
July,  1883.  His  father  removed  to  Hamilton,  Ont.,
and  died  while  the  son  was  a  boy.  He  received
only  two  terms  of  schooling,  was  employed  during
his  "youth  by  a  druggist,  found  a  place  in  a  print
ing-office  at  Niagara  Falls,  and  went  thence  to
New  York  city,  and  in  1825  to  Albany,  where  he
worked  as  a  compositor  for  more  than  forty  years.
Meanwhile  he  devoted  his  leisure  to  the  study  of
mathematics,  and  learned  French  and  German  in
order  to  read  mathematical  and  philosophical
treatises  in  those  languages.  From  1851  till  his
death  he  held  the  office  of  superintendent  of
weights  and  measures,  and  from  1862  till  he  was
incapacitated  by  a  stroke  of  paralysis  in  1874  he
was  employed  by  the  state  insurance  department
in  calculating  life  annuities.  He  published  a  work
on  the  '•  Calculus  of  Operations"  (Albany,  1850),  to
which  was  added  a  supplemental  volume;  papers
on  "Weights  and  Measures"  (1864);  and  '-Re-


670


PATERSON


PATRICK


searches  in  the  Theory  and  Calculus  of  Operations"
(1872),  printed  in  the  "Transactions"  of  the  Al
bany  institute  ;  and  a  pamphlet  announcing  a  new
theory  of  gravitation  (1874);  also  mathematical
papers  in  the  "Cambridge  Mathematical  Journal,"
the  "American  Journal  of  Science,''  and  other  sci
entific  periodicals.

PATERSON,  William,  Scottish  colonist,  b.
probably  in  Skipmyre,  Dumfriesshire,  Scotland,  in
the  spring  of  1005";  d.  in  Westminster,  England,
22  Jan.,  1719.  He  was  originally  intended  for
the  ministry  of  the  Scottish  church,  and,  to  escape
persecution*  under  Charles  II.,  he  visited  this  coun
try,  where  he  acquired  much  information  from  the
buccaneers  in  regard  to  the  Spanish  main.  It  has
been  questioned  whether  he  was  not  personally
concerned  with  the  marauders,  but  the  accusation
has  not  been  proved.  He  was  a  merchant  in  Lon
don  in  1G92,  and  about  this  time  made  proposals  to
found  a  bank  of  England,  publishing  a  tract  en
titled  "  A  Brief  Account  of  the  Intended  Bank  of
England,"  and  he  was  one  of  the  first  directors  of
that  institution.  He  had  conceived  the  idea  of
founding  a  colony  at  Darien  during  his  first  visit
to  this  country,  and,  after  several  unsuccessful
attempts  toward  the  adoption  of  his  scheme  by  the
English  and  by  continental  countries,  he  procured
its  sanction  from  the  Scottish  parliament  in  1095.
In  a  short  time  the  subscription  for  stock  amounted
to  £400.000  in  Scotland,  £"500,000  in  England,  and
£200,000  in  Holland,  but  the  subscriptions  of  the
latter  countries  were  almost  wholly  withdrawn  in
consequence  of  the  severe  measures  that  were  passed
by  the  English  parliament  at  the  instance  of  trad
ing  corporations.  The  Scotch,  however,  favored
the  enterprise  with  increased  zeal,  and  on  2(5  July,
1098,  1.200  men  in  five  ships  sailed  from  Leitli  for
Panama,  arriving  after  a  voyage  of  three  months.
They  then  founded  a  colony  at  Acta  (now  Port
Escoces),  about  thirty  miles  northwest  of  the  Gulf
of  Darien,  and  gave  the  town  the  name  of  New
Edinburgh,  and  the  country  that  of  New  Caledonia.
They  bought  lands  of  the  natives,  sent  messages  of
amity  to  the  nearest  Spanish  governors,  and  pub
lished  a  declaration  of  freedom  of  trade  and  re
ligion  to  all  people.  They  had  brought  with  them
only  a  small  supply  of  provisions,  trusting  to  obtain
them  from  the  English  colonists.  But  the  Dutch
and  English  East  India  companies  had  united  in
procuring  orders  from  the  king  forbidding  any  one
to  render  the  colonists  any  assistance.  Their  num
bers  were  now  rapidly  reduced  by  disease.  Pater-
son  lingered  for  eight  months,  but  did  not  abandon
the  settlement  till  almost  all  had  died  or  gone
home.  Meanwhile  1,300  men  had  been  sent  from
Scotland  to  their  relief,  but  these  did  not  arrive
until  the  departure  of  the  last  of  the  colonists.
Paterson  returned  to  Scotland  and  devised  a  new
plan  for  the  colony,  but  the  death  of  William  III.,
with  whom  he  had  influence,  destroyed  his  pros
pects  of  reviving  the  project.  He  was  an  able  ad
vocate  of  the  union  of  England  and  Scotland,  and
when  the  treaty  to  that  effect  was  passed  it  was
recommended  that  indemnity  be  given  him  on  ac
count  of  his  losses  in  the  Darien  expedition,  and  for
his  "carrying  on  other  matters  of  a  public  nature
much  to  his  country's  service,"  but  the  money  was
not  paid  until  the  reign  of  George  I.  He  was  a
member  of  parliament  for  Dumfriesshire  in  1708,
an  early  advocate  for  free-trade,  and  in  all  matters
of  finance  his  ideas  were  in  advance  of  his  time.
Macaulay  says  of  him  :  '•  He  seems  to  have  been
gifted  by  nature  with  fertile  invention,  great
powers  of  persuasion,  and  to  have  acquired  some
where  in  the  course  of  his  vagrant  life  a  perfect


knowledge  of  accounts."  His  writings  have  been
collected,  with  a  biographical  introduction  (Lon
don.  1858).  See  also  his  life  by  Samuel  Bannister
(Edinburgh,  1858).

PATERSON,  William,  jurist,  b.  at  sea  in
1745;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y..  9  Sept.,  1800.  His  par
ents,  who  were  natives  of  Ireland,  brought  him
to  this  country  when  he  was  two  years  old.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1703.  studied  law
with  Richard  Stockton,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1709.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New  Jersey
state  constitutional  convention  in  1770,  and  in  the
same  year  became  state  attorney-general  and  one
of  the  legislative  council.  He  was  a  delegate  to
the  Continental  congress  in  1780-'!,  and  to  the  Na
tional  constitutional  convention  in  1787,  introduc
ing  the  resolution  that  the  "  state  sovereignties  shall
be  preserved,  while  power  shall  be  placed  in  the
general  government  to  provide  for  the  common
defence  and  general  welfare  of  the  country."  The
resolution  was  opposed  by  Edmund  Randolph,  who
introduced  the  proposition  of  a  National  govern
ment,  the  discussion  resulting  in  a  fusion  of  the
two  plans.  He  was  U.  S.  senator  in  1789,  until  his
resignation  in  March  of  the  next  year,  became  gov
ernor  of  New  Jersey  in  1791,  and  was  appointed  by
Washington  a  justice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court
in  1793,  which  post  he  held  until  his  death,  which
occurred  while  he  was  on  a  visit  to  his  son-in-law,
Gen.  Stephen  Van  Rensselaer,  his  place  of  residence
being  New  Brunswick.  Bancroft  says  he  was  an
accomplished  writer.  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1800.  He  published  a  revised  edition
of  the  laws  of  New  Jersey  (Philadelphia,  1798-'9).

PATILLO,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Scotland
in  1720;  d.  in  Dinwiddie  county.  Va.,  in  1801.
He  emigrated  to  this  country  at  nine  years  of  age,
settled  in  Virginia,  and  became  a  merchant's  clerk.
He  subsequently  studied  for  the  ministry,  was  or
dained  in  1758,  and  then  removed  to  North  Caro
lina,  where  he  was  in  charge  of  Presbyterian
churches  until  his  death.  lie  was  active  in  pre-
Revolutionary  movements,  a  member  of  the  North
Carolina  Provincial  congress  in  1775,  was  chaplain
to  that  body,  and  chairman  of  the  committee  of  the
whole.  He  also  taught  for  many  years,  and  was  an
excellent  classical  scholar.  His  ministry  Avas  es
pecially  successful  among  the  negroes.  Hampden
Sidney  gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1787.  He
published  in  that  year  a  small  collection  of  ser
mons,  edited  an  abridged  edition  of  John  Leland's
"  Deistical  Waiters,"  and  left  in  manuscript  a  cate
chism,  several  essays,  and  a  geography.

PATRICK,  Marsena  R.,  soldier,  b.in  Hounds-
field,  Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.,  15  March,  1811 ;  d.  in  Day
ton,  Ohio,  27  July,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1835,  served  in  the  Mexi
can  war,  was  made  captain  in  1847.  and  bre vetted
major  in  1849  for  "  meritorious  conduct  while  serv
ing  in  the  enemy's  country."  He  resigned  in  1850,
engaged  in  farming  in  Jefferson  county,  N.  Y.,  and
in  1859  was  appointed  president  of  the  State  agri
cultural  college.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
he  was  made  inspector-general  of  the  New  York
militia,  became  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  in
March.  1802,  and  served  with  Gen.  Irwin  McDowell
in  the  Shenandoah  valley  in  northern  Virginia,  and
with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  at  South  Mountain
and  Antietam.  He  became  provost-marshal-gcn-
eral  of  that  army  in  October  of  the  same  year,  sub
sequently  of  the  combined  armies  acting  against
Richmond,  and,  after  Lee's  surrender,  of  the  Depart
ment  of  Virginia.  He  resigned  12  June,  1805,  was
president  of  the  New  York  state  agricultural  society
in  1807-'8,  commissioner  for  New  York  state  in


PATTEN


PATTERSON


671


1868-'9,  and  again  in  1879-'80.  and  from  1880  till  his
death  was  governor  of  the  central  branch  of  the  Na
tional  home  for  disabled  volunteer  soldiers  in  Ohio.

PATTEN,  John,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  Kent  county,  Del.,  in  174(5;  d.  in
Dover,  Del.,  17  June,  1801.  He  joined  the  Con
tinental  army  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,
was  commissioned  major,  14  Dec.,  1779,  and  fought
in  almost  every  battle  from  Long  Island  to  Cam-
den,  at  which  he  was  taken  prisoner.  He  served  in
the  Continental  congress  in  1785-'0,  and  in  the  3d
congress  in  1793-'4,  but  his  seat  was  successfully
contested  in  the  latter  year.  He  was  returned  at
the  next  election  and  served  till  1797.

PATTEN,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Halifax,
Mass.,  in  1763;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  9  March,
18:39.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1780,
studied  divinity,  and  was  pastor  of  the  2d  Congre
gational  church  at  Newport,  R.  I.,  from  1786  till
1833.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Brown  in
1807,  and  was  one  of  its  overseers  from  1790  till  his
death.  Dr.  Patten  published  several  separate  ser
mons  ;  "  Christianity  the  True  Religion,"  a  reply
to  Thomas  Paine  (1795);  "  Memoir  of  Mrs.  Ruth
Patten,"  his  mother,  and  the  daughter  of  Rev.
Eleazar  Wheelock  (1834) ;  and  "  Reminiscences  of
Rev.  Samuel  Hopkins"  (1843). — His  son,  William
Samuel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  in  1800 ;  d.
in  Providence,  R.  I.,  27  Dec.,  1873,  was  graduated
at  Brown  in  1818,  studied  law.  and,  after  practising
in  Newport,  removed  to  Providence,  where  from
1831  till  his  death  he  was  cashier  in  the  Manufac
turers'  bank.  He  was  twice  president  of  the  city
common  council,  thrice  in  the  legislature,  and  its
speaker  in  1847-'8,  and  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Providence  athemeum,  of  which  he  was  presi
dent  for  fourteen  years.  He  became  a  trustee  of
Brown  in  1856.  and  after  18G7  was  its  chancellor. —
Another  son,  George  Washington,  soldier,  b.  in
Newport,  R.  I.,  25  Dec.,  1808 :  d.  in  Houlton,  Me.,
28  April,  1882,  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1825,
and  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1830.  He
served  on  frontier  and  garrison  duty  till  the  Mexi
can  war,  was  engaged  against  1  he  Seminole  Indians
in  Florida  at  various  times  in  1837-'42,  and  reached
the  rank  of  captain,  18  June,  1846.  At  the  battle
of  Cerro  Gordo,  during  the  war  with  Mexico,  he
lost  his  left  hand  while  storming  the  heights,  and
was  brevetted  major  for  gallant  conduct.  At  the
end  of  the  war  impaired  health  forced  him  to  de
cline  a  captaincy  in  the  quartermaster's  department,
and  he  obtained  an  absence  on  sick-leave.  After
his  return  to  duty  in  1850  he  served  on  the  frontier
till  he  was  made  major  on  30  April,  1861.  and
though  his  disability  prevented  him  from  seeing
service  in  the  field  during  the  civil  war,  he  ren
dered  valuable  assistance  as  a  member  of  various
military  commissions.  He  was  promoted  lieuten
ant-colonel,  7  June,  1862,  and  on  17  Feb.,  1864,  re
tired  "for  disability  resulting  from  long  and  faith
ful  service,  and  from  wound  and  exposure  in  the
line  of  duty."  Col.  Patten  achieved  some  reputa
tion  as  a  writer,  and  has  been  called  the  "poet
laureate  of  the  army."  His  lyrics  include  "  The
Seminole's  Reply,"  "Joys  that  We've  Tasted,"  and
"  Episode  of  the  Mexican  War."  which  he  delivered
on  14  Sept.,  1878.  the  thirty-first  anniversary  of  the
capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico.  He  published  in
book-form  "  Army  Manual  "  (3d  ed..  New  York,
1863) :  "  Infantry  Tactics,  Bayonet  Drill,  and  Small-
Sword  Exercise'"  (1861) ;  "  Artillery  Drill "  (1861) :
"Cavalry  Drill  and  Sabre  Exercise "  (1863) ;  and
'•  Voices  of  the  Border,"  a  collection  of  his  fugitive
poems  (1867).  He  also  edited  Gen.  Philip  St.  George
Cooke's  "  Cavalry  Tactics  "  (1863).


PATTERSON,  Daniel  Tod,  naval  officer,  b.  on
Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  6  March,  1786;  d.  in  Washing
ton,  D.  C.,  15  Aug.,  1839.  He  entered  the  U.  S.
navy  as  a  midshipman  in  August.  1800,  and  was
attached  to  the  frigate  "Philadelphia,"  under  Capt.
William  Bainbridge  when  she  ran  upon  a  reef  off
Tripoli,  and  was  taken  by  a  flotilla  of  gun-boats.
Patterson  was  kept  a  prisoner  in  Tripoli  until  1805,
and  in  1807  he  was  promoted  to  lieutenant.  In
1813  he  was  made  commander,  and  in  1814  had
charge  of  the  naval  forces  at  New  Orleans,  co-oper
ating  ably  with  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson,  and  receiv
ing  the  thanks  of  congress.  He  commanded  the
flotilla  that  captured  and  destroyed  the  forts  and
other  defences  of  Jean  Lafitte  (q.  v.)  on  the  island
of  Barataria.  Subsequently  he  attained  the  rank
of  captain,  and  had  charge  of  the  "Constitution"
in  1826-'8,  while  on  the  Mediterranean.  In  1828
he  was  made  naval  commissioner,  and  in  1832-'6  he
commanded  the  Mediterranean  squadron,  after
which  he  was,  until  his  death,  commandant  of  the
navy-yard  at  Washington. — His  son,  Carlile  Pol
lock,  superintendent  of  the  coast  survey,  b.  in
Shieldsborough,  Miss.,  24  Aug.,  1816 ;  d.  near
Washington,  15  Aug.,  1881,  was  appointed  as  a
midshipman  in  the  U.  S.  navy  in  1830.  served  in
the  Mediterranean  squadron,  returned  home  in
1836,  and  was  graduated  at  Georgetown  college,
Ky.,  as  a  civil  engineer  in  1838.  Resuming  his  duties
as  midshipman,  he  was  assigned  to  duty  in  the
U.  S.  coast  survey,  to  which,  after  a  period  of  sea-
service,  he  returned  in  1845,  and  was  placed  in
charge  of  a  hydrographic  parly  in  the  Gulf  of
Mexico,  having*  meanwhile,  on  8  Sept..  1841,  at
tained  the  rank  of  lieutenant.  In  1850  he  retired
from  the  navy  to  accept  the  command  of  the  Pacific
mail  steamer  "  Oregon,"  in  which  capacity  and
other  private  duties  he  continued  until  1861.  He
then  returned  to  the  survey  in  the  capacity  of
hydrographic  inspector,  and  so  remained  until  he
became  superintendent  in  February,  1874.  In  his
hands  the  scope  of  the  survey  was  greatly  enlarged,
and  its  character  as  a  general  geodetic  survey  be
came  fully  recognized,  and  he  continued  its  execu
tive  officer  until  his  death.  Supt.  Patterson  was
chairman  of  the  committee  that  was  appointed  in
1869  to  examine  into  the  condition  of  the  revenue
cutter  service,  and  in  1872  a  member  of  the  com
mission  that  was  created  to  examine  and  test  life-
saving  apparatus.  He  also  served  for  many  years
as  a  member  of  the  light-house  board.  He  was  a
member  of  various  societies,  and  in  1878  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Amherst.  Besides  his
various  reports  of  special  duty,  he  edited  the
annual  reports  of  the  U.  S.  coast  and  geodetic  sur
vey  during  the  years  of  his  administration.

PATTERSON,  David  Trotter,  senator,  b.  in
Greene  county,  Tenn.,  28  Feb.,  1819.  He  was  edu
cated  at  Greeneville  college,  Tenn.,  engaged  for  a
short  time  in  business,  and  then  studied  law,  being
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1841.  He  was  elected  judge
of  the  circuit  court  in  1854,  and  served  till  1803.
In  1857  he  married  Martha,  daughter  of  Andrew
Johnson.  He  was  elected  to  the  United  States
senate  as  a  Conservative  in  1865,  after  the  recon
struction  of  Tennessee,  and  served  from  26  July,
1866,  till  March.  1869.

PATTERSON,  George,  Canadian  clergyman,
b.  in  Pictou,  Nova  Scotia,  30  April,  1824.  He  was
graduated  at  Dalhousie  college,  Halifax,  in  1841,
studied  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  was  or
dained  to  the  ministry  of  the  Presbyterian  church,
and  in  1849-'76  was  pastor  of  the  congregation  at
Green  Hill,  Pictou  co.,  N.  S.  He  established  the
"  Eastern  Chronicle "  in  1843,  edited  it  for  three


672


PATTERSON


PATTERSON


years,  subsequently  was  in  charge  of  the  "  Mission
ary  Register  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,"  and  in
1860  was  joint  editor  of  the  "  Missionary  Record  of
the  Lower  Provinces."  He  was  secretary  of  the
board  of  home  missions  for  several  years,  a  member
of  the  foreign  missionary  board,  and  a  founder  of
the  fund  for  the  widows  and  orphans  of  ministers
of  the  Presbyterian  church.  He  has  also  engaged
in  archaeological  studies,  and  made  a  large  collec
tion  of  the  remains  of  the  aboriginal  tribes  of  Nova
Scotia.  His  publications  include  many  essays,
pamphlets,  and  addresses,  and  "  Memoir  of  Rev.
James  McGregor,  with  Notices  of  the  Colonization
of  the  Lower  Provinces  of  British  North  America  "
(Philadelphia,  1859) ;  "  Memoirs  of  the  Rev.  S.  F.
Johnston,  Rev.  J.  W.  Matheson.  and  Mrs.  Mary
J.  Matheson,  with  Selections  from  their  Diaries
and  Correspondence"  (Pictou,  N.  S..  1864);  "The
Doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  underlying  the  Revelation
of  Redemption"  (Edinburgh,  1870);  "History  of
the  County  of  Pictou"  (Montreal,  1877);  "Mis
sionary  Life  among  the  Cannibals,  being  the  Life  of
the  Rev.  John  Gedderd  "  (1882) ;  and  the  "  Heathen
World  "  (Toronto,  1884).

PATTERSON,  James  Willis,  senator,  b.  in
Henniker,  Merrimack  co.,  N.  H.,  2  July,  1823.  He
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1848.  and  studied
divinity  at  Yale,  but  was  not  licensed  to  preach.
He  was  tutor  at  Dartmouth  in  1852-'4.  professor  of
mathematics  there  in  1854-'9,and  occupied  the  chair
of  astronomy  and  meteorology  from  the  latter  date
till  1865.  lie  was  school  commissioner  for  Grafton
county  in  1858-'61,  and  at  the  same  time  secretary
of  the  state  board  of  education,  and  prepared  the
state  reports  for  five  years.  He  was  in  the  legisla
ture  in  1862,  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republi
can  in  the  same  year,  served  till  1867,  and  in  1866
was  chosen  U.  S.  senator,  serving  one  term,  during
which  he  was  the  author  of  the  measure  constitut
ing  consular  clerkships,  and  the  bill  for  establish
ing  colored  schools  in  the  District  of  Columbia,
and  was  chairman  of  the  committee  on  the  District
of  Columbia  and  of  that  on  retrenchment  and  re
form.  At  the  close  of  the  congressional  investiga
tion  of  the  Credit  Mobilier  (see  AMES,  OAKES)  the
senate  committee  reported  a  resolution  expelling
Mr.  Patterson,  27  Feb..  1873 ;  but  no  action  was
taken  upon  it,  and  five  days  later  his  term  expired.
He  was  a  regent  of  the  Smithsonian  institution  in
1864-'5.  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia
loyalists'  convention  in  1866.  In  1877-'8  he  was
again  a  member  of  the  New  Hampshire  legisla
ture,  and  in  1885  he  was  appointed  state  superin
tendent  of  public  instruction  in  New  Hampshire.
Iowa  college  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  1).  in  1868.
In  1880  he  was  the  orator  at  the  unveiling  of  the
soldiers'  monument  in  Marietta,  Ohio.

PATTERSON,  John  James,  senator,  b.  in
Waterloo,  Juniata  co.,  Pa.,  8  Aug.,  1830.  He  was
graduated  at  Jefferson  college.  Pa.,  in  1848.  edited
the  Juniata  "  Sentinel  "  in  the  interest  of  Gen.
Winfield  Scott  in  the  presidential  campaign  in
1852,  and  for  ten  subsequent  years  the  "  Harrisburg
Telegraph."  He  then  engaged  in  banking  and  in
the  management  of  railroads,  and  in  1858-'61  was
in  the  legislature.  He  served  in  the  National  army
on  Gen.  Seth  Williams's  staff  during  the  civil  war.
In  1869  he  removed  to  South  Carolina.  He  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Republican  in  1872,
and  served  one  term.

PATTERSON,  Joseph,  banker,  b.  near  Norris-
town,  Pa.,  2  Feb.,  1808;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  25
Sept.,  1887.  Flis  father.  John,  was  a  native  of  Ire
land,  and  his  mother,  Elizabeth  Stuart,  was  the
only  daughter  of  Col.  Christopher  Stuart,  an  officer


in  the  Revolutionary  army,  who  was  second  in
command  at  the  storming  of  Stony  Point.  The  son
engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  until  1842,  when  he
became  president  of  what  is  now  the  Wrestern
national  bank.  He  afterward  was  largely  engaged
as  a  dealer  and  shipper  of  anthracite  coal,  and
owned  large  collieries  in  Schuylkill  county,  but
continued  president  of  the  bank  till  his  death.  On
15  Aug.,  1861,  Mr.  Patterson  participated  in  the
memorable  conference  in  New  York  between  Sec.
Chase  and  representatives  of  the  banking  interests
of  Philadelphia.  New  York,  and  Boston.  The  secre
tary  asked  for  a  loan  of  $50,000.000  in  gold  to  aid
in  defraying  the  expenses  of  the  war.  In  view  of
the  alarming  condition  of  the  nation's  finances,  the
assembled  bankers  hesitated  to  accede  to  his  re
quest.  Then  Mr.  Patterson  made  an  eloquent  ap
peal  in  behalf  of  the  government,  convincing  those
present  that  they  should  furnish  the  needed  money,
and  the  associated  banks  of  the  three  cities  lent
the  government  at  that  time  $50,000.000  at  par,
and  later  in  the  same  year  $100,000,000  more.
From  that  time  the  secretary  was  accustomed  to
consult  Mr.  Patterson  regarding  the  financial  policy
of  the  government,  and  his  successors  in  office  fol
lowed  his  example.  He  declined  the  controller-
ship  of  the  currency  twice,  and  also  the  post  of
assistant  U.  S.  treasurer  at  Philadelphia.  Through
out  the  civil  war  he  was  treasurer  of  the  Christian
commission.  From  1869  until  his  death  he  was
president  of  the  Philadelphia  clearing-house  asso
ciation. —  His  son,  Christopher  Stuart,  b.  in
Philadelphia.  Pa.,  24  June,  1842,  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1860,  admitted
to  the  bar  in  J865,  and  elected  professor  of  the  law
of  real  estate  and  conveyancing  in  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1887.  He  is  the  author  of  a
"Memoir  of  Theodore  Cuyler"  (Philadelphia,
1879).  and  "Railway  Accident  Law — the  Liability
of  Railways  for  Injuries  to  the  Person  "  (1886).

PATTERSON,  Morris,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa..  26  Oct.,  1809;  d.  there.  23  Oct.,
1878.  He  was  left  fatherless  at  ten,  and  the  rudi
ments  of  his  business  education  were  received  at
the  Philadelphia  public  schools  prior  to  his  four
teenth  year,  at  which  age  he  entered  business,  to
assist  in  the  support  of  his  mother.  From  dealing
in  coal  he  soon  became  interested  in  mining,  and
he  was  one  of  the  pioneers  in  anthracite  coal-mining
in  Schuylkill  county,  bringing  his  outputs  to  mar
ket  in  his  own  boats  through  the  Schuylkill  canal.
He  also  established  an  extensive  coal-trade  in  Pitts-
burg  and  the  west.  He  was  one  of  the  canvassers
for  stock  of  the  Pennsylvania  railroad,  and  one  of
its  organizers  and  original  stockholders.  He  was
active  in  the  affairs  of  the  Presbyterian  church,  a
humanitarian  in  his  dealings  with  his  workingmen,
the  founder  of  the  Pennsylvania  working  home  for
blind  men,  and  took  active  and  substantial  interest
in  philanthropic  movements  in  Philadelphia.

PATTERSON,  Robert,  director  of  the  mint.  b.
near  Hillsborough.  County  Down,  Ireland.  30  May,
1743;  d.  in  Philadelphia,'  Pa..  22  July,  1824.  lie
emigrated  to  Pennsylvania  in  1768,  found  employ
ment  as  a  teacher,  and  in  1774  became  principal  of
the  academy  in  Wilmington,  Del.  When  the  Revo
lution  began,  he  volunteered  in  the  patriot  army,
was  at  first  a  military  instructor,  and  subsequently
adjutant,  assistant  surgeon,  and  brigade-major.  He
was  elected  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1779.  occupied  that  chair
for  thirty-five  years,  and  in  1810-'13  was  vice-pro
vost  of  'that  institution.  Chief-Justice  William
Tilghman  says  of  him  :  "  Arduous  as  were  his  duties
in  the  university,  he  found  time  for  other  useful


PATTERSON


PATTERSON


673


employments.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the
select  council  of  Philadelphia,  and  was  chosen  its
president  in  1799.  In  1805  he  received  from  Presi
dent  Jefferson,  with  whom  lie  had  been  in  habits
of  friendship,  the  appointment  of  director  of  the
mint.  This  office  he  filled  with  great  success  until
his  last  illness."  Mr.  Patterson  took  an  active  part
in  the  proceedings  of  the  American  philosophical
society,  and  was  its  president  from  1819  until  his
death,  being  a  constant  contributor  to  its  "  Trans
actions."  The  University  of  Pennsylvania  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  I).'  in  1819.  He  published
••  The  Newtonian  System  "  (Philadelphia,  1808)  and
a  treatise  on  "Arithmetic"  (Pittsburg.  Pa.,  1819);
and  edited  James  Ferguson's  ••  Lectures  on  Me
chanics  "  (2  vols.,  1800) ;  his  "Astronomy"  (1809) ;
John  Webster's  "  Natural  Philosophy  "  (1808) ;  and
Rev.  John  Ewing's  "  Natural  Philosophy,"  with  a
memoir  of  the  author  (1809).  See  "  Records  of
the  Family  of  Robert  Patterson  (the  Elder) "  (print
ed  privately.  Philadelphia,  1847).— His  son,  Robert
Maskell.  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  23
March,  1787;  cl.  there,  5  Sept.,  1854,  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1804,  and  at
the  medical  department  there  in  1808.  He  studied
the  physical  sciences  in  Paris  for  the  next  two
years,  and  in  1811  completed  his  education  as  a
chemist  under  Sir  Humphrey  Davy  in  London.  On
his  return  to  Philadelphia  in  1812  he  was  chosen
professor  of  natural  philosophy,  chemistry,  and
mathematics  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
(of  which  institution  he  was  vice-provost  from  1814
to  1828,  and  trustee  from  1830  till  his  death),  and
he  occupied  a  similar  chair  in  the  University  of
Virginia  in  1828-'35.  At  the  latter  date  he  was
appointed  director  of  the  mint,  which  post  he  held
until  1851.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the
American  philosophical  society  in  1809.  being  the
youngest  man  that  was  ever  admitted,  and  was
active  in  the  labors  of  the  society,  contributing
largely  by  oral  and  written  communications  to  its
proceedings,  and  he  delivered  the  discourse  at  its
centennial  celebration  in  1843.  He  was  elected  its
president  in  1849.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Franklin  institute  of  Philadelphia,  and  also  of
the  Musical  fund  society  of  Philadelphia,  of  which
he  was  president  from  1838  to  1853.  He  published
'•Early  History  of  the  American  Philosophical  So
ciety  :  a  Discourse  at  its  Hundredth  Anniversary.''
etc.  (Philadelphia,  1843) ;  address  before  the  Frank
lin  institute  (1843);  and  other  occasional  discourses.
— Robert  Maskell's  son.  Robert,  lawyer,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  4  Feb..  1819,  was  educated  at  the
University  of  Virginia,  where  he  graduated  in  law
and  other  branches ;  read  law  in  the  office  of  Judge
Kane,  and  was  admitted  to  the  Philadelphia  bar  in
1840.  In  June,  1845,  lie  became  clerk  to  the  direc
tor  of  the  U.  S.  mint  in  Philadelphia.  In  1868  he
drafted  the  plan  of  the  Fidelity  trust,  safe  deposit,
and  insurance  company  (the  first  institution  of
that  nature  in  Philadelphia),  and  became  its  secre
tary  and  treasurer.  He  published  a  memoir  of
Franklin  Peale  in  1875,  and  a  memoir  of  William
E.  Dubois  in  1881.

PATTERSON,  Robert,  pioneer,  b.  in  Pennsyl
vania  in  1753  ;  d.  near  Dayton.  Ohio.  5  Aug.,  1827.
He  emigrated to Kentucky  in 1775, joined the  |
settlement  at  Royal  Spring  (now  Georgetown),  and  j
assisted  in  building  the  fort  which  he  subsequently  ,
defended. In  October,  1770.  he  was  one  of  seven
men  that  set  out  for  Fort  Pitt  to  procure  powder
and  ammunition,  making  the  journey  through  the
wilderness  on  foot  and  up  the  river  in  canoes. All
of  the  party  were  either  killed  or  wounded  by  the
Indians,  Patterson  receiving  a  blow  from  a  toma-
VOL.  iv. — 43


hawk  that  confined  him  to  his  bed  for  a  year.  He
was  on  Col.  George  R.  Clark's  expedition  in  1778,
and  with  ('apt.  John  Bowman  in  his  raid  on  old
Chillicothe  in  1779.  On  1  April  of  the  latter  year
he  built  the  first  house  on  the  site  of  the  present
city  of  Lexington,  and  bought  a  large  part  of  the
surrounding  property.  He  was  captain  of  a  com
pany  in  Col.  Clark's  expedition  against  the  Shaw-
nees  in  August,  1780,  and  was  second  in  command
to  Daniel  Boone  at  the  battle  of  Lower  Blue  Licks.
Being  overcome  with  fatigue  in  the  retreat,  he  fell
by  the  way,  but  was  rescued  by  Aaron  Reynolds,
who  dismounted  and  gave  him  his  horse,  with  the
remark  :  ''  You  saved  my  soul ;  I  will  save  your
life."  Patterson  had  rebuked  him  for  profanity  in
a  previous  campaign.  He  was  colonel  of  Clark's
second  expedition  into  the  Miami  country  in  1782,
and  in  Gen.  Benjamin  Logan's  expedition  against
the  Shawnees  in  1780,  in  which  he  received  severe
wounds.  He  was  one-third  owner  of  Cincinnati
when  the  town  was  laid  out,  and  in  1804  built  the
first  settlement  at  Dayton,  Ohio,  residing  on  a
farm  in  its  vicinity  until  his  death.

PATTERSON,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  Cappagh,
County  Tyrone,  Ireland.  12  Jan.,  1792  ;  d.  in  Phila
delphia.  Pa.,  7  Aug.,  1881.  His  father,  who  was
engaged  in  the  Irish  rebellion  of  1798,  escaped  to
this  country  and  set
tled  in  Delaware  coun
ty,  Pa.  Robert  was
educated  in  the  com
mon  schools,  and  sub
sequently  became  a
clerk  in  a  Philadelphia
counting  -  house.  He
was  commissioned  1st
lieutenant  of  infantry
in  the  war  of  1812.  and
afterward  served  on
Gen.  Joseph  Bloom-
field's  staff.  He  re
turned  to  commercial
pursuits,  engaged  in
manufacturing  and  es
tablished  several  mills,
became  active  in  poli
tics,  and  was  one  of  the  five  Col.  Pattersons  in  the
Pennsylvania  convention  that  nominated  Andrew
Jackson  for  the  presidency,  and  in  1830  was  presi
dent  of  the  electoral  college  that  cast  the  vote  of
Pennsylvania  for  Martin  Van  Buren.  In  1838,  and
again  in  1844,  he  was  active  in  quelling  local  riots.
He  became  major-general  of  volunteers  at  the  begin
ning  of  the  Mexican  war,  commanded  his  division
at  Cerro  Gordo,  led  the  cavalry  and  advanced  bri
gades  in  the  pursuit,  entered  and  took  Jalapa.  and
was  honorably  mentioned  in  Gen.  Winfield  Scott's
official  report'.  After  the  war  he  resumed  business,
and  took  command  of  the  Pennsylvania  militia.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  the  oldest
major-general  by  commission  in  the  United  States.
On  the  president's  first  call  for  75,000  men  for
three  months,  15  April,  1801,  he  was  mustered  into
service  as  major-general  of  volunteers,  and  assigned
to  a  military  department  composed  of  Pennsyl
vania,  Delaware,  Maryland,  and  the  District  of
Columbia.  He  crossed  the  Potomac  on  15  June  at
Williamsport.  When  Gen.  McDowell  advanced
into  Virginia.  Gen.  Patterson  was  instructed  to
watch  the  troops  under  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston
at  Winchester,  Va.  He  claimed  that  the  failure  of
Gen.  Winfield  Scott  to  send  him  orders,  for  which
he  had  been  directed  to  wait,  caused  his  failure  to
co-operate  with  McDowell  in  the  movements  that
resulted  in  the  battle  of  Bull  Run.  He  was  mus-


074


PATTERSON


PATTI


tered  out  of  service  on  the  expiration  of  his  com
mission,  27  July,  1861,  and  returned  to  private  life.
Gen.  Patterson  was  a  popular  speaker,  one  of  the
largest  mill-owners  in  the  United  States,  and  was
interested  in  sugar-refineries  and  cotton-planta
tions.  He  was  president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of
Lafayette  college  at  the  time  of  his  death.  He
published  "Narrative  of  the  Campaign  in  the
Shenandoah "  (Philadelphia,  1865).  —  His  son,
Francis  Engle,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
24  June,  1827 ;  d.  in  Fairfax  Court-House,  Va.,  22
Nov.,  1862,  entered  the  army  from  civil  life  in  1847
as  2d  lieutenant  of  artillery.  He  became  captain
in  1855,  resigned  in  1857,  and  devoted  himself  to
commercial  pursuits  till  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war,  when  lie  took  command  of  the  115th  regiment
of  Pennsylvania  volunteers.  He  became  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  11  April,  1862,  and  partici
pated  in  the  peninsular  campaign.  He  was  killed
by  the  accidental  discharge  of  his  own  pistol.

PATTERSON,  Robert,  clergyman,  b.  in  Let-
terkenny,  County  Donegal,  Ireland,  in  1829.  He
was  educated  in  his  native  town  and  in  London
derry,  emigrated  to  the  United  States,  and  after
a  course  in  the  theological  seminary  of  the  Re
formed  Presbyterian  church  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1851.  He  was  ordained
the  next  year,  engaged  in  missionary  work,  and  in
1854  became  pastor  of  the  1st  Reformed  Presby
terian  church  of  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  He  was  in
charge  of  churches  in  Chicago,  111.,  from  1857  till
1873.  and  in  San  Francisco  in  1874-'8,  returned  to
Cincinnati  in  the  latter  year,  and  accepted  a  call
from  the  Central  Presbyterian  church  of  that  city,
serving  for  two  years.  Since  1880  he  has  been
pastor  of  the  church  in  Brooklyn,  Alameda  co.,
Cal.  He  has  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  His  pub
lications  include  '•  The  Fables  of  Infidelity  and  the
Facts  of  Faith  "  (Cincinnati,  1860J;  "  The  Ameri
can  Sabbath  "  (Philadelphia,  1868) ;  "  The  Sabbath,
Scientific,  American,  and  Christian  "  (1870) ;  "  Chris
tianity  the  only  Republican  Religion"  (1871);
"  Christ's  Testimony  to  the  Scriptures"  (1872) ;  and
"Egypt's  Place  in  History"  (1875).

PATTERSON,  Robert  Mayne,  clergyman,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  17  July,  1832.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  the  Philadelphia  high-school  in  1849,  was
a  reporter  in  the  United  States  senate  for  five  years,
and  subsequently  studied  law,  and  then  divinity,
in  which  he  was  graduated  at  the  Princeton  theo
logical  seminary  in  1859.  He  was  pastor  of  the
Presbyterian  church  in  Cherry  Valley,  Pa.,  from
that  date  till  1867.  and  for  the  subsequent  thirteen
years  of  the  South  church,  Philadelphia.  Since
1880  he  has  edited  the  "  Presbyterian  Journal,"
and  in  1883  he  resumed  the  pastorate  of  the  Cherry
Valley  church.  He  was  a  member  of  the  commit
tee  of  five  to  revise  and  publish  the  new  "  Digest  of
the  Acts  of  the  Assembly,"  in  1871,  and  was  one  of
the  council  that  met  in  London  in  1875  to  form  the
alliance  of  the  Presbyterian  churches  of  the  world.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Pan-Presbyterian  councils
in  1880  and  1884,  read  a  paper  on  "  Church  Ex
tension  "  before  the  former  body,  and  edited  the
reports  of  its  proceedings.  Princeton  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1884.  Dr.  Patterson  has
published  several  short  histories  of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  the  United  States,  and  "  History  of  Pres-
byterianisra  in  Philadelphia  "  (Philadelphia,  1872) ;
"  Paradise,  or  the  State  and  Place  of  Saved  Souls
between  Death  and  the  Resurrection  "  (1874) :  "  His
torical  Sketch  of  the  Synod  of  Philadelphia"
(1876) ;  "  Visions  of  Heaven  for  the  Life  on  Earth  "
(1877);  "Elijah  the  Favored  Man"  (1880);  and
•'  History  of  the  Synod  of  Pennsylvania  "  (1885).


PATTERSON,  Thomas  H.,  naval  officer,  b.
in  New  Orleans,  La.,  in  May,  1820.  He  entered
the  U.  S.  navy  in  1836  as  midshipman,  became
lieutenant  in  1849,  and  commanded  the  steamship
"Chocura"  in  Hampton  roads,  Va.,  in  the  early
part  of  1862.  He  was  present  at  the  siege  of  York-
town,  made  a  reconnoissance  to  West  Point,  Va.,
and  opened  the  way  up  the  Pamunkey  river  in  sup
port  of  Gen.  George  B.  McClelian's  army.  He  co
operated  with  Gen.  George  Stoneman's  advance,  at
the  White  House,  in  checking  the  approach  of  the
enemy  at  that  point,  and  from  June  till  October
was  senior  officer  of  the  naval  forces  in  York  and
Pamunkey  rivers,  being  in  constant  co-operation
with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  was  commis
sioned  commander  in  July,  1862,  was  in  charge  of
the  steamer  "  James  Adger  "  till  1865,  on  blockade
duty  off  Wilmington,  N.  C.,  and  cut  out  the
steamer  "  Kate"  from  under  the  Confederate  bat
teries  at  New  Inlet  in  July,  1863.  He  participated
in  the  capture  of  a  flying  battery  above  Fort
Fisher  in  August,  1863,  captured  the  "  Cornubia"
and  the  "  Robert  E.  Lee,''  both  filled  with  arms  and
stores  for  the  Confederate  army,  and  the  schooner
"  Ella."  He  became  senior  officer  of  the  outside
blockade  off  Charleston,  S.  C.,  in  September,  1864.
He  was  commissioned  captain  in  1866.  commodore
in  1871,  commanded  the  navy- yard  at  Washington,
D.  C.,  was  president  of  the  naval  board  of  examin
ers  in  1876-'7,  and  in  the  latter  year  became  rear-
admiral.  He  was  retired  in  1883.

PATTI,  Carlotta,  singer,  b.  in  Florence,  Italy,
in  1840.  She  is  the  daughter  of  Salvatore  Patti,  a
Sicilian  and  a  tenor-singer  on  the  operatic  stage,
who  made  his  first  appearance  in  this  country,  4
Oct.,  1848.  in  Philadelphia,  and  died  in  Paris,  30
Aug.,  1859.  Her  mother,  whose  stage  name,  Sig-
nora  Barilli,  was  that  of  her  first  husband,  was  a
native  of  Rome  and  a  singer  of  some  repute.  Car
lotta  was  educated  as  a  pianist  under  Henri  Ilerx,
but  soon  gave  up  the  piano  in  order  to  cultivate
her  voice.  She  made  her  first  public  appearance  in
New  York  city  in  1861  at  a  concert,  and  the  fol
lowing  year  sang  in  opera.  A  slight  lameness  in
terfering  with  her  success  on  the  lyric  stage,  and
the  civil  war  disarranging  her  plans,  she  went
abroad  and  first  sang  in  England,  16  April,  1863.
After  giving  more  than  fifty  concerts  in  London,
she  was  invited  to  appear  before  the  queen.  •'  Never
in  my  life,"  said  the  latter,  after  hearing  her,  "  has
any  singer  so  charmed  and  pleased  me."  During
the  next  six  years  she  gave  hundreds  of  concerts
in  all  parts  of  the  continent  with  unvarying  suc
cess.  Her  voice  is  one  of  the  highest  sopranos
known,  stretching  from  C  below  the  clef  to  G
sharp  in  alt,  considerably  over  two  octaves.  She
returned  to  New  York  in  1869,  and  has  since  ap
peared  frequently  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  Al
though  confining  herself  almost  entirely  to  the
concert  stage,  she  has  occasionally  appeared  in
opera,  singing,  among  other  roles,  that  of  the
Queen  of  Night  in  Mozart's  •'  Magic  Flute,''  the
music  of  which  is  the  despair  of  ordinary  singers.
On  3  Sept.,  1879,  she  married  Ernst  de  Munck,  of
Weimar. — Her  brother.  Carlo,  violinist,  b.  in  Mad
rid,  Spain,  in  1842 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  17
March,  1873,  was  taken  to  the  United  States  with
his  sisters  in  1843,  and  as  a  child  was  taught  the
violin.  In  1862  he  became  the  leader  of  the  orches
tra  at  the  New  Orleans  opera-house,  and  was  after
ward  similarly  employed  in  New  York,  St.  Louis,
and  Cincinnati. — Her  sister,  Adelina  (ADELEA
JUAKA  MARIA  CLORINDA),  singer,  b.  in  Madrid,
Spain,  19  Feb.,  1843,  early  showing  signs  of  great
musical  ability,  was  taught  the  rudiments  of  her  art


PATTIE


PATTISON


675


by  her  step-brother,  Barilli,  and  her  brother-in-law,
Maurice  Strakosch.  She  could  sing  almost  before
she  could  speak,  and  at  four  years  of  age  she  had
caught  many  of  the  principal  airs  of  popular
operas,  which  she  sang  correctly.  When  only

seven  years  old
she  made  her  first
appearance  in
public,  at  a  con
cert  in  Tripler
hall,  New  York,
singing  "  Casta
diva"  and  "  Una
voce."  She  then
made  a  tour  of  the
British  provinces
with  Strakosch
and  Ole  Bull,  sing
ing  the  principal
songs  and  arias  of
Jenny  Lind,  Son-
tag,  and  other  art-
ists.  In  1854  she
again  appeared  in
New  York  city,  and  then  accompanied  Gottschalk,
the  pianist,  to  the  West  Indies.  She  earned  enough
by  this  means  to  enable  her  parents  to  withdraw
her  from  the  stage,  in  order  that  her  musical  educa
tion  might  be  completed.  She  did  not  sing  again
in  public  until  she  made  her  first  appearance  in
Italian  opera,  on  24  Nov.,  1859,  at  the  Academy  of
music,  New  York,  in  Lucia,  Her  success  in  this
and  other  parts  was  immediate.  On  14  May,  1801,
she  made  her  first  appearance  in  London  in  "  La
Sonnambula,"  and  she  at  once  became  a  favorite
in  that  city  by  her  beauty,  grace,  and  artistic
skill.  She  sang  in  the  autumn  of  1861  at  the
Birmingham  festival,  and  made  her  first  appear
ance  in  Paris.  16  Nov..  1862,  afterward  visiting
Holland,  Belgium,  Austria  and  Prussia.  After
1864  she  was  attached  to  the  Italiens  at  Paris,  but
made  visits  to  London,  Baden,  Brussels,  and  St.
Petersburg.  In  the  last-named  city,  in  1870,  the
emperor  bestowed  upon  her  the  Order  of  Merit  and
the  title  of  "  First  Singer  of  the  Court."  She  sang
A'ida  in  the  Apollo  theatre  at  Rome,  and  returned
to  Paris  in  1874.  From  1861  till  1880  she  ap
peared  every  season  at  the  Covent  Garden  concerts
in  London,  besides  making  frequent  tours  in  the
British  provinces,  and  appearing  at  the  Handel
festivals  of  1865,  1877,  and  1880.  In  1881  she
entered  into  an  engagement  with  a  New  York
manager  to  sing  in  the  United  States  in  a  series  of
concerts  during  the  season  of  1881-'2.  She  sub
sequently  appeared  in  opera  in  this  country  in
1882-'3,  ~1884-'5,  and  1886-'7.  In  December,  1887,
she  began  an  extensive  tour  which  was  to  include
South  America,  Mexico,  and  the  United  States.
Besides  a  voice  of  exceptional  beauty,  range,  and
flexibility,  she  possesses  rare  talents  as  an  actress.
Though  too  small  of  stature  adequately  to  person
ate  the  leading  characters  in  grand  opera,  her  pre
eminence  is  indisputable  in  parts  that  require
pathos  and  sentiment,  or  archness  and  coquetry.
On  29  July,  1868,  she  married  in  London  the
Marquis  de  Caux,  a  French  nobleman  ;  but  she  was
divorced  from  him  in  1885,  and  in  1886  she  married
Ernesto  Nicolini,  an  Italian  tenor-singer.

PATTIE,  Sylvester,  pioneer,  b.  in  Bracken
county,  Ky.,  25  Aug.,  1782 ;  d.  in  New  Mexico
about  1828.  His  father  was  born  in  Caroline
county.  Va.,  in  1750,  and  in  1781  emigrated  to
Kentucky,  settled  on  the  south  side  of  the  river  of
that  name,  and  obtained  employment  as  a  carpen
ter  and  teacher.  He  was  one  of  a  party  that


marched  to  the  assistance  of  Bryant's  station  when
that  place  was  attacked.  Sylvester  emigrated  to
Missouri  in  1812,  and  made  his  home  at  St.  Charles.
He  was  lieutenant  of  rangers  in  the  war  of  1812,
and  was  left  in  command  of  a  detachment  at  the
fort  at  Cap  au  Gris,  which  was  shortly  afterward
attacked  by  a  force  of  British  and  Indians.  After
the  siege  had  continued  a  week,  and  Pattie  had
tried  in  vain  to  induce  two  of  his  men  to  make
their  way  through  the  enemy's  lines,  cross  the
Mississippi  and  apprise  the  commander  at  Belle-
fontaine,  forty  miles  distant,  cf  the  precarious
condition  of  the  besieged,  he  disguised  himself
in  the  uniform  of  a  dead  British  soldier  and  suc
cessfully  performed  the  exploit,  bringing  back  500
men  to  the  relief  of  the  garrison.  After  the  war
had  ended,  Pattie  built  a  saw-  and  grist-mill  on  the
Gasconade  river,  sending  down  pine  lumber  in
rafts  to  St.  Louis.  Here  he  remained  until  1824,
when,  having  lost  his  wife  and  become  dissatisfied
with  his  business,  he  decided  to  undertake  an  ex
pedition  into  New  Mexico,  where  he  died  in  cap
tivity  among  the  Indians.  This  was  one  of  the  first
expeditions  from  this  country  into  that  territory.
— His  son,  James  Ohio,  b.  in  Bracken  county,
Ky.,  in  1804,  accompanied  his  father,  and  to  his
pen  we  owe  an  account  of  the  expedition.  On
his  return  his  journal  was  edited  by  Timothy  Flint
and  published  under  the  title  "  The  Personal  Nar
rative  of  James  0.  Pattie,  of  Kentucky,  during  an
Expedition  from  St.  Louis  through  the  Vast  Re
gions  between  that  Place  and  the  Pacific  Ocean,
and  thence  Back  through  the  City  of  Mexico  to
Vera  Cruz,  during  Journeyings  of  Six  Years ;  in
which  he  and  his  Father,  who  accompanied  him,
suffered  Unheard-of  Hardships  and  Dangers,  had
Various  Conflicts  with  the  Indians,  and  were  made
Captives,  in  which  Captivity  his  Father  Died ;  to
gether  with  a  Description  of  the  Country  and  the
Various  Nations  through  which  they  Passed "
(Cincinnati,  1833).

PATTISON,  Gram-Hie  Sharpe,  educator,  b.
near  Glasgow,  Scotland,  in  1791  ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  12  Nov.,  1851.  He  was  educated  in  Glasgow,
and  began  his  career  as  lecturer  on  anatomy  at  the
Andersonian  institute  in  that  city.  He  then  came
to  the  United  States,  and  was  for  several  years
professor  of  anatomy  in  the  medical  college  at
Baltimore.  Returning  to  Europe,  he  held  the
same  chair  in  London  university.  On  again  visit
ing  this  country  he  taught  his  specialty  in  Jeffer
son  medical  college,  Philadelphia,  until  1840,  when
he  accepted  a  similar  office  in  the  medical  school
of  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York,  where
he  remained  until  his  death.  He  published  a
translation  of  J.  N.  Masse's  "Anatomical  Atlas"
(New  York),  and  edited  Jean  Cruveilhier's  "  An
atomy  of  the  Human  Body.''  He  contributed  fre
quently  to  the  "  American  Medical  Recorder,"  and
published  several  pamphlets  on  personal  subjects.

PATTISON,  James,  British  soldier,  b.  in
1724 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  1  March,  1805.  He
early  entered  the  army,  and  was  promoted  cap
tain  of  artillery,  1  Aug.,  1757.  He  became  lieu
tenant-colonel  "in  1761;  colonel,  25  April,  1777;
major-general,  19  Feb.,  1779 ;  lieutenant-general,
28  Sept..  1787;  and  general,  26  Jan.,  1797.  He
was  appointed  adjutant-general  in  America,  11
July,  1776,  and  was  sent  home  with  despatches
after  the  battle  of  Monmouth.  N.  J.  He  accom
panied  the  expedition  against  Charleston,  S.  C.,  in
1780,  and  was  chief  in  command  at  New  York
after  the  capture  of  that  city.  On  his  return  to
England  he  twice  held  a  similar  appointment  at
Woolwich  arsenal.


676


PATTISON


PATTON


PATTISON,  Robert  Emory,  governor  of  Penn
sylvania,  b.  in  Quantico,  Somerset  co.,  Md.,  8  Dec.,
1850.  His  father.  Rev.  Robert  H.  Pattison,  D.  I).,  a
Methodist  clergyman,  was  sent  to  Philadelphia
when  the  son  had  reached  his  sixth  year.  There
the  latter  was  graduated  at  the  Central  high-school
in  1870,  became  a  law-student  in  1869,  and  in
1872  began  to  practise  law.  In  1877  and  1880  he
was  elected  comptroller  of  the  city  of  Philadelphia.
His  fearless  administration  of  this  office  secured
his  nomination  for  governor  by  the  Democrats.
He  was  elected  in  November,  1882,  and  shortly
afterward  he  sent  a  message  to  the  legislature,  in
which  he  recommended  a  policy  of  retrenchment
and  reform,  urging  the  modification  or  repeal  of
laws,  under  which  needless  offices  were  created.
A  controversy  followed,  which  resulted  in  the  suc
cess  of  Gov.  Pattison's  policy  as  it  related  to  com
missions  and  special  legislation.  His  term  expired
in  1886,  and  in  1887  he  was  appointed  a  member
of  the  U.  S.  Pacific  railway  commission.

PATTISON,  Robert  Everett,  clergyman,!),  in
Benson,  Vt.,  9  Aug.,  1800;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in
1874.  After  his  graduation  at  Amherst  in  1830
he  became  tutor  in  Columbian  college,  Washington,
D.  C.,  and  subsequently  professor  of  mathematics
in  Waterville  college,  Me.  From  1836  till  183!)  he
was  president  of  this  college.  He  was  twice  pas
tor  of  the  1st  Baptist  church  in  Providence,  R.  I.
In  1845  he  was  elected  president  of  the  Western
Baptist  theological  institute  at  Lexington.  Ky.  He
was  successively  a  professor  in  Newton  theological
seminary,  in  Shurtleff  college,  and  in  the  Union
Baptist  theological  seminary,  Chicago.  The  degree
of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  'him  by  Brown  in  1838.
He  was  the  author  of  a  "  Commentary  on  the  Epis
tle  to  the  Ephesians  "  (Boston,  1859).

PATTISON.  Thomas,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  8  Feb.,  1822.  He  entered  the  navy  as
midshipman,  2  March,  1839,  and  saw  service  during
the  Mexican  war.  He  was  commissioned  lieu
tenant,  19  Sept.,  1854,  and  in  1857  was  stationed
at  the  Boston  navy-yard,  serving  the  next  three
years  on  the  "  Mississippi,"  of  the  East  India  squad
ron.  In  1861  he  was  attached  to  the  "  Perry,"  of
the  Atlantic  squadron.  He  was  then  transferred  to
the  "  Philadelphia,"  of  the  Potomac  flotilla,  which
he  commanded  in  October.  He  was  made  lieuten
ant-commander,  16  July,  1862,  and  commander,  3
March,  1865.  In  1862  he  was  chief  officer  of  the
"  Sumpter,"  of  the  South  Atlantic  squadron,  and
of  the  "  Clara  Dolson,"  of  the  Mississippi  squadron,
in  1863.  From  1863  till  1865  he  was  in  charge  of
the  naval  station  at  Memphis,  Tenn.  He  was  in
command  of  the  Norfolk  navy-yard  in  1867-'9,  and
in  July,  1870,  was  promoted  captain.  After  being
in  command  of  the  "  Richmond  "  in  the  West  In
dies  in  1871,  Capt.  Pattison  took  her  to  San  Fran
cisco  the  following  year,  and  subsequently  com
manded  the  "  Saranac  "  and  the  receiving-ship  "  In
dependence"  at  the  Mare  island  navy-yard,  Cal.
Promoted  commodore.  11  Dec.,  1877,  he  was  for
eighteen  months  in  charge  of  the  naval  station  at
Port  Royal,  S.  C.,  when  he  was  transferred  to  the
command  of  the  navy-yard  at  Washington,  D.  C.
He  was  detached  in  July,  1883,  made  rear-admiral
the  following  November,  and  retired  8  Feb.,  1884.
Admiral  Pattison  was  the  first  American  naval
officer  to  enter  Jeddo,  now  Tokio,  Japan,  and  was
lieutenant  oh  the  "  Perry  "  when  she  captured  the
first  privateer  taken  during  the  civil  war  in  a  night
engagement  off  Charleston,  S.  C.

PATTON,  Alfred  Spencer,  clergyman,  b.  in
Suffolk,  England,  12  Dec.,  1825  ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  12  Jan.,  1888.  His  parents  emigrated  to  the


United  States,  and  he  was  educated  at  Columbian
college,  Washington,  D.  C.,  and  Madison  univer
sity,  N.  Y.,  receiving  the  degree  of  D.  I),  from  the
latter.  He  was  pastor  successively  of  Baptist
churches  at  West  Chester,  Pa.,  and  Haddonville
and  Hoboken,  N.  J.,  remaining  five  years  in  the
latter  pla.ce.  In  1859  he  was  called  to  Roxbury,
Mass.,  and  in  1862-'3  he  was  chaplain  of  the  Massa
chusetts  senate.  In  1864  he  was  invited  to  Utica,
and  there  built  the  Tabernacle  Baptist  church.  In
1872  he  purchased  the  "  American  Baptist,"  an  anti-
slavery  journal,  in  New  York  city,  changing  its
name  to  "  The  Baptist  Weekly,"  and  it  soon  became
widely  known  as  an  organ  of  that  denomination.
He  continued  its  publication  until  his  death.  He
wrote  "Light  in  the  Valley"  (Philadelphia,  1852);
"  My  Joy  and  Crown  "  (1855) ;  "  Kincaid,  the  Hero
Missionary  "  (New  York,  1858) ;  "  The  Losing  and
Taking  of  Marisoul.  or  Lectures  on  the  Holy  War"
(185!))';  and  "Live  for  Jesus"  (Philadelphia,  1861).
PATTON,  Francis  Landey,  educator,  b.  in
Warwick,  Bermuda,  22  Jan.,  1843.  He  was  edu
cated  at  University  and  Knox  colleges,  Toronto,
Canada,  and  at  Princeton  theological  seminary,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1865.  He  was  pastor  of
Presbyterian  churches  in  New  York  city,  Nyack,
and  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  and  Chicago,  111.,  between
1865  and  1881.  From  1871  till  1881  he  was  pro
fessor  of  didactic  and  polemic  theology  in  the
Presbyterian  theological  seminary  at  Chicago,  and
in  the  latter  year  he  accepted  the  chair  of  the  rela
tion  of  philosophy  and  science  to  the  Christian  re


ligion  in  Princeton  theological  seminary.  lie  was
also  professor  of  ethics  in  Princeton  college.  On  9
Feb.,  1888,  he  was  chosen  president  of  the  latter
institution,  by  a  unanimous  vote  of  the  board  of
trustees.  He  was  editor  of  the  Chicago  "  Interior"
in  1873-'6,  and  moderator  of  the  general  assembly
of  his  church  in  1878.  While  in  Chicago  he  be
gan  the  prosecution  before  the  presbytery  of  that
city  of  Prof.  David  Swing,  whom  he  assailed  as  un
orthodox.  This  contest,  although  the  presbytery
did  not  fully  sustain  him.  brought  him  prominently
before  the  religious  public.  In  the  pulpit  Dr.  Pat-
ton  is  impressive,  clear,  and  logical.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Hanover  college,  Ind..  in
1872,  and  that  of  LL.  I),  from  Wooster  university,
Ohio,  in  1878.  He  has  contributed  to  periodicals,
and  published  in  book-form  "  Inspiration  of  the
Scriptures"  (Philadelphia,  1859)  and  "Summary
of  Christian  Doctrine"  (1874).  The  illustration
represents  Nassau  hall.  Princeton  college.

PATTON.  Jacob  Harris,  author,  b.  in  Fayette
county,  Pa..  20  May,  1812.  He  was  graduated  at
Jefferson  college,  Pa,,  in  1839.  and  at  Union  theo
logical  seminary,  New  York,  in  1846.  After  leav
ing  college  he  taught  four  years  at  the  south,  three
of  which  were  spent  as  tutor  in  Nashville  univer
sity.  He  then  came  to  New  York  city,  and,  on


PATTOX


PATTOX


677


finishing  his  course  in  the  seminary,  was  principal
of  a  private  classical  school  till  1882.  He  has  since
devoted  himself  entirely  to  authorship.  His  pub
lications  in  book-form  include  "  A  Concise  History
of  the  American  People "  (2  vols.,  Xew  York.
1860-'82);  "Yorktown,  1781-1881"  (1881);  "The
Democratic  Party,  its  History  and  Influence "
(1884);  "A  Brief  History  of "  the  Presbyterian
Church  in  the  United  States"  and  "The  Natural
Resources  of  the  United  States  "  (1888).

PATTON,  James,  Canadian  lawyer,  b.  in  Pres-
cott,  Upper  Canada,  10  June,  1824.  His  father,
Andrew  Patton,  a  native  of  Scotland,  was  major
of  the  45th  regiment.  James  was  educated  at
Upper  Canada  and  King's  colleges,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1845,  and  in  1847
received  the  degree  of  LL.  B.  from  Toronto  univer
sity.  He  began  practice  in  Barrie,  and  founded  the
Ba'rrie  "  Herald  "  in  1852  and  the  "  Upper  Canada
Law  Journal  "  in  1855.  In  1856  he  was  elected  a
member  of  the  legislative  council  of  Canada  for
Saugeen,  and  in  that  year,  on  the  formation  of
the  Toronto  university'association,  he  was  elected
its  president.  In  1857  he  was  appointed  a  member
of  its  senate.  He  became  vice-chancellor  of  To
ronto  university  in  1860,  in  1861  chairman  of  the
Toronto  university  commission,  Queen's  counsel  in
1862.  and  in  this  year  was  appointed  solicitor-  j
general  for  Upper  Canada.  He  has  been  collector
of  customs  at  Toronto  since  1881.

PATTON,  John  Mercer,  lawyer,  b.  in  Vir
ginia  in  1796 :  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  29  Oct.,  1858.
He  received  a  classical  education,  and  was  gradu
ated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1818.  He  subsequently  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  to  prac
tise  at  Fredericksburg,  Va.  He  was  elected  to
congress  to  fill  a  vacancy,  and  four  times  re-elected,
serving  continuously  from  6  Dec.,  1830,  till  1838,
when  he  resigned.  He  then  removed  to  Rich
mond,  and  resumed  practice,  taking  high  rank  at
the  bar.  He  was  elected  and  served  until  his  death  \
as  judge  of  the  court  of  appeals.

PATTON.  Robert,  patriot,  b.  in  Westport,
Ireland,  in  1755 ;  d.  in  Xew  York  city,  3  Jan.,  1814.  !
He  was  brought  to  this  country  when  he  was  seven  ;
years  of  age,  and  resided  in  Philadelphia.  In  Octo
ber,  1776,  he  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  Revolu
tionary  army,  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  British,  and
confined  for  some  time  in  Xew  York  city.  After
his  liberation  he  rose  to  the  rank  of  major  and  served
under  Lafayette.  He  was  early  a  member  of  the
Society  of  the  Cincinnati.  In  1789  he  was  appointed
postmaster  of  Philadelphia,  that  office  then  being
the  most  important  in  the  country.  He  discharged
the  duties  for  nearly  twenty  years,  when  he  re
signed  and  removed  to  Xew  York  city.  He  was
intimate  with  President  Madison,  and  the  latter
offered  him  the  postmaster-generalship,  but  Patton
refused  the  appointment  on  the  ground  that  he
was  unwilling  to  remove  his  family  from  a  free  to
a  slave  community.  One  of  his  chief  character
istics  was  his  strict  integrity.  When  he  was  made
postmaster  he  refused  to  appoint  any  of  his  sons
to  a  clerkship,  and  on  his  resignation  he  strictly  en
joined  them  not  to  apply  to  be  his  successor,  saying
that  the  office  had  been  long  enough  in  his  family,
and  should  now  go  to  another.  When  war  was
declared  in  1812,  and  a  government  loan,  which
every  one  prophesied  would  prove  a  failure,  was
placed  on  the  market,  he  went  at  an  early  hour  on
the  first  day  and  subscribed  $60,000,  asserting  that,
if  his  country  should  be  ruined,  his  property  would
then  be  valueless.  —  His  son,  Robert  Bridges,
educator,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  25  Sept.,  1794 ;  d.


in  Xew  York  city,  6  May,  1839,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1817,  and  received  the  degree  of  A.  B.
from  Middlebury  in  1818,  and  that  of  Ph.  D.  from
the  University  of  Gottingen,  Germany,  in  1821.
He  was  professor  of  Greek  and  Latin  at  Middle-
bury  college  until  1825,  and  then  accepted  the
same  chair  at  Princeton,  but  resigned  in  1829,  to
become  principal  of  the  Edgehill  seminary  at
Princeton,  X.  J.  In  1834-'8  he  was  professor  of
Greek  in  the  University  of  the  city  of  Xew  York,
and  he  took  high  rank  as  a  Greek  scholar.  He
translated  Thiersch's  "  Greek  Verbs "  from  the
German  (Xew  York,  1830),  and  revised  and  edited
Donegan's  Greek  lexicon. — Another  son,  William,
clergyman,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  23  Aug.,  1798;
d.  in  Xew  Haven,  Conn..  9  Sept.,  1879,  was  gradu
ated  at  Middlebury  in  1818,  and,  after  studying
at  Princeton  theological  seminary,  was  ordained.
During  twenty-six  years  of  his  life  he  was  pastor
of  churches  in  Xew  York  city.  From  1834  till
1837  he  was  secretary  of  the  American  educa
tion  society.  He  spent  the  latter  part  of  his  life
in  Xew  Haven,  Conn.,  engaged  in  literary  and
ministerial  work.  He  was  the  first  to  suggest  the
idea  of  the  World's  evangelical  alliance,  which  he
did  in  a  letter  to  Rev.  John  Angoll  James,  of  Eng
land,  in  1843.  He  attended  the  convention  in
London  in  August.  1846,  that  organized  the  alli
ance.  He  was  a  founder  of  the  Xew  York  union
theological  seminary,  and  first  proposed  its  estab
lishment.  He  made  fourteen  visits  to  Europe  be
tween  1825  and  1879.  He  was  an  earnest  opponent
of  slavery,  and  for  forty  years  a  member  of  the
executive  committee  of  the  American  home  mis
sionary  society.  His  views  on  the  subject  of  tem
perance  were"  equally  radical.  In  the  pulpit  he
was  characterized  not  so  much  by  breadth  and
accuracy  of  scholarship,  finish  of  style,  or  elegance
of  delivery,  as  by  his  strong  grasp  upon  his  subject,
his  simplicity,  directness,  aptness,  and  freshness.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  Uni
versity  of  the  city  of  Xew  York.  Besides  editing
President  Jonathan  Edwards's  work  on  "  Revi
vals"  and  Charles  G.  Finney's  "  Lectures  on  Re
vivals"  (London,  1839),  preparing  the  American
editions  of  "  The  Cottage  Bible."  of  which  over
170,000  copies  were  sold,  and  '•  The  Milage  Testa
ment"  (Xew  York.  1833).  and  assisting  in  editing
••The  Christian  Psalmist"  (1836),  he  published
'•  The  Laws  of  Fermentation  and  the  Wines  of  the
Ancients"  (1871);  "The  Judgment  of  Jerusalem
Predicted  in  Scripture.  Fulfilled  in  History  "  (Lon
don,  1879) ;  "  Jesus  of  Xazareth  "  (1878) ;  and  "  Bible
Principles  and  Bible  Characters  "  (Hartford,  1879).
— Robert's  grandson,  William  Weston,  clergy
man,  b.  in  Xew  York  city,  19  Oct.,  1821,  was  gradu
ated  at  the  L'niversity  of  the  city  of  Xew  York  in
1839  and  at  the  L^nion  theological  seminary  in
1842.  After  taking  charge  of  a  Congregational
church  in  Boston,  Mass.,  for  three  years,  he  became
pastor  of  one  in  Hartford.  Conn.,  in  1846,  and
in  Chicago,  111.,  in  1857.  From  1867  till  1872  he
was  editor  of  "  The  Advance  "  in  that  city,  and
during  1874  he  was  lecturer  on  modern  skepticism
at  Oberlin,  Ohio,  and  Chicago  theological  semi
naries,  since  which  time  he  has  been  president  of
Howard  university,  Washington.  D.  C.,  filling  the
chair  of  natural  theology  and  evidences  of  Christi
anity  in  its  theological  department.  He  took  an
earnest  part  in  the  anti-slavery  movement,  and
was  chairman  of  the  committee  that  presented  to
President  Lincoln,  13  Sept.,  1862,  the  memorial
from  Chicago  asking  him  to  issue  a  proclamation
of  emancipation.  He  was  vice-president  of  the
Xorrhwestern  sanitary  commission  during  the  civil


678


PAUL


PAUL


war,  and  as  such  repeatedly  visited  the  eastern
and  western  armies,  publishing  several  pamphlet
reports.  In  1880  he  went,  on  behalf  of  the  freed-
men,  to  Europe,  where,  and  in  the  Orient,  he  re
mained  nearly  a  year.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Asbury  (now  DePauw)  university,  Ind.,
in  1864,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  the  University  of
the  city  of  New  York  in  1882.  He  is  the  author
of  "The  Young  Man"  (Hartford,  1847:  repub-
lished  as  "The  Young  Man's  Friend."  Auburn.
N.  Y.,  1850) ;  "  Conscience  and  Law  "  (New  York,
1850);  "Slavery  and  Infidelity  "(Cincinnati,  1850):
"  Spiritual  Victory  "  (Boston,  1874) ;  and  "  Prayer
and  its  Remarkable  Answers  "  (Chicago,  1875).

PAUL,  Frederick  William,  Duke  of  Wurtem-
berg,  German  naturalist,  b.  in  Carlsruhe,  Silesia,
25  June,  1797;  d.  in  Mergentheim,  24  Nov.,  1800.
He  showed  a  fondness  for  mathematics  and  the
natural  sciences  at  an  early  age,  and  in  1822  made
a  scientific  journey  through  the  United  States.  He
returned  to  Europe  in  1824,  and  travelled  much  in
the  southern  countries  of  the  continent.  In  1828
he  married  a  princess  of  the  house  of  Thurm  and
Taxis,  but  the  marriage  was  not  happy,  and  the
duke  separated  from  his  wife  in  1829  and  embarked
for  the  United  States.  He  spent  the  next  two
years  in  exploring  North  America,  Ilayti,  and
Mexico,  afterward  went  to  Egypt,  and  spent  a
large  part  of  the  rest  of  his  life  in  Africa,  Asia,  and
the  islands  of  the  Pacific.  His  castle  of  Mergent
heim,  the  ancient  residence  of  the  grand-masters
of  the  Teutonic  order,  was  filled  with  collections  of
natural  history,  and  contained  specimens  that  were
not  found  in  any  of  the  great  official  cabinets  of
Europe.  In  North  America  he  had  become  inti
mate  with  many  Indian  chiefs,  and  they  supplied
him,  in  exchange  for  his  presents,  with  ornaments
and  other  interesting  articles  that  were  in  use
among  the  tribes.  The  duke  was  the  head  of  the
Catholic  branch  of  the  house  of  Wiirtemberg.  Ex
tracts  from  his  travels  appeared  in  the  "  Ausland,"
the  Stuttgart  journals  of  medicine  and  the  natural
sciences,  and  elsewhere.

PAUL,  Gabriel  Rene,  soldier,  b.  in  St.  Louis.
Mo.,  22  March.  1813 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  5
May,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1834,  made  1st  lieutenant  in  the  7th
infantry,  20  Oct.,  1830,  and  served  in  the  Florida
war  in  1839-'42,  surprising  a  camp  of  Seminole
Indians  near  Tampa  bay  in  the  latter  year.  He
was  commissioned  captain,  19  April,  1846,  took
part  in  the  Mexican  war,  was  wounded  at  the  bat
tle  of  Cerro  Gordo,  and  brevetted  major  for  gallant
conduct  at  Chapultepec,  where  he  led  the  storming
party  that  captured  the  enemy's  flag.  The  follow
ing  year  he  was  presented  with  a  sword  by  the
citizens  of  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  for  his  services  in  Mexico.
In  an  expedition  to  Rio  Grande  river,  Texas,  in  1852,
he  took  part  in  the  capture  of  a  band  of  desperadoes,
and  on  2  Oct.,  1858,  he  surprised  and  took  a  camp
of  hostile  Indians  on  Spanish  Fork,  Utah.  Later
he  was  promoted  major  of  the  8th  infantry,  became
colonel  of  the  4th  New  Mexico  volunteers',  and  did
good  service  in  keeping  the  Confederates  out  of
that  territory.  He  was  acting  inspector-general  of
the  Department  of  New  Mexico  till  December,
1861,  subsequently  in  command  of  the  southern
military  district,  and  on  13  April,  1802.  engaged  in
a  skirmish  with  the  enemy  at  Peralta.  He  was
made  lieutenant-colonel  on  25  April,  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  18  April,  1803,  and  colonel,
13  Sept.,  1864.  He  was  present  at  Fredericksburg,
Chancellorsville,  and  Gettysburg,  in  which  latter
engagement  he  was  deprived  of  the  sight  of  both
eyes  by  a  rifle-ball.  In  the  following  November  he


was  presented  by  the  29th  New  Jersey  volunteers
with  a  jewelled  sword  for  his  services  in  that  battle.
Gen.  Paul  was  on  sick-leave  until  10  Feb.,  1805,
served  as  deputy-governor  of  the  Soldiers'  home
near  Washington.  D.  C.,  till  13  June  of  that  year,
and  was  in  charge  of  the  military  asylirm  at
Harrodsburg.  Ky.,  till  20  Dec..  1860.  He  was  re
tired  from  active  service,  10  Feb.,  1865,  on  account
of  his  blindness,  and  on  the  23d  of  the  same  month
he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general.  U.  S.  army,  for
gallant  conduct  at  the  battle  of  Gettysburg"  In
December,  I860,  congress  granted  him  the  pay  and
allowances  attaching  to  the  full  rank  of  brigadier-
general.  On  10  Dec.,  1886,  a  monument  erected
to  the  memory  of  Gen.  Paul  in  the  Arlington.
Va.,  cemetery,  by  his  comrades  of  the  Grand  army
of  the  republic,  was  dedicated  with  appropriate
ceremonies. — His  son,  Augustus  Cliouteau,  sol
dier,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  10  April,  1842,  was
a  cadet  at  the  Kentucky  military  institute  in
1801.  In  May,  under  the  call  for  three  months'
troops,  he  enlisted  and  was  made  captain  of  Ken
tucky  mounted  infantry.  He  was  mustered  out  in
the  following  August,  but  entered  the  army  again
as  captain  in  the  23d  Kentucky  volunteers,  his
commission  bearing  date  2  Jan.,  1862.  He  took
part  with  his  regiment  in  the  campaigns  of  the
Armies  of  the  Ohio  and  the  Cumberland  until  1
June,  1863,  when  he  was  appointed  assistant  adju
tant-general  of  volunteers.  In  this  capacity  he
served  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  on  the  staffs
of  Gen.  Henry  Baxter  and  Gen.  Andrew  A.  Hum
phreys,  and  on  that  of  Byron  R.  Pierce.  During
this  period  Col.  Paul  took  part  in  the  battles  of  the
Wilderness,  Spottsylvania  Court-House,  etc.,  was
captured  by  the  enemy,  spent  eleven  months  in
Confederate  prisons,  and  was  among  those  officers
that  were  placed  by  the  Confederates  under  the  fire
of  National  guns  at  Charleston,  S.  C.  He  was
brevetted  major  for  gallantry  in  the  Wilderness,,
and  lieutenant-colonel  for  meritorious  conduct  at
Spottsylvania  Court-House.  He  was  mustered  out,.
19  Sept.,  1865.  On  11  May,  1866,  he  was  appointed
2d  lieutenant  in  the  regular  army,  but  declined.
He  subsequently  accepted  the  same  rank  in  the  3d
cavalry,  and  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant,  20  Dec.,.
1872.  During  the  next  twelve  years  Col.  Paul  saw
arduous  service  on  the  western  frontier.  In  May,
1881,  his  health  became  so  impaired  that  he  re
signed  his  commission.

PAUL,  Henry  Martyn,  astronomer,  b.  in  Dor
chester  (now  Hyde  Park),  Mass.,  25  June,  1851.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1873,  and  as  a
civil  engineer  at  the  Thayer  school  in  1875.  In
the  latter  year  he  was  appointed  assistant  astrono
mer  in  the  U.  S.  naval  observatory,  Washington,
D.  C.,  where  he  remained  until  1880,  meanwhile
serving  with  the  expeditions  that  were  sent  to  ob
serve  the  transit  of  Mercury  in  May,  1878.  and
the  solar  eclipse  of  July.  1878.  During  1880-'3  he
was  professor  of  astronomy  in  the  LTniversity  of
Tokio.  Japan,  after  which  he  returned  to  his  post  in
Washington.  Prof.  Paul  is  a  member  of  various
scientific  societies,  and  is  the  author  of  astronomi
cal  monographs  that  have  been  published  as  ap
pendices  to  the  annual  volumes  of  the  "Observa
tions  "  of  the  U.  S.  naval  observatory.

PAUL,  Howard,  actor,  b.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,
10  Nov.,  1835.  In  1850  he  went  to  England,  and
after  essaying  journalism  he  brought  out,  in  con
junction  with  John  Leech,  who  furnished  the  draw
ings,  a  serial  entitled  "Dashes  of  American  Hu
mor,  or  Yankee  Stories "  (London ;  New  York,
1853).  This  work  attained  immediate  popularity,
both  in  England  and  the  United  States.  He  then


PAUL


PAULDING


679


turned  his  attention  to  writing  for  the  London
stage,  and  produced  various  pieces  of  a  light  char
acter.  This  was  followed  with  a  drama, "  A  Mob
Cap,"  at  Drury  Lane  theatre.  About  this  time  Mr.
Paul  married  Isabelle  Featherstone,  and  in  1854  he
made  his  first  appearance  on  the  stage  at  Bath  in  a
farce  of  his  own  composition,  entitled  "  My  Neigh
bor  Opposite."  Subsequently  he  wrote  and  pro
duced  •'  Locked  Out,"  a  pleasing  trifle  that  proved
widely  popular  throughout  Great  Britain  and  sub
sequently  in  this  country.  In  1858  he  brought  out
'•  Patchwork,"  a  combination  of  songs  and  dialogue,
and  the  forerunner  of  a  kind  of  entertainment  that
has  since  been  popular.  After  playing  his  own
adaptation,  from  the  French,  "  Thrice  Married,"
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Paul  came  to  the  United  States,
where  they  made  an  extended  tour.  Their  last
visits  to  this  country  were  made  in  1866-'7  and
1869.  Of  late  years  Mr.  Paul  has  rarely  appeared
in  public,  but  has  been  more  or  less  concerned  in
theatrical  affairs,  at  times  as  a  manager.  Besides
the  works  mentioned  above,  he  has  written  "  The
Young  Chemist ;  Pastimes  for  Youth  "  (London,
1851) ;  "  The  Book  of  American  Songs,  with  Notes,
Biographical  and  Critical  "  (185?) ;  "  Patchwork
Embroidered  with  Art,  Whim,  and  Fancy  "  (1859) ;
"  Clever  Things  said  by  Children  "  (1886) ;  and
"  Funny  Stories  that  will  make  You  Laugh  out
Loud  "  (1887).  Mr.  Paul  has  also  been  a  frequent
contributor  to  the  press  on  literary  and  artistic  sub
jects. — His  wife,  Isabelle  Featherstone,  singer,
b.  in  Dartford,  Kent,  England,  about  1835 :  d.  in
England,  8  June.  1879.  was  the  possessor  of  a  con
tralto  voice  of  extraordinary  power  and  compass.
With  proper  training  she  would  have  taken  a  high
position  on  the  lyric  stage,  but  she  was  satisfied
with  playing  a  range  of  characters  that  were  en
tirely  unworthy  of  her.  After  studying  in  France
and  Italy,  she  appeared  in  London,  in  1853,  as
C'apt.  Mac-heath  in  the  "  Beggars'  Opera,"  winning
an  easy  triumph.  The  opera  was  revived  the  fol
lowing  season  at  the  Haymarket.  Besides  acting
jointly  with  her  husband,  she  made  a  success  by
singing  tenor  parts  in  an  English  adaptation  of
Offenbach's  "  Grande  Duchesse,"  and  in  his  "  Gene-
vieve  de  Brabant "  in  the  original  French,  the  lat
ter  being  given  in  New  York  city.  Mrs.  Paul  was
perhaps  best  known  by  her  almost  perfect  imita
tion  of  the  English  tenor,  Sims  Reeves.  In  1869
she  essayed  the  part  of  Lady  Macbeth  in  London.
Her  last  important  appearance  was  in  Gilbert  and
Sullivan's  opera  of  the  "  Sorcerer."

PAUL,  Jose  Jesus,  Venezuelan  statesman,  b.
in  Caracas,  Venezuela,  in  1825:  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C.,  7  March,  1870.  He  was  the  son  of  an  emi
nent  lawyer  who  was  for  many  years  chief  justice
of  the  supreme  court.  The  son  was  educated  for
the  legal  profession,  and  held  the  office  of  judge,
when  he  was  chosen  secretary  of  the  house  of  rep
resentatives.  He  was  soon  afterward  elected  to  a
seat  in  that  body,  but  did  not  take  it,  as  he  was  at
once  appointed  minister  of  the  interior  in  the  cabi
net  of  President  Tovar.  When  a  revolution  drove
Tovar  from  power  and  placed  Juan  Crisostomo
Falcon  at  the  head  of  the  government,  Paul  re
tired  from  public  life  for  a  time  and  devoted  him
self  to  agriculture.  The  latter  did  not  suit  his  ac
tive  temperament,  and,  believing  that  the  people
were  ready  for  another  change,  he  visited  the  dif
ferent  states  and  advised  a  revolution,  which
speedily  followed  in  1868.  Jose  Tadeo  Monagas
was  then  made  president,  and  Paul  was  appointed
to  a  judgeship,  the  duties  of  which  he  filled  until
he  was  sent  as  minister  to  the  United  States.  Pie
was  a  man  of  great  firmness  and  much  ability.


PAULDING,  James  Kirke,  author,  b.  in  Nine
i  Partners,  Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y.,  22  Aug.,  1779 ;  d.  at
Hyde  Park,  in  the  same  county,  6  April,  1860.  He
was  the  youngest  son  of  William  Paulding,  a  mem
ber  of  the  New
York  committee
of  safety  and  com
missary  -  general
of  the  state  troops,
and  hiswife.Cath-
erine  Ogden,  of
the  New  Jersey
family  of  that
name.  Soon  af
ter  peace  was  de
clared  the  Paul-
dings  returned
to  their  former
abode  in  West-
chester  county.
Of  his  early  years
Mr.  Paulding
said :  "  There  was
little  sunshine  in
my  youth.  For
some  time  after
the  war  there  were  very  few  schools  in  our  part  of
the  country,  and  the  nearest  school-house  was  up
ward  of  two  miles  from  our  residence.  At  this  coun
try  school,  which  was  a  log-hut,  I  received  my  educa
tion,  which  first  and  last  cost  about  fifteen  dollars
— certainly  quite  as  much  as  it  was  worth."  At  the
age  of  nineteen  he  went  to  New  York  and  lived  with
his  brother  William,  who  had  secured  a  place  for
him  in  a  public  office.  Through  his  brother-in-law,
William  Irving,  a  man  of  wit  and  genius,  whose
house  was  the  familiar  resort  of  many  young  men
of  literary  taste  and  aspirations,  Paulding  became
acquainted  with  Washington  Irving.  A  strong
friendship  immediately  sprang  up  between  them,
which  continued  unbroken  to  the  last.  They  had
each  written  some  trifling  articles  for  the  "  Morn
ing  Chronicle"  and  for  other  journals  of  the  day —
Paulding  a  few  hits  at  the  follies  of  society,  and
Irving  his  '•  Oliver  Old  Style  "  essays — when,  meet
ing  one  evening  at  William  Irving's,  they  formed
the  project  of  publishing  a  periodical  to  amuse
themselves  and  the  town.  In  January,  1807,  the
first  number  of  "  Salmagundi  "  was  issued.  It  was
their  joint  production,  with  the  exception  of  the
poetical  epistles  and  several  prose  articles,' which
were  written  by  William  Irving.  It  satirized  the
follies  of  the  day  with  great  prodigality  of  wit  and
no  less  exuberance  of  good  nature.  Nothing  of
the  kind  had  appeared  before  from  an  American  pen
or  press,  and  its  great  success  was  perhaps  the  de
termining  cause  of  the  subsequent  devotion  to  liter
ature  of  its  chief  authors.  At  the  expiration  of  a
year,  twenty  numbers  having  been  issued,  "  Salma
gundi  "  was  suddenly  discontinued,  owing  to  the
refusal  of  the  publisher  to  remunerate  its  authors.
In  1812,  having  in  the  meanwhile  written  occasion
ally  for  various  periodicals,  Mr.  Paulding  published
his  second  work,  "The  Diverting  History  of  John
Bull  and  Brother  Jonathan,"  in  the  style  of  Ar-
buthnot,  which  passed  through  many  editions,
and  may  be  considered  as  among  the  most  suc
cessful  of  Paulding's  productions.  It  was  followed
during  the  next  year  by  a  parody  on  Scott's  "  Lay
of  the  Last  Minstrel," "entitled  "The  Lay  of  the
Scottish  Fiddle,"  which  appeared  anonymously,  like
most  of  Paulding's  earlier  writings.  An  edition  of
this  national  satire  was,  with  the  addition  of  a  com
plimentary  preface,  published  in  London,  and  en
joyed  what  might  be  called  the  distinction  of  a


680


PAULDING


PAULDING


severe  castigation  from  the  "  Quarterly  Review."
Our  authors  next  work  was  a  pamphlet  in  prose,
"  The  United  States  and  England  (1814),"  called
forth  by  the  strictures  of  the  same  periodical  on
"  Inchiquin's  Letters  "  by  Charles  J.  Ingersoll.  This
clever  brochure  attracted  the  attention  of  President
Madison,  and  paved  the  way  for  the  subsequent  po
litical  career  of  its  author. "  After  making  a  tour  in
Virginia  in  the  year  1816,  Paulding  published
"  Letters  from  the  South  by  a  Northern  Man."  in
which  he  gives  glowing  descriptions  of  the  scenery
and  society  of  the  •'  Old  Dominion."  Soon  after  the
appearance  of  this  work  he  was  made  secretary  to
the  first  board  of  navy  commissioners,  consisting
of  Commodores  Hull,  Porter,  and  Rodgers.  In
1818  Paulding  issued  '•  The  Backwoodsman,"  his
most  elaborate  poetical  production,  written  in  the
heroic  measure  and  describing  the  fortunes  of  an
emigrant  and  his  family  in  removing  from  the
banks  of  the  Hudson  to  the  western  wilderness.
Of  this  production,  which  was  translated  and  pub
lished  in  Paris,  Halleck  wrote :  "  The  muse  has
damned  him — let  him  damn  the  muse."  It  may
be  said  in  passing  that  Paulding  during  his  long
literary  life  devoted  much  time  and  strength  to
unpopular  verse  and  to  writing  anonymous  articles
and  editorials  on  various  subjects  for  the  "Even
ing  Post "  and  other  journals  and  magazines,  and
"  To  party  gave  up  what  was  meant  for  mankind  "
by  entering  the  field  of  political  controversy.

In  1819  a  second  series  appeared  of  "Salma
gundi,"  which  was  entirely  the  product  of  Paul-
ding's  pen.  It  failed  to  receive  the  cordial  recep
tion  that  greeted  its  predecessor.  The  "  town  "  in
terest  had  diminished,  the  author  was  residing  in
Washington,  engaged  in  official  duties,  and  the  j
work  was  deficient  in  that  buoyant  spirit  of  vivacity
which  was  one  of  the  chief  characteristics  of  the
first  series.  The  scene  of  Paulding's  first  novel,
"  Koningsmarke,  the  Long  Finne,"  which  appeared
in  1823,  is  laid  among  the  early  Swedish  settlers  on
the  Delaware.  This  was  followed  one  year  later  by
"John  Bull  in  America,  or  the  New  Munchausen,"
purporting  to  be  the  tour  of  an  English  traveller
in  the  United  States,  and  in  182(5  appeared  "The
Merry  Tales  of  the  Three  Wise  Men  of  Gotham,''  a
satire  on  the  social  system  of  Robert  Owen,  on  the
science  of  phrenology,and  on  the  legal  maxim  caveat
empfor.  "  The  New  Mirror  for  Travellers  "  was  pub
lished  in  1828,  and  was  followed  by  "  Tales  of  the
Good  Woman  "  (1829)  and  "Chronicle  of  the  City
of  Gotham  "  (1830),  in  which  Mr.  Paulding  gives
what  purports  to  be  a  translation  of  curious  old
Dutch  legends  of  New  Amsterdam,  but  emanating
exclusively  from  the  author's  fertile  imagination.
In  1831  "  The  Dutchman's  Fireside  "  was  issued,  a
story,  as  the  author  informed  the  writer  of  this
notice,  founded  on  Mrs.  Grant's  descriptions  of
the  manners  of  the  early  Dutch  settlers  in  her
"  Memoirs  of  an  American  Lady."  This  novel  is  in
Paulding's  happiest  vein,  and  is  his  most  success
ful  production.  It  passed  through  six  editions  in
twice  that  number  of  months,  was  republished  in
London,  and  translated  into  the  Dutch  and  French
languages.  In  the  following  year  appeared  "  West
ward  Ho !"  the  scene  of  which  is  principally  laid  in
Kentucky.  For  the  copyright  of  this  work,  and
also  for  that  of  "  The  Dutchman's  Fireside,"  the
author  received  in  each  instance,  on  the  delivery  of
the  manuscript,  fifteen  hundred  dollars — a  hand
some  sum  for  those  days.  In  1835  was  published
Paulding's  admirable  "  Life  of  George  Washing
ton."  addressed  to  the  youth  of  his  country,  and
constituting  one  of  the  most  attractive  personal
sketches  of  Gen.  Washington  ever  written.  His


next  work,  which  appeared  in  1836.  when  the  Texas
question  was  agitating  the  country,  was  on  "  Sla
very  in  the  United  States."  It  is  an  unhesitating
defence  of  slavery  against  every  kind  of  religious,
moral,  and  economical  attack.

After  having  filled  the  office,  of  navy  agent  at
the  port  of  New  York  for  twelve  years,  embracing
three  administrations,  Paulding  resigned  the  posi
tion  to  enter  Van  Buren's  cabinet  in  1837.  In  his
determination  to  reform  abuses  in  the  naval  affairs
of  the  country,  and  to  be  master  of  his  department,
lie  naturally  met  witli  opposition  in  many  quarters,
and  had  occasion  to  make  use  of  his  practised  pen.
While  in  the  navy  department  he  viewed  with
alarm  the  introduction  of  steamships  and  engi
neers  and  the  persistency  with  which  the  advanced
naval  officers  advocated  them.  He  wrote  that  he
"  never  would  consent  to  see  our  grand  old  ships  sup
planted  by  these  new  and  ugly  sea-monsters,"  and
elsewhere  he  exclaims,  ••  I  am  steamed  to  death  ! "
Soon  after  his  retirement  from  the  navy  depart
ment,  over  which  he  presided  with  ability  and
fidelity,  Mr.  Paulding  purchased  in  1841  a  pleasant
home  on  the  banks  of  the  Hudson  near  Hyde  Park,
represented  in  the  accompanying  illustration,  which
lie  named  "Placentia."  The  lines  of  our  author
had  fallen  in  pleasant  places.  No  poet  could  have
pictured  a  lovelier  retreat,  and  there,  surrounded


by  his  children  and  grandchildren  and  some  of  the
finest  scenery  of  the  Hudson,  he  devoted  himself  to
the  congenial  pursuits  of  agriculture  and  author
ship.  Some  of  his  magazine  articles  written  dur
ing  the  years  1842  to  1846  are  equal  to  any  of  the
compositions  of  his  best  days.  A  novel  entitled
"The  Old  Continental,  or  the  Price  of  Liberty,"  a
Revolutionary  story,  distinguished  by  all  of  Paul-
ding's  peculiarities  of  manner  and  spirit,  appeared
in  1846.  The  next  year  there  was  published  a  vol
ume  of  "  American  Comedies,"  by  James  K.  Paul-
ding,  and  his  second  son,  William  Irving,  only  the
first  of  which,  called  "The  Bucktails.  or  the  Ameri
cans  in  England,"  was  written  by  the  father.  In
1849  was  issued  "The  Puritan  and  his  Daughter,"
the  scene  of  which  is  partly  laid  in  England  and
partly  in  this  country.  It  was  the  last  of  his  novels,
and  not  perhaps  equal  to  Paulding's  earlier  ones,
nor  did  it  meet  with  the  same  measure  of  success.

To  a  party  of  gentlemen,  including  William  Gil-
more  Simms,  who.  while  on  a  visit  to  William  Wil
son,  the  poet-publisher  of  Poughkeepsie,  during  the
summer  of  1854,  drove  to  "  Placentia"  with  their
host  to  dine  with  Mr.  Paulding,  he  gave  the  fol
lowing  description  of  his  way  of  life :  "  I  smoke  a
little,  read  a  little,  write  a  little,  ruminate  a  little,
grumble  a  little,  and  sleep  a  great  deal.  I  was
once  great  at  pulling  up  weeds,  to  which  I  have  a
mortal  antipathy,  especially  bull's  eyes,  wild  car
rots,  and  toad-flax,  alias  butter  and  eggs.  But  my
working  days  are  almost  over.  I  find  that  carry
ing  seventy-five  years  on  my  shoulders  is  pretty
nearly  equal  to  the  same  number  of  pounds ;  and,


PAULDING


PAULDINQ


681


instead  of  laboring  myself.  I  sit  in  the  shade  watch
ing  the  labors  of  others,  which  I  find  quite  suffi
cient  exercise."  In  August,  1858,  he  said  to  the
author  of  this  article  :  "  I  have  been  to  New  York
but  once  in  ten  years,  and  rarely  go  farther  from
home  than  Poughkeepsie  to  visit  your  father.  .  .  .
The  world  has  not  done  me  justice  as  an  author.
I  shall  leave  my  works  to  posterity  and  to  my  son
William,  who  can  do  what  he  thinks  best  with
them."  He  pointed  out  the  original,  by  Joseph
Wood,  of  the  portrait  that  appears  on  a  previous
page,  and  in  answer  to  the  question  if  that  or  any
other  picture  had  been  engraved,  he  said  :  "  I  would
never  consent  to  have  any  portrait  engraved  for
the  periodicals.  While  I  was  secretary  of  the  navy
the  publisher  of  the  '  Democratic  Review'  wanted
to  put  in  one  of  his  damned  scurvy  lamp-black
portraits  of  me."

The  echoes  of  the  eloquent  eulogies  pronounced
by  Bryant  and  Everett  on  the  name  of  Washing
ton  Irving  at  the  New  York  academy  of  music  on
3  April,  1860,  had  scarcely  reached  the  home  of
Paulding  when  he  too  was  called  away,  and  it  re
quires  no  stretch  of  fancy  to  imagine  that  he  only
lingered  to  gather  and  carry  to  his  friend  the  grate
ful  homage  of  their  common  country.  The  hand
of  Spring  was  laid  on  the  elder,  whom  Winter  had
spared.  Paulding  passed  away  peacefully  early  in
the  evening  of  0  April,  having,  by  reason  of  strength,
attained  to  more  than  fourscore  years,  and  died,
like  Irving,  in  his  own  happy  home,  surrounded  by
those  who  were  most  near  and  dear  to  him.  A  few
days  later  his  remains  were  interred  in  Greenwood
cemetery,  near  New  York.  Under  the  title  of
"  Literary  Life  of  James  K.  Paulding,"  his  literary
executor  gave  to  the  world  in  1867  a  record  and
pleasant  picture,  not  only  of  his  father,  but  of  many
of  his  associates — Gouverneur  Kemble,  Henry  Bre-
voort,  Ebenezer,  William,  and  Washington  Irving,
Harry  Ogden,  and  others,  who  some  fourscore  years
ago  had  charming  frolics  at  "  Cockloft  Hall,"  on
the  banks  of  the  Passaic,  near  Newark,  N.  J.  This
volume  was  followed  by  four  others  containing
such  of  Paulding's  writings  as  his  son  deemed
most  worthy  of  preservation,  including  a  post
humous  volume  entitled  "  A  Book  of  Vagaries."
Thus,  by  the  aid  of  extracts  from  his  autobiography,
correspondence,  essays,  and  other  works,  the  career
of  Mr.  Paulding  is  seen  both  as  an  author  and  a
public  man,  and  it  is  clearly  shown  that  he  is  en
titled  to  the  son's  memorial  by  his  constant  love  of
nature,  his  hearty  patriotism,  and  his  characteristic
originality.  His  principal  works  are  "  The  Divert
ing  History  of  John  Bull  and  Brother  Jonathan  "
(New  York,  1812) :  "  The  Lay  of  the  Scotch  Fid
dle  "  (1813);  "The  Backwoodsman"  (1818),  his
longest  and  best  poem  ;  "  Salmagundi  "  (1819'-20),
a  second  series  wholly  by  himself;  "A  Sketch  of
Old  England  by  a  New"  England  Man"  (1822);
"  Koningsmarke,  the  Long  Finne  "  (1823) ;  "John
Bull  in  America,  or  the  New  Munchausen  "  (1825) ;
"  The  Merry  Tales  of  the  Three  Wise  Men  of
Gotham"  (1826);  "The  New  Mirror  for  Travel
lers"  (1828);  "Tales  of  the  Good  WToman,  by  a
Doubtful  Gentleman  "  (1829) :  "  Chronicles  of  the
City  of  Gotham,  from  the  Papers  of  a  Retired
Common  Councilman"  (1830);  "  The  Dutchman's
Fireside  "  (1831) ;  "  Westward  Ho ! "  (1832) ;  a  "  Life
of  George  Washington  "  (1835) ;  "  View  of  Slavery
in  the  United  States"  (1836);  "The  Book  of  St.
Nicholas "  (1837) :  "  A  Gift  from  Fairy  Land "
(1838).  illustrated  by  John  G.  Chapman  ;  "The  Old
Continental,  or  the  Price  of  Liberty  "  (1846) ;  "  The
Puritan  and  his  Daughter"  (1849);  also,  edited  by
his  son,  "  Select  Works  "  (4  vols.,  New  York,1867-'8J.


PAULDING,  John,  patriot,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  1758;  d.  in  Staatsburg,  Dutchessco.,  N.  Y.,
18  Feb.,  1818.  He  served  throughout  the  war  of
the  Revolution,  and  was  three  times  taken  prisoner
by  the  British.  A  few
days  after  his  escape
from  his  second  im
prisonment  he  assist
ed  in  capturing  John
Andre.  Paulding,
Isaac  Van  Wart,  and
David  Williams  were,
on  23  Sept.,  1780,  pa
trolling  the  east  bank
of  the  Hudson  river,
in  search  of  the  Tory
depredators,  known  as
cow-boys,  and  when
Andre,  who  was  on
his  way  back  to  the
British  lines  after
his  interview  with
Benedict  Arnold,  had
reached  a  point  within
half  a  mile  of  Tarrytown,  Paulding  sprang  out  of
a  thicket,  where  he  had  been  secreted  with  his
companions,  presented  a  firelock  at  Andre's  breast,
and  asked  which  way  he  was  going.  Supposing
the  men  to  be  cow-boys,  Andre  replied  :  "Gentle
men,  I  hope  you  belong  to  our  party  I"  "Which
party  ?  "  aske'd  Paulding.  "  The  lower  party,"  said
Andre.  Paulding  replied  that  he  did.  "  Then,"
said  Andre,  "  I  am  a  British  officer,  out  on  particu
lar  business,  and  I  hope  you  will  not  detain  me  a
minute."  Upon  this  Paulding  ordered  him  to  dis
mount.  Seeing  that  he  had  made  a  mistake,  Andre
then  produced  a  pass  that  had  been  given  to  him
by  Arnold,  adding :  "  By  stopping  me  you  will  de
tain  the  general's  business."  Paulding  then  apolo
gized  for  his  action,  and  said  that  they  did  not
mean  to  take  anything  from  him.  He,  however,
added  that  there  were  "  many  bad  people  going
along  the  road ;  perhaps  you  may  be  one  of  them."
On  being  further  questioned,  Andre  declared  that  he
carried  no  letters.  He  was,  however,  taken  among
the  bushes  and  searched,  when  three  parcels  were
discovered  under  each  stocking.  Among  these
were  a  plan  of  the  fortifications  of  West  Point,  a
memorial  from  the  engineer  on  the  attack  and  de
fence  of  that  place,  and  returns  of  the  garrison,
cannon,  and  stores,  in  Arnold's  handwriting.  He
was  then  asked  by  Williams  whether  he  would  give
his  horse,  saddle,'bridle,  watch,  and  100  guineas  to
be  released.  He  eagerly  promised  these,  and  any
sum  of  money,  or  quantity  of  dry-goods,  his  captors
might  name,"  when  Paulding  interfered,  saying :
"  No,  by  God,  if  you  would  give  us  10,000  guineas
you  sho'uld  not  stir  a  step."  The  three  men  ^took
their  prisoner  to  the  nearest  military  post  at  North
Castle,  and  delivered  him  to  the  officer  in  command.
They  then  went  away  without  claiming  any  reward,
or  even  leaving  their  names.  On  being  asked  sub
sequently  during  the  trial  of  Joshua  Hett  Smith,
who  had'  rowed  Andre  from  the  "  Vulture  "  to  meet
Arnold  and  had  left  him  just  previous  to  his  cap
ture,  why  he  did  not  release  his  prisoner  when  the
pass  was  shown,  he  replied  :  "  Because  he  said  be
fore  he  was  a  British  officer.  Had  he  pulled  out
Gen.  Arnold's  pass  first,  I  should  have  let  him  go."
Washington  sought  out  the  three  men  who,  "lean
ing  only  on  their  virtue  and  an  honest  sense  of  their
duty,"  could  not  be  tempted  by  gold.  On  his  rec
ommendation  congress  presented  to  each  a  silver
medal,  bearing  on  one  side  the  word  "  Fidelity "
and  on  the  other  the  legend  "  Vincit  amor  patria,"


682


PAULDING


PAULLU-INCA


(f


and  ordered  that  in  each  case  an  annuity  of  $200
be  paid.  Paulding  lies  buried  in  St.  Peter's  church
yard,  near  Peekskill,  N.  Y.  In  1827  a  marble
monument  was  erected  over  his  grave  by  the  corpora
tion  of  the  city  of  New  York,  and  an  address  was
made  by  William  Paulding,  who  was  then  mayor.
—John's  son,  Hiram,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New  York
city,  11  Dec.,  1797  ;  d.  in  Iluntington,  L.  1.,  20  Oct.,
1878,  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman,  1  Sept.,

1811,  and  partici
pated  in  the  victory
on  Lake  Cham-
plain  under  Coin.
McDonough  on  11
Sept.,  1814,  for
which  he,  with  oth
ers,  received  a  vote
of  thanks  from  con
gress  on  20  Oct.,
1814.  He  served  in
the  frigate  "  Con-
stellation"  during
the  Algerine  war,
was  commissioned
lieu  tenant,  27  April,
1816,  cruised  in  the
frigate  •' Macedoni
an  "  in  1820-'2,  sup
pressing  piracy  in
the  West  Indies,and
commanded  the  schooner  "  Shark  "  in  the,  Mediter
ranean  in  1834-'7.  He  was  promoted  to  commander.
9  Feb.,  1837,  and  had  charge  of  the  sloop  "  Levant"
in  the  Mediterranean  in  1839-'41.  After  becoming
a  captain  on  29  Feb.,  1844,  he  was  on  the  sloop
"  Vincennes  "  in  the  East  Indies  in  1846-'7  and  the
frigate  "  St.  Lawrence "  in  1849-'50.  He  was  in
charge  of  the  navy-yard  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  in
1853-'5,  and  of  the  home  squadron  in  1856-'8.  On
21  Dec.,  1861,  he  was  retired  by  law,  being  over
sixty-two  years  of  age,  and  on  16  July,  1862,  he
was  promoted  to  rear-admiral  on  the  retired  list.
During  the  civil  war  he  rendered  valuable  service
in  command  of  the  navy-yard  at  New  York  until
May,  1865,  when  he  was  placed  on  waiting  orders
until  his  death,  at  which  time  he  was  the  senior
officer  on  the  retired  list  of  the  navy.  The  navy
department  published  an  obituary  order  to  com
memorate  his  long,  faithful,  and  distinguished  ser
vice. — John's  nephew,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Tar-
rytown,  N.  Y.,  in  1769;  d.  there,  11  Feb.,  1854.
His  father,  William,  a  brother  of  John,  represented
Suffolk  county  in  the  1st  Provincial  congress,  which
met  in  New  York  city,  23  May,  1775.  The  son  re
ceived  a  classical  education,  studied  law,  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  to  practise  in  New
York  city.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo
crat,  serving  from  4  Nov.,  1811,  till  3  March,  1813,
but  was  absent  from  his  seat  during  the  last  ses
sion  on  account  of  having  taken  the  field  as  briga
dier-general  of  volunteer  militia.  In  1821  he  was
a  delegate  to  the  State  constitutional  convention,
and  from  6  March,  1824,  till  5  March,  1826.  he
served  as  mayor  of  the  city  of  New  York.  On  Sun
day,  15  Aug.,  1824,  at  the  head  of  a  deputation  of
citizens,  he  welcomed  Lafayette  back  to  this  coun
try  on  the  deck  of  the  "  Cadmus."  On  the  follow
ing  day  the  distinguished  guest  was  taken  to  the
city-hall,  and  welcomed  by  Mayor  Paulding  in  an
appropriate  address.  While  still  a  resident  of  New
York  city,  and  after  retiring  from  the  mayoralty,
Paulding  lived  in  one  of  the  finest  blocks  in  the
neighborhood,  known  as  Paulding's  row,  in  Jay
street,  on  the  corner  of  Greenwich.  He  subsequent
ly  built  a  country-seat  at  Tarrytown,  N.  Y.,  where


he  resided  until  his  death.  —  John's  grandson,
Leonard,  b.  in  New  York  city,  16  Feb.,  1826 ;  d.
in  the  Bay  of  Panama,  29  April,  1867,  entered  the
navy  as  midshipman,  19  Dec.,  1840,  and  was  pro
moted  master,  1  March,  1855,  lieutenant  the  follow
ing  September,  lieutenant-commander,  16  July,
1862,  and  commander,  24  Dec.,  1865.  Out  of
twenty-four  years  in  the  navy,  he  was  only  two
years  unemployed,  seeing  service  on  the  survey,  off
the  coast  of  A'frica,  in  the  Mediterranean,  on  the
lakes,  in  the  naval  observatory,  on  the  Paraguay
expedition,  and  on  the  Pacific.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  was  ordered  to  St.  Louis  to
superintend  the  construction  of  iron-clads,  and
commanded  the  "St.  Louis,"  the  first  vessel  of  that
kind  that  was  built  in  the  United  States,  doing
valuable  service  at  Fort  Henry,  Fort  Donelson,  Isl
and  No.  10,  Fort  Pillow,  and  in  many  skirmishes
with  Confederate  gun-boats.  While  thus  employed
he  was  attacked  by  acute  dysentery,  but  still  con
tinued  at  his  post.  He  was  wounded  at  Fort  Don
elson,  and  again  at  Island  No.  10,  by  the  explosion
of  a  100-pound  rifle-gun,  which  threw  him  in  the
air,  and  killed  and  maimed  more  than  a  dozen
others.  After  a  few  months'  absence  on  sick-leave
he  reported  for  duty,  and  after  being  stationed  a
short  time  at  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard  he  was  or
dered  to  command  the  "Galena."  of  the  James
river  squadron.  After  the  war  he  was  successive
ly  in  command  of  the  "  Monocacy,"  "  Eutaw,"
"  Cyane,"  on  the  Pacific  squadron,  and  the  "  Wa-
teree."  on  board  of  which  he  died.

PAULLIN,  William,  aeronaut,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  3  April,  1812;  d.  there,  1  Dec.,  1871.  At  the
age  of  twenty-one  he  began  the  construction  of  his
first  balloon,  and  in  August,  1833,  he  made  a  trial-
trip  from  Philadelphia,  inflating  with  hydrogen
gas,  followed  by  numerous  ascents,  and  on  26  July,
1837,  made  a  private  effort  from  the  Philadelphia
gas-works  with  the  view  of  testing  the  practica
bility  of  using  coal-gas  for  balloon  purposes.  lie
succeeded,  and  was  thus  the  first,  in  this  country
at  least,  to  use  illuminating  gas  for  balloon  pur
poses.  In  September,  1841,  he  sailed  for  Valpa
raiso,  Chili,  and  he  made  numerous  ascensions  dur
ing  his  stay  in  South  America.  On  one  occasion
he  rose  from  St.  Jago  and  crossed  the  volcano,  be
ing  compelled  to  ascend  to  such  a  height  as  to  dis
tress  him  severely.  The  heat  was  so  great  as  to
endanger  the  balloon,  while  the  fumes  that  arose
threatened  the  aeronaut  with  suffocation.  Mr.
Paullin  made  ascensions  also  in  Cuba,  Hayti,  Porto
Rico,  and  Mexico.  After  an  absence  of  six  years
he  returned  to  the  United  States,  and  made  many
ascents  from  the  western  states,  and  some  in  the
east.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  connected  with
the  National  army,  making  his  last  ascension  under
Gen.  Joseph  Hooker.  He  then  resigned,  and  be
came  a  photographer.  His  intellect  was  affected
for  some  time  before  his  death.

PAULLU-INCA  (pah'-oo-loo-ing'-ka),  Peruvian
prince,  b,  in  Cuzco  about  1510;  d.  there  about
1550.  He  was  a  son  of  the  emperor  Iluaina  Capac
(q.  i'.),  and  was  much  attached  to  the  Spaniards,
especially  Diego  Alrnagro  and  his  followers.  By
order  of  his  brother,  Manco  Inca  Yupanqui,  he  and
the  supreme  priest,  Villac  Umac,  accompanied
Almagro  in  his  campaign  for  the  discovery  and
conquest  of  Chili.  Both  awaited  Almagro  at  Tupiza
and  delivered  to  him  on  his  arrival  a  large  quantity
of  gold  from  the  Chilian  tribute.  From  Jujuy,
Villac  Umac  escaped  and  returned  to  Peru,  foment
ing  during  his  journey  a  general  revolution  against
the  Spaniards,  at  the  instigation  of  Manco  Inca.
Paullu  remained  faithful  to  the  Spaniards,  and  on


PAUSCH


PAXTOX


683


Almagro's  return  to  Cuzco  the  latter  recompensed
his  services  by  giving  him  the  property  of  his
brother  Huascar.  After  Almagro  took  possession
of  Cuzco  and  captured  the  brothers  Pizarro,  Paullu,
at  the  head  of  the  Indians,  aided  Almagro  to  defeat
the  forces  of  Alonso  Alvarado  at  Abancay.  Paullu
also  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Salinas  at  the  head
of  6.000  Indians,  and  in  1539  he  accompanied  Gon-
zalo  Pizarro  in  the  war  against  the  Indians  of
Charcas.  Charles  V.  recommended  him  to  the
viceroy  Blasco  Nunez  Vela,  and  wrote  to  Paullu  a
letter  expressing  his  gratitude.  In  1543  he  was
baptized  under  the  name  of  Cristoval,  and  he  was
buried  in  the  church  that  he  built  in  Cuzco.

PAUSCH,  Georgre,  Hessian  soldier,  b.  about
1740;  d.  in  179(3.  He  was  chief  of  the  Hesse-
Hanau  artillery  in  the  Burgoyne  campaign.  Little
is  known  of  him  after  Burgoyne's  surrender.  His
signature  appears  on  the  Cambridge  parole,  now  in
the  Boston  public  library.  In  1786  the  name  of
George  Pausch  is  entered  in  the  official  calendar  of
Cassel  as  major  in  the  regiment  of  light  artillery.
His  name  disappears  from  the  calendar  in  1796.  so
that  it  is  probable  he  died  early  in  that  year  or  late
in  the  year  preceding.  His  journal,  which  was  re
cently  found  in  the  state  library  at  Cassel,  is  among
the  most  valuable  of  the  accounts  of  the  German
troops  during  the  Revolution  that  have  yet  been
discovered,  inasmuch  as  it  gives  with  great  fulness
of  detail  the  difficulties  that  the  Hessians  experi
enced  in  passing  through  the  countries  on  the
lower  Rhine  and  Holland  to  the  seaboard.  It  de
tails  the  fate  and  fortune  of  Pausch  and  his  men
from  15  May,  1776,  the  day  they  left  Hanau,  to  the
close  of  Burgoyne's  last  battle,  7  Oct.,  1777.  The
journal  also  dwells  freely  on  the  personal  experi
ences  of  its  author  and  his  men  while  in  Canada,
by  which  glimpses  are  obtained  into  the  private
life  of  the  execrated  Hessian  soldiers.  Regarding
also  the  battles  of  Saratoga,  Pausch's  account  is
the  first  we  have  had  of  the  part  played  by  the
Hesse-Hanau  artillery  in  those  actions,  which  well
supplements  that  taken  at  the  same  time  by  the
Brunswick  infantry,  as  given  in  the  "  Military  Jour
nals  of  Gen.  Riedesel."  The  journal  has  been  trans
lated  by  William  L.  Stone,  with  an  introduction  by
Edward  J.  Lowell  (Albany,  1886).

PAVIE,  Theodore  Marie  (pah- vee),  French  ex
plorer,  b.  in  Angers  in  September.  1811.  He  trav
elled  in  early  life  in  the  United  States,  South  Ameri
ca,  and  China.  From  1852  till  1857  he  was  professor
of  Sanskrit  in  the  College  de  France,  but  he  resigned
on  account  of  ill  health.  His  works  include  "  Voy
age  aux  Etats-Unis  et  au  Canada  "  (6  vols.,  Paris,
1828-'33) ;  "  Choix  de  contes  et  nouvelles,"  trans
lated  from  the  Chinese  (1839) ;  "  Fragments  d'un
voyage  dans  1'Amerique  Meridionale  en  1833 "
(Angers.  1842) ;  "  Scenes  et  recits  des  pays  d'outre
mer  "  (1853) ;  "  Recits  de  terre  et  de  mer  "  (1860) ;
and  "  Recits  des  landes  et  des  greves  "  (1863).

PAVY,  Octave  Pierre,  naturalist,  b.  in  Xew
Orleans,  La.,  22  June,  1844 ; d.  at  Cape  Sabine,  j
arctic  regions,  6  June,  1884. He  was  graduated  at  !
the  University  of  Paris,  France,  in  1866,  studied  j
medicine,  and  travelled  extensively,  making  large  |
collections  in  natural  history. He  became  associ-  j
ated  with  Gustave  Lambert  in  an  arctic  expedition  j
projected  by  the  French  government  in  1869,  but
it  was  prevented  by  the  Franco-Prussian  war,  and  j
Pavy,  who  was  in  New  Orleans,  returned  to  France  j
and  organized  and  equipped  at  his  own  expense  an
independent  body  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  com
posed  of veteran  soldiers  and  sailors  of  'French
parentage,  who  had been  residents  of Xorth  or  !
South  America. The  death  of  Lambert  and  the  i


state  of  France  in  1871  again  frustrated  his  plans,
and  he  sailed  for  the  United  States,  and,  with  the
co-operation  of  the  American  geographical  society,
began  preparations  for  an  expedition  to  the  north
pole  by  way  of  Bering  strait  and  Wrangel  land.
On  the  eve  of  its  departure,  in  1872,  the  sudden
death  of  a  financial  associate  of  Pavy's  in  San
Francisco  caused  its  abandonment.  He  then  com
pleted  his  medical  course  in  St.  Louis,  and  in  1880
accompanied  the  "  Gulnare  "  to  the  arctic  regions
as  surgeon  and  naturalist,  and  remained  in  Green
land  a  year,  making  collections  for  the  Smithsonian
institution.  In  1881  the  Greely  expedition  arrived
in  Greenland  with  a  special  commission  for  Dr.
Pavy  as  acting  assistant  surgeon,  and,  being  re
quested  by  Lieut.  Greely  to  act  as  naturalist  to  the
expedition,  he  spent  three  years  with  the  party  at
Lady  Franklin  bay.  The  northernmost  point
reached  by  him  was  beyond  Cape  Joseph  Henry,  in
latitude  83°  X.  He  made  frequent  sledge  journeys
to  Lincoln  bay  and  vicinity,  and  in  1883  discovered
Pavy  valley  and  Pavy  river,  between  Cape  Baird
and  Carl  Ritterbay.  The  unprecedented  health  of
the  party  during  their  three  years  of  exposure,  and
the  prolonging  of  their  lives  at  Cape  Sabine,  after
the  perilous  retreat  of  1883,  were  due  to  Dr.  Pavy.
Sixteen  days  before  the  rescue  of  the  survivors  he
died  of  starvation.  His  natural-history  collections
were  left  at  Lady  Franklin  bay.

PAXOX,  Edward  M.,  jurist,  b.  in  Buckingham,
Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  3  Sept.,  1824.  His  paternal  ances
tors  came  from  Bycot  House,  Bucks  co.,  England,
in  1682,  and  settled  in  Pennsylvania.  He  received
his  education  in  Quaker  schools.  In  1843,  in  con
nection  with  Samuel  D.  Ingham  and  Dr.  Phineas
Jenks,  he  founded  the  Bucks  county  agricultural
society.  In  1843  he  published  and  edited  the
"  Xewtown  Journal,"  and  later  he  was  editor  of  the
•'  Daily  News "  in  Philadelphia.  He  afterward
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  his  native
county  in  1850,  and  subsequently  removed  to  Phila
delphia,  where  he  attained  reputation.  In  1869  he
became  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  of
Philadelphia,  and  in  1874  was  elected  judge  of  the
supreme  court  of  Pennsylvania  for  a  term  of
twenty-one  years,  and  on  1  Jan.,  1889,  he  will  be
come  chief  justice  by  seniority  of  commission.  He
has  edited  "  The  Collection  Laws  of  the  Several
States  and  the  District  of  Columbia  "  (Philadelphia,
1855)  and  "  Memoirs  of  the  Johnson  Family,"
printed  privately  (1855),  contributed  anonymously
to  newspapers  and  magazines,  and  delivered  numer
ous  agricultural,  historical,  and  other  addresses.

PAXTOX.  Charles,  British  commissioner,  b.  in
1704;  d.  in  Norfolk  county,  England,  in  March,
1788.  He  was  commissioner  of  customs  in  Boston,
and,  as  the  disputes  with  the  crown  and  its  agents
increased,  made  frequent  visits  to  London  to  com
plain  of  resistance  to  acts  of  parliament.  He  pos
sessed  "  as  much  of  the  friendship  of  Charles
Townsend  as  a  selfish  client  may  obtain  from  an
intriguing  patron,"  and  was  in  the  counsels  of  that
minister  when  his  plans  relating  to  the  colonies
were  devised  and  presented  to  the  house  of  com
mons.  John  Adams  says  that  he  was  '•  the  essence
of  customs,  taxation,  and  revenue,"  and  that  he
appeared  at  one  time  '•  to  have  been  governor,
lieutenant-governor,  secretary,  and  chief  justice."
As  head  of  the  board  of  commissioners  in  1760,  he
directed  his  deputy  in  Salem  to  the  courts  for  writs
of  assistance,  under  which  the  officers  of  the  revenue
were  to  have  authority  to  enter  and  search  all  places
that  they  should  suspect  contained  smuggled
goods.  In  1769  Paxton  and  his  associates  were
posted  in  the  "  Boston  Gazette  "  by  James  Otis,  and


684


PAXTON


PAYER


this  card  brought  on  an  altercation  in  State  street
with  Robinson,  another  commissioner,  which  re
sulted  in  injuries  that  deprived  Otis  of  his  reason.
On  one  of  the  anniversaries  of  the  gunpowder  plot
Paxton's  effigy  was  hanged  between  those  of  the
devil  and  the  pope  and  labelled  "  Every  man's  ser
vant,  but  no  man's  friend."  Paxton  and  his  fellow-
commissioners  at  one  time  seized  one  of  John  Han
cock's  vessels  for  smuggling  wine,  and  a  mob  then
forced  them  to  flee  to  Castle  William.  Paxton  was
subsequently  hanged  again  in  effigy  on  the  "  Lib
erty-tree."  "Paxton  was  one  of  the  writers  of  the
"  Hutchinson  Letters."  (See  FRANKLIN,  BENJAMIN.)
In  1770  he  and  his  family  went  with  the  British
army  to  Halifax,  and  in  July  of  that  year  to  Eng
land.  He  had  been  proscribed  in  Massachusetts,
and  his  estate  was  confiscated.  He  then  lived  in
obscurity,  and  died  on  the  estate  of  William  Burch,
one  of  his  fellow-commissioners.

PAXTON,  Elisha  Franklin,  soldier,  b.  in
Rockbridge  county,  Va.,  4  March,  1828 ;  d.  near
Chancel  lorsville,  Va.,  2  May,  186:3.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Yale  in  1847,  studied  at  the  Virginia  mili
tary  academy  in  Lexington,  and  became  president
of  a  bank  in  Lynchburg.  He  joined  the  Confeder
ate  army,  in  which  lie  rose  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-
general,  commanded  the  Stonewall  brigade  and  sub
sequently  an  army  corps,  and  served  at  Antietam,
Fredericksburg,  and  Chancellorsville,  being  killed
iu  the  last-named  action.

PAXTON,  John  R,  clergyman,  b.  in  Canons-
burg,  Pa.,  18  Sept.,  1843.  He  entered  Jefferson
college,  Canonsburg,  in  185!),  but  was  not  gradu
ated  until  1866,  having  left  college  to  serve  in  the
civil  war,  enlisting  in  the  140th  Pennsylvania  regi
ment,  and  becoming  3d  lieutenant.  He  studied
theology  at  Western  theological  seminary,  Alle
gheny,  Pa.,  and  at  Princeton,  was  ordained  in  1870,
and  was  pastor  of  the  New  York  avenue  Presbyte
rian  church  in  Washington,  I).  C.,  from  1878  till
1882,  when  he  became  pastor  of  the  42d  street  Pres
byterian  church  in  New  York  city,  which  charge
he  now  (1888)  holds.  In  1887  he  became  chaplain
of  the  7th  regiment  of  New  York.  Union  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1882.  He  has  published
several  addresses  and  sermons.

PAXTON,  Joseph,  manufacturer,  b.  near  New
Hope,  Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  8  Feb.,  1786;  d.  in  Columbia
county,  Pa.,  21  Aug.,  1861.  He  was  educated  at
home  by  his  mother,  a  Quaker,  and  during  the  war
of  1812  held  successively  the  commissions  of  ma
jor,  lieutenant-colonel,  and  colonel  of  Pennsylvania
troops.  He  was  the  principal  projector  'of  the
Catawissa  (now  Reading)  railroad,  and  through  it
did  much  to  develop  the  mineral  and  agricultural
region  between  Pottsville  and  Williamsport.  Col.
Paxton  was  the  first  to  undertake  the  manufacture
of  iron  on  a  large  scale  in  the  state,  and  among
the  first  to  import  short-horn  cattle.  He  was  a
friend  and  correspondent  of  Henry  Clay  and  Dan
iel  Webster,  and  an  advocate  of  a  protective  tariff.
—His  son,  Joseph  Rupert,  author,  b.  in  Colum
bia  county,  Pa.,  2  July,  1827 ;  d.  in  Houston,  Tex.,
20  Aug.,  "1867.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Pennsylvania  in  1845,  studied  law,  and
in  1848  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Philadelphia,
where  he  engaged  in  practice.  In  1854-'5  he  edited
the  "  Bizarre  "  in  that  city.  Shortly  after  the  inau
guration  of  President  Lincoln  he  was  offered  a
diplomatic  appointment  abroad,  but  chose  to  enter
the  National  service,  and  became  captain  in  the
loth  U.  S.  infantry,  in  which  he  served  until  the
close  of  the  war,  resigning  on  1  July,  1865.  At
the  battle  of  Nashville  he  was  on  the  staff  of  Gen.
George  H.  Thomas,  rendering  valuable  services,


and  being  accompanied  in  the  fight  by  his  only
son,  then  a  boy,  Alexis  R.  Paxton,  who  has  since
become  an  officer  in  the  regular  army.  In  1866  he
travelled  in  Europe,  with  the  view  of  obtaining
matter  for  future  literary  work.  He  was  well
known  in  Philadelphia  for  his  various  acquirements,
and  also  for  his  genial  nature.  He  dramatized
many  of  Dickens's  stories,  translated  into  English
several  French  plays  and  into  French  "  Reveries
of  a  Bachelor,"  and  was  the  author  of  '•  Jewelry
and  the  Precious  Stones,  by  Ilipponax  Roset,"  an
anagram  (Philadelphia,  1856).  His  mother,  a
daughter  of  Leonard  Rupert,  of  Rupert,  Pa.,  died,
14  Nov.,  1887,  in  the  hundred  and  first  year  of  her
age,  preserving  her  faculties  until  the  last.

PAYAN,  Elisco  (pi-an'),  Colombian  statesman,
b.  in  Cali  in  August,  1825.  lie  studied  philosophy
and  jurisprudence  in  the  College  of  Santa  Librada,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1847.  He  joined
!  the  Liberal  party,  was  elected  to  the  provincial
!  assembly,  served  as  representative  in  congress  for
Cauoa  in  1853-'4,  and,  when  the  Federal  form  of
government  was  adopted,  became  a  member  of  the
commission  to  organize  the  new  state  of  that  name.
He  was  successively  deputy  to  the  state  assembly,
district  judge,  and  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of
the  state.  When  the  revolution  of  I860  began,
Payan,  as  governor  of  the  province  of  Buga,
equipped  a  force  to  sustain  the  state  government,
but  after  several  victories  he  was  defeated  and  re
tired  to  the  Pacific  coast,  where  he  captured  the
fleet  of  the  government,  and  invaded  the  valley  of
the  Cauca.  This  campaign  insured  the  triumph  of
the  Federal  cause,  and  Payan  was  rewarded  with
the  rank  of  general  and  the  governorship  of  the
state  of  Cauca,  which  place  he  occupied  till  1867.
He  was  a  member  of  the  chamber  of  deputies  in
1868-'!),  and  in  1870-'!  of  the  senate.  In  1876  he
was  in  command  of  a  division  of  the  army  of  the
south,  and  by  his  victory  at  Batero  insured  the
triumph  of  the  government.  He  was  elected  to
the  Federal  senate  in  1880,  and  became  its  piesi-
dent,  but  in  the  same  year  resigned  to  enter  the
cabinet  as  secretary  of  war.  In  1883  he  was  again
elected  governor  of  the  state  of  Cauca,  and  as  such
sustained  the  Federal  government  in  the  revolution
of  1885  with  all  the  resources  at  his  command,  de
feating  the  revolutionary  forces  in  numerous  en
counters  until  the  capitulation  of  Antioquia.  The
services  that  he  rendered  to  the  cause  of  the  consti
tutional  reform,  his  administrative  talent,  and  mili
tary  prestige  gained  for  him  in  the  elections  of  1886
the  vice-presidency  of  the  republic,  and  as  such,
during  a  temporary  absence  of  the  president  from
January  to  June.  1887,  he  occupied  the  executive
of  the  nation.  When  Nunez  abandoned  the  presi
dency,  12  Dec.,  1887,  Payan  assumed  the  govern
ment,  and  his  first  measures  were  the  decree  of  19
Dec.  conceding  full  liberty  to  the  press,  and  that
of  1  Jan.,  1888,  recalling  from  banishment  persons
that  had  been  expelled  by  Nunez.

PAYER,  Julius  (pi'-air),  Austrian  navigator,  b.
in  Schoenau,  1  Sept.,  1842.  He  received  his  educa
tion  in  the  military  academy  of  Vienna,  entered
the  army  as  lieutenant  in  185!),  became  professor  of
history  in  the  military  academy  in  1865.  and,  being
attached  in  the  following  year  to  the  general  staff,
determined  the  altitude  of  most  of  the  Austrian
alps.  He  accompanied  the  German  expedition
to  the  north  pole,  under  command  of  Capt.  Karl
Koldewey,  in  1869-'70.  and  discovered  in  the  inte
rior  of  Greenland  a  range  of  mountains  with  sum
mits  11,000  feet  high.  The  results  of  the  expe
dition  are  recorded  in  "  Die  zweite  deutsche  Nord-
polarfahrt "  (Leipsic,  1874),  which  Payer  wrote  in


PAYNE


PAYNE


685


association  with  Koldevvey.  In  1872  he  was  given,
in  conjunction  with  Heir  Weyprecht,  the  mission
to  ascertain  if  an  open  sea  exists  east  of  Spitzber-
gen,  between  Europe  and  America.  They  sailed  °
from  Bremen,  13  June,  1872,  on  the  steamship  !
"  Tegetthoff,"  but  were  imprisoned  by  ice-fields
near  Nova  Zembla.  and,  after  enduring  great  hard
ships,  landed,  in  April,  1874,  at  Franz  Joseph
island,  where  they  were  compelled  to  abandon  the
ship.  After  performing  a  remarkable  sledge-jour
ney  of  300  miles,  they  embarked  on  two  canoes,  and
were  in  a  state  of  great  destitution  when  they  met
a  Russian  whaler,  which  carried  them  to  Lapland,
whence  they  returned  by  land  to  Vienna  in  July.
1874.  Payer  was  retired  from  the  army  in  the  fol
lowing  year,  and  has  since  lived  in  Frankfort,
devoting  his  time  to  scientific  researches.  He  has
in  preparation  several  works  on  the  arctic  regions.
He  published  ••  Die  Expedition  der  Tegetthoff,
Reise  nach  den  Eisfeldern  des  Nordpols  "  (Leipsic,
1870;  French  translation,  Paris,  1876).

PAYNE.  Charles  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in
Taunton,  Mass.,  24  Oct.,  1830.  He  was  graduated
at  Wesleyan  university  in  1856,  studied  divinity  at
the  Biblical  institute,  Concord,  N.  H.,  and  in
1857-'76  was  pastor  of  Methodist  Episcopal  churches
in  the  middle  and  western  states,  becoming  presi
dent  of  Ohio  Wesleyan  university  at  the  latter
date.  He  was  a  member  of  the  committee  to  re
vise  the  hymn-book  of  his  denomination  in  1876,
and  a  delegate  to  its  ecumenical  council  in  1881.  j
Dickinson  college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  I
1870.  He  has  published  "  The  Social  Glass,  and
Christian  Obligation  "  (New  York,  1868) ;  "  Daniel,  \
the  Uncompromising  Young  Man,"  in  the  "  Young
People's  Half  -  Hour  Series "  (Cincinnati,  Ohio,
1872);  ''Methodism,  its  History  and  Results  "(New
York,  1881) ;  '•  Women,  and  their  Work  in  Method
ism  "(1881);  "Temperance"  (1881);  "Education"
(1881) :  and  "  Guides  in  Character  Building  "  (1883).

PAYNE,  Daniel  Alexander,  A.  M.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  24  Feb.,  1811.  He  is  of
African  descent,  and  was  born  of  poor  parents.
He  removed  to  the  north  in  1835,  studied  at  the
Lutheran  theological  seminary,  Gettysburg,  Pa.,
and  entered  the  ministry  of  the  church  in  1838.
He  became  a  member  of  the  itinerancy  of  the
African  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1843,  was
chosen  its  historiographer  in  1848,  and  elected
bishop  by  the  general  conference  of  1852  in  New
York.  He  was  president  of  Wilberforce  university,
Ohio,  in  1865-'76.  Bishop  Payne  travelled  ex
tensively  abroad  in  1867-'8,  attended  the  Meth
odist  ecumenical  conference  in  London  in  1881,
and  was  chosen  to  preside  over  one  or  more  of  its
deliberations.  He  received  the  honorary  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Lincoln  university  in  1879.  He  is  the
author  of  "  Domestic  Education,"  "  History  of  the
African  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  "  (3  vols.,  Bal
timore,  1865).  "  Recollection  of  Men  and  Things,"
and  "  Domestic  Education  "  (Cincinnati,  1886).

PAYNE,  Derail,  soldier,  b.  in  Fairfax  county,
Va.,  1  Jan.,  1764;  d.  in  Mason  county,  Ky.,  21
June,  1830.  He  was  the  son  of  William  Payne,
whose  paternal  ancestor  came  to  this  country  with
Lord  Fairfax  in  1739.  After  his  marriage  he  re
moved  to  Kentucky  in  1789,  settling  near  Lexing
ton,  and  soon  afterward  joined  Capt.  Kenneth
McCoy's  cavalry  and  served  under  Gen.  Charles
Scott  against  the  Indians  in  1791.  In  1792  he  re
moved  to  Mason  county  and  settled  on  his  farm  on
Mill  creek,  where  he  resided  until  his  death,  and
was  active  against  the  Indians,  by  whom  he  was
frequently  molested.  He  was  a  good  surveyor,  and
also  a  county  magistrate.  He  joined  Col.  Richard


M.  Johnson's  mounted  cavalry  in  1813  as  major,
and  distinguished  himself  at  the  battle  of  the
Thames,  5  Oct.,  1813,  where  at  the  head  of  his  bat
talion  he  charged  hotly  through  the  British  line,
and  after  the  surrender,  by  special  appointment  of
the  general-in-chief,  led  in  pursuit  of  Gen.  Henry
Procter.  He  served  several  years  in  the  legislature.

PAYNE,  Edward  Dugran,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Reading,  Pa.,  2  July,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at
Jefferson  medical  college  in  1857,  appointed  as
sistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  navy  in  1861,  served  on
the  "  Congress  "  in  her  fight  with  the  "  Merrimac,"
8  March.  1862,  and  was  assistant  surgeon  in  charge
of  the  "  Metacomet "  in  the  action  in  Mobile  bay
in  August,  1864.  He  became  passed  assistant
surgeon  in  1865,  surgeon  in  1871,  and  was  retired
in  1876  on  account  of  the  failure  of  his  health.  He
has  published  reports  of  cases  in  "  Contributions  to
Medical  Science  in  the  United  States  Navy  Depart
ment  " ;  "  Medical  Essays  "  (Washington,  D.  C.,
1872) ;  and  "  United  States  Naval  Sanitary  and
Medical  Reports  "  (1873-'4).

PAYNE,  Henrr  B,  senator,  b.  in  Madison
county,  N.  Y.,  30  Nov.,  1810.  His  father,  Elisha,
was  an  early  settler,  and  judge  of  Madison  county.
Henry  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  college  in  1832,
studied  law  in  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  removed  to
Cleveland,  Ohio,  in  1834,  and  practised  law  there
for  the  next  twelve  years.  He  was  a  presidential
elector  in  1848,  state  senator  in  1849-'oO,  and  was
defeated  in  the  canvass  for  U.  S.  senator  in  1851,
and  for  governor  in  1857,  Salmon  P.  Chase  being
elected  by  a  slight  majority.  He  supported  Stephen
A.  Douglas  in  the  Cincinnati  Democratic  conven
tion  in  1856,  and  in  the  Charleston,  S.  C.,  conven
tion  in  1860,  reporting  from  the  minority  of  the
committee  the  resolutions  that  were  adopted  as  the
platform  of  that  body.  He  was  a  consistent  Union
ist  during  the  civil  war.  Having  retired  from  his
profession,  he  became  largely  interested  in  manu
factures,  railroads,  and  similar  enterprises.  Since
1862  he  has  been  president  of  the  Cleveland  sinking-
fund  commission,  and  he  was  for  several  years
president  of  the  Cleveland,  Columbus,  and  Cincin
nati  railroad  company.  He  was  chairman  of  the
Ohio  delegation  to  the  Baltimore  Democratic  con
vention  in  1872,  a  member  of  congress  in  1875-'7.
chairman  of  the  house  committee  on  the  electoral
bill,  and  a  member  of  the  electoral  commission  in
1876.  In  1884  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate.

PAYNE,  John,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  W'estmore-
land  jCOimty,  Va.,  9  Jan..  1815 :  d.  there,  23  Oct.,
1874.  He  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in
1833,  and  at  the  theological  seminary  at  Alexan
dria,  Va..  in  1836.  He  was  ordained  deacon  in
Christ  church,  Alexandria,  17  July,  1836,  by  the
bishop,  Richard  C.  Moore,  and  took  his  departure
at  once  for  western  Africa,  where  he  served  as  a
missionary  for  nearly  five  years.  He  then  returned
to  the  United  States  both  to  obtain  rest  and  im
provement  in  his  health  and  also  to  be  ordained
priest.  Bishop  Moore  admitted  him  to  priest's
orders  in  St.  George's  church,  Fredericksburg,  Va.,
18  July,  1841.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  William  and  Mary  in  1851.  and  was  conse
crated  bishop  of  Cape  Palmas  and  parts  adjacent
in  Christ  church,  Alexandria,  11  July,  1851.  After
a  long  and  arduous  service  of  nearly  twenty  years
on  the  coast  of  western  Africa,  Bishop  Payne  re
turned  to  the  United  States  in  1871,  completely
broken  in  health  and  strength.  He  sent  in  his
resignation  to  the  house  of  bishops,  which  was
accepted  in  October  of  that  year.  He  made  no
contributions  to  literature  beyond  letters,  reports,
etc.,  connected  with  his  missionary  work.


686


PAYNE


PAYNE


PAYNE,  John  Howard,  dramatist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  9  June,  1792;  d.  in  Tunis,  Africa,  10
April,  1852.  He  was  the  sixth  of  a  family  of  nine
children.  Ilis  precocity  was  wonderful,  and  at  the

age of fourteen,

-.-;>v  while  a  clerk  in  a

.  ^i" .  counting-house,  he

clandestinely  edit
ed  the  "  Thespian
Mirror,"  a  weekly
journal.  The  fol
lowing  year  lie
entered  Union  col
lege,  where  he  re
mained  for  two
terms,  publishing
during  that  period
twenty  -  five  num
bers  of  a  periodical
called  "  The  Pas
time."  Payne  made
his  first  appearance
as  a  professional
actor  at  the  Park
theatre,  New  York,  24  Feb.,  1809.  as  "Young
Norval,"  subsequently  appearing  at  Boston.  Phila
delphia,  Baltimore,  and  in  other  cities.  On  4  June,
1813,  he  appeared  at  Drury  lane  theatre,  London,
as  "  Young  Norval,"  afterward  playing  in  the  prin
cipal  cities  of  Great  Britain  with  a  fair  measure  of
popularity.  Of  Payne's  appearance  at  this  period
a  contemporary  wrote :  "  Nature  bestowed  upon
him  a  countenance  of  no  common  order,  and
though  there  was  a  roundness  and  fairness  which
but  faintly  express  strong  turbulent  emotions  or
display  the  furious  passions,  these  defects  were
supplied  by  an  eye  which  glowed  with  animation
and  intelligence.  A  more  extraordinary  mixture
of  softness  and  intelligence  were  never  associated
in  a  human  countenance,  and  his  face  was  a  true
index  of  his  heart."  For  nearly  a  score  of  years
he  pursued  a  career  of  varied  success  abroad  as  an
author,  actor,  and  manager.  While  living  in  Lon
don  and  Paris,  where  he  was  intimate  with  Wash
ington  Irving,  he  wrote  a  host  of  dramas,  chiefly
adaptations  from  the  French.  In  one  of  these —
"  Clari,  or  the  Maid  of  Milan" — occurs  his  death
less  song  of  "  Home,  Sweet  Home,"  which  made  the
fortunes  of  all  concerned  except  the  always  un
fortunate  author.  By  it  alone  Payne  will  be  re
membered  long  after  his  multitude  of  poems  and
dramas  are  entirely  forgotten,  which,  indeed,  has
almost  happened  already.  His  tragedy  of  "  Bru
tus,"  produced  in  1818,  with  Edmund  Kean  in  the
principal  part,  is  his  only  dramatic  composition
that  still  holds  possession  of  the  stage  with  the
single  exception  of  "  Charles  the  Second,"  the  lead
ing  character  of  which  was  a  favorite  with  Charles
Kemble.  In  1832  Payne  returned  to  the  United
States,  receiving  several  substantial  benefits  in
New  York  and  elsewhere,  and  in  1841  was  appointed
American  consul  at  Tunis,  which  office  he  held  at
the  time  of  his  death.  The  melancholy  fact  will
be  remembered  in  connection  with  his  popular
song,  that  the  poor  poet  never  knew  what  it  was  to
have  a  home  after  the  age  of  thirteen,  when  his
mother  died.  His  father  soon  followed,  and,  despite
the  tenderness  of  his  heart,  like  his  friend  Irving,
having  lost  the  object  of  his  early  love,  he  main
tained  his  celibacy  and  homelessness,  dying  on  the
distant  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  where  a  monu
ment  was  erected  to  his  memory  in  the  Cemetery
of  St.  George.  But  his  ashes  are  no  longer  there.
Payne's  restlessness  did  not  end  with  his  life,  and
three  decades  after  his  death  his  dust  was  borne


across  the  ocean  to  find  its  final  repose  in  the  capi
tal  of  his  native  land.  At  the  reinterment  in
Washington  in  June,  1883,  through  the  liberality
of  William  W.  Corcoran,  the  benediction  of  the
ceremony  was  the  blending  of  a  thousand  voices
and  instruments  in  the  immortal  melody  of  "  Home,
Sweet  Home."  Perhaps  no  single  song-poet  was
ever  so  famous  or  so  honored  as  Payne.  He  made
handsome  sums  by  his  plays,  but  nevertheless  he
was  always  in  pecuniary  perplexities.  He  speaks
with  bitter  jocularity  in  one  of  his  letters  of  the
struggles  he  had  to  keep  afloat  since  he  grew  too
portly  for  the  stage,  and  began  to  fatten  on  trouble
and  starvation.  Payne  was  a  friend  and  corre
spondent  of  Coleridge  and  Charles  Lamb,  and  in
timate  with  many  of  the  most  eminent  men  of
England.  With  Talma  he  was  a  great  favorite.
An  octavo  edition  of  his  life  and  poems  was  pub
lished  in  Albany  in  1875,  edited  by  Gabriel  Harri
son.  A  second  edition  of  this  work  has  since  ap
peared,  and  in  1885  there  was  issued  another  vol
ume,  entitled  "John  Howard  Payne  :  A  Biographi
cal  Sketch  of  the  Author  of  'Home,  Sweet  Home,'
with  a  Narrative  of  the  Removal  of  the  Remains
from  Tunis  to  Washington,  by  Charles  11.  Brain-
ard."  There  is  a  good  painting  of  Payne  by  John
Wesley  Jarvis  in  the  Corcoran  gallery,  Washing
ton,  another  by  his  friend,  Charles  Robert  Leslie,
as  "  Young  Norval,"  and  a  colossal  bust  in  Pros
pect  park,  Brooklyn.  The  portrait  that  accom
panies  this  article  is  copied  from  a  painting  exe


cuted  by  Joseph  Wood  in  1812,  and  the  ancient
shingled  house  is  the  one  in  which  Payne  passed
his  early  years  at  East  Hampton,  Long  Island,  to
which  place  his  father  removed  soon  after  his  birth.
A  nohle  monument  now  marks  Payne's  grave  in
Oak  IliJl  cemetery,  Washington,  and  it  is  pleasanter
to  think  of  his  lying  where

"  Of  his  ashes  may  be  made

The  violets  of  his  native  land,"
than  as  resting  on  the  distant  coast  of  Africa.

PAYNE,  William  Harold,  educator,  b.  in
Farmington.  Ontario  co.,  N.  Y.,  12  May.  1836.  He
was  educated  at  Macedon  academy,  N.  Y.,  and  New
York  conference  seminary,  was  superintendent  of
public  schools  in  Michigan  in  1858-'79,  professor  of
the  science  and  art  of  teaching  in  the  University
of  Michigan  in  1879-'87,  and  at  the  latter  date  be~-
came  chancellor  of  the  University  of  Nashville,  and
president  of  Peabody  normal  college.  He  is  the
author  of  "  Chapters  on  School  Suspervision  "  (Cin
cinnati,  Ohio,  1875) :  "  Outlines  of  Educational
Doctrine"  (Adrian.  Mich.,  1882):  "Contributions
to  the  Science  of  Education  "  (New  York,  1887) ;
and  has  edited  David  P.  Page's  "  Theory  and  Prac
tice  of  Teaching"  (New  York,  1885);  Gabriel  Com-
payree's  "  History  of  Pedagogy  "  (Boston,  1886)  and
"  Lectures  on  Pedagogy"  (1887).

PAYNE,  William  Wallace,  educator,  b.  in
Somerset,  Mich.,  19  May,  1837.  He  was  graduated


PAYSON


PEABODY


687


at  Hillsdale  college  in  1803.  and  after  a  year  at  the
law-school  in  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.,  was  graduated  at
Chicago  law-school  in  1805.  Subsequently  he  de
voted  his  attention  to  teaching,  and  became  pro
fessor  of  mathematics  and  astronomy  at  Carleton
college  and  director  of  its  observatory.  Prof.
Payne  is  director  of  the  Minnesota  state  weather
service.  He  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and
contributes  papers  in  his  specialties  to  their  trans
actions.  In  1867  he  projected  "  The  Minnesota
Teacher  and  Journal  of  Education,"  which  he  con
tinued  for  six  years,  and  in  1882  lie  established
"  The  Sidereal  Messenger,"  which  he  still  edits.

PAYSON,  Phillips,  clergyman,  b.  in  Walpole.
Mass.,  18  Jan.,  1736;  d.  in  Chelsea,  Mass.,  11  Jan.,
1801.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1754,
studied  divinity,  and  from  1757  until  his  death
was  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  Chel
sea,  Mass.  Mr.  Payson  was  a  zealous  patriot  dur
ing  the  Revolution.  He  was  of  scholarly  attain
ments,  and  an  eloquent  preacher.  Harvard  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  I),  in  1800.  He  published
tracts  on  astronomy  and  natural  philosophy  in  the
"  Transactions  of  the  American  Academy  of  Arts
and  Sciences,"  and  several  sermons,  the  best  known
of  which  is  that  on  the  "  Battle  of  Lexington "
(1780)  and  on  the  "  Death  of  Washington  "  (1800).
— His  brother,  Seth,  clergyman,  b.  in  Walpole,
Mass.,  29  Sept.,  1758 ;  d.  in  Rindge,  X.  H.,  26
Feb.,  1820,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1777.  and
from  1782  until  his  death  was  pastor  of  the  Con
gregational  church  in  Rindge,  N.  H.  Dartmouth
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1809.  He  pub
lished  numerous  sermons,  and  a  work  against  secret
societies,  entitled  "  Proofs  of  the  Existence  and
Dangerous  Tendencies  of  Modern  Illuminism "
(Rindge,  N.  II.,  1802).  —  Seth's  son,  Edward,
clergyman,  b.  in  Rindge,  N.  H.,  25  Jan.,  1783 :  d.
in  Portland,  Me.,  22  Oct.,  1827,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1803,  taught  in  Portland,  Me.,
for  three  years,  studied  divinity  under  his  father,
and  from  his  ordination  until  his  death  was  pastor
of  the  Congregational  church  in  Portland.  Bow-
doin  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1821.  He
was  of  exalted  piety,  and,  although  almost  without
worldly  ambition,  is  described  by  his  contempo
raries  as  having  left  a  lasting  impression  of  his
life  and  work  on  the  community  in  which  he  lived.
He  frequently  was  invited  to  accept  charges  in
New  York  and  Boston,  but  refused  to  leave  his
Portland  congregation.  His  sermons  were  collected
and  published,  with  a  memoir,  by  Rev.  Asa  Cum-
mings,  and  an  introduction  by  Rev.  Calvin  E.
Stowe  (3  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1859).  Rufus  W.  Gris-
wold  says  of  this  work  :  "  It  is  more  read  at  home
and  abroad  than  the  writings  of  any  other  New
England  divine  except  Dr.  Timothy  Dwight."

PAZ,  Jose  Maria  (path),  Argentine  soldier,  b.
in  Cordova  de  Tucuman,  9  Sept.,  1789;  d.  in  Bue
nos  Ayres,  22  Oct.,  1854.  He  studied  philosophy
and  theology  in  the  university  of  his  native  city,
and  was  about  to  be  graduated  in  law  when  the
revolution  against  the  Spanish  dominion  began  in
Buenos  Ayres,  25  May.  1810.  With  the  majority  of
his  fellow-students  he  enlisted  in  the  independent
army  and  took  part  in  the  campaign  of  upper  Peru
in  1813-'15.  In  the  later  intestine  wars  of  the  re
public  he  fought  always  on  the  side  of  legality
against  oppression,  and  in  1829  routed  at  Salta,
Tucuman,  and  Cordova  the  Federal  partisan  chiefs
Bustos  and  Quiroga,  losing  his  right  arm.  In  1840
he  was  expelled  by  the  dictator  Rosas  and  took
refuge  in  Montevideo,  where  in  1843.  during  the
siege  by  Oribe's  forces,  he  was  appointed  command-
er-in-chief  of  the  besieged  city,  and  showed  mili


tary  talent  in  the  defence.  In  June,  1844,  he  was
called  to  take  the  command  of  the  army  that  had
risen  in  the  province  of  Corrientes  against  Rosas,
who  sent  Gen.  Urquiza  against  the  revolutionists.
They  were  finally  routed  at  Vences  in  1845,  and
Paz  emigrated  to  Chili.  After  the  fall  of  Rosas  he
returned,  and  was  elected  governor  of  Cordova ;
but  after  the  election  of  Urquiza  to  the  presidency,
and  his  virtual  assumption  of  the  dictatorship,
Paz  retired  to  Buenos  Ayres,  where  he  was  called
by  the  government  of  Dr.  Alsina  to  the  portfolio
of  war;  but  he  soon  died  in  poverty.  After  the
reconstruction  of  the  Argentine  confederation  con
gress  voted  $40.000  to  his  widow  and  children.

PAZ  SOLDAN,  Mariano  Felipe,  Peruvian
statesman,  b.  in  Arequipa  in  1821.  He  received
his  preparatory  education  in  the  Seminary  of  San
Geronimo  of  his  native  city,  and  in  1838  went  to
Lima  to  study  law  in  the  University  of  San  Mar
cos,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1843,  returning  to
Arequipa  to  practise  his  profession.  In  the  fol
lowing  year  he  was  appointed  district  judge  of
Cajamarca  and  Chota.  and  gradually  rose  in  his
profession,  becoming  successively  judge-auditor  of
the  naval  court  of  Callao,  and  member  of  the  su
perior  courts  of  Libertad  and  Lima.  In  1853  he
was  sent  as  minister  to  Colombia,  and  on  his  re
turn  he  remained  for  some  time  in  the  United
States,  where  he  studied  the  penitentiary  system.
On  his  return  to  Peru  he  conceived  the  project  of
establishing  the  improved  system  in  that  country,
and,  after  he  had  encountered  many  difficulties,
Gen.  Ramon  Castillo  interested  himself  in  the  enter
prise,  and  Paz  Soldan  directed  the  construction  of
the  present  model  penitentiary  at  Lima.  He  held
in  1860  the  portfolio  of  foreign  relations,  and  in
1870  that  of  justice.  Later  he  was  appointed  gen
eral  director  of  public  works,  and  director  of  the
penitentiary  that  he  had  established,  but  afterward
he  retired  to  private  life,  to  devote  himself  entirely
to  the  preparation  of  his  geographical  dictionary.
In  March,  1881,  he  formed  part  of  Francisco  Gar
cia  Calderon's  cabinet,  but  after  the  arrest  of  the
latter  by  the  Chilians  he  retired  again  to  private
life.  He  is  professor  of  literature  at  the  Univer
sity  of  San  Marcos,  and  has  published  in  the  news
papers  of  Lima  many  sonnets.  He  is  the  author
of  "  Atlas  Geografico  de  la  Repiiblica  del  Peru,"
published  by  order  of  President  Cast  ilia  (Paris,
1861 ;  French  ed..  1805) ;  "  Historia  del  Peru  Inde-
pendientede  1819  a  1827"  (Lima,  1868-'70);  and
"  Diccionario  Geografico  Estadistico  del  Peru "
(1877).— His  brother,  Mateo,  b.  in  Arequipa  in
1814 ;  d.  in  Lima  in  1860.  studied  in  the  Seminary
of  San  Geronimo  of  his  native  city,  was  graduated
in  law  in  1835,  and  afterward  employed  in  the  de
partment  of  taxes.  In  his  leisure  hours  he  studied
French,  English,  Italian,  Latin,  and  Greek,  and
cultivated  mathematical  science.  He  is  the  author
of  an  excellent  "  Tratado  de  Astronomia  "  (Madrid,
1856),  used  as  a  text-book  in  Spain ;  "  Geografia
del  Peru,"  edited  by  his  brother  Mariano  (Lima,
1860,  and  French  ed..  Paris.  1863) ;  and  "  Tratado
de  Calculo  infinitesimal"  (Lima,  1874).

PEABODY,  Andrew  Preston,  clergyman,  b.
in  Beverly,  Mass..  19  March.  1811.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Harvard  in  1826.  and,  after  studying  three
years  in  the  divinity-school  and  serving  one  year
as  mathematical  tutor  in  the  university,  succeeded
in  1833  Rev.  Dr.  Nathan  Parker  as  pastor  of  the
South  parish  (Unitarian)  church  in  Portsmouth,
N.  H.  He  held  this  pastorate  till  1860,  when  he
was  appointed  preacher  to  the  university  and  pro
fessor  of  Christian  morals,  and  this  relation  was
maintained  till  the  commencement  season  of  1881,


688


PEABODY


PEABODY


when,  resigning  to  give  his  whole  time  to  the  com
pletion  of  literary  work  that  had  been  long  in
hand,  he  was  given  an  emeritus  appointment.  In
1862  and  again  during  the  academic  year  of  1808-'9
he  was  acting  president  of  the  university.  From
student  days  he  has  been  an  active  literary  worker.
He  wrote  sixty  leading  articles  in  "  The  Whig
Review "  in  1837-'59,  was  editor  of  the  "  North
American  Review  "  in  1852-'61,  and  has  contributed
frequently  to  "  The  Christian  Examiner,"  "  The
New  England  Magazine,"  "  The  American  Month
ly,"  and  other  religious  and  educational  publica
tions.  Besides  more  than  a  hundred  special  ser
mons,  addresses,  and  orations,  he  has  published
"Lectures  on  Christian  Doctrine"  (Boston,  1844):
"  Sermons  of  Consolation  "  (1847) ;  "  Conversation  :
its  Faults  and  its  Graces"  (1850);  "Christianity
the  Religion  of  Nature "  (1804) ;  "  Sermons  for
Children  "  (1806) ;  "  Reminiscences  of  European
Travel"  (New  York,  1868);  "Manual  of  Moral
Philosophy  "  ;  "  Christianity  and  Science  "  (Boston,
1874);  "Christian  Belief  and  Life"  (1875);  and
"  Harvard  Reminiscences "  (1888).  He  has  also
compiled  a  Sunday-school  hymn-book  (1840),  and
edited,  with  memoirs,  the  writings  of  James  Ken-
nard,  Jr.  (1847) ;  Rev.  Jason  Whitman  (184!)) ;  John
W.  Foster  (1852) ;  Charles  A.  Cheever,  M.  1).  (1854);
and  William  Plummer  and  William  Plummer,  Jr.
(1857).  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Har
vard  in  1852,  and  LL.  D.  from  the  University  of
Rochester  in  1863.

PEABODY,  Elizabeth  Palmer,  educator,  b.
in  Billerica,  Mass.,  10  May,  1804.  She  was  the
daughter  of  Nathaniel  Peabody,  a  physician,  passed
her  early  life  at  Salem,  and  since  18*22  has  resided
principally  in  Boston,  where  she  has  engaged  in
teaching.  Her  sister  Sophia  married  Nathaniel
Hawthorne,  and  her  sister  Mary  married  Horace
Mann.  Miss  Peabody,  who  is  now  the  last  survivor
of  her  generation,  resides  at  Jamaica  Plain,  near
Boston.  She  has  been  successful  as  a  teacher,  and
was  one  of  the  first  to  introduce  the  kindergarten
system  of  instruction  into  the  United  States,  and
has  been  prominent  in  numerous  works  of  philan
thropy.  She  is  still  to  some  extent  engaged  (1888)
in  literary  work,  and  she  has  published  '-^Esthetic
Papers"  (Boston,  1849);  "Crimes  of  the  House  of
Austria,"  edited  (New  York,  1852) ;  "  The  Polish-
American  System  of  Chronology  "  (Boston,  1852);
"Kindergarten  in  Italy,"  in  "  U.  S.  Bureau  of
Education  Circular"  (1872);  and  a  revised  edition
of  Mary  Mann's  "  Guide  to  the  Kindergarten  and
Intermediate  Class ;  and  Moral  Culture  of  Infan
cy"  (New  York,  1877);  "Reminiscences  of  Dr.
Charming"  (Boston,  1880);  "Letters  to  Kinder-
gartners"  (1880);  and  "Last  Evening  with  All-
ston.  and  other  Papers"  (1887).

PEABODY,  Ephraim,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wil
ton,  N.  H.,  22  March,  1807 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  28
Nov.,  1856.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1827,
studied  theology  at  Cambridge,  and  began  to
preach  in  1830  at  Meadville,  Pa,  He  was  minis
ter  for  four  years  in  Cincinnati,  and  pastor  of
a  Unitarian  church  at  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  in
1838-'46,  and  for  the  remainder  of  his  life  of  King's
chapel,  Boston.  He  was  the  originator  of  the  Bos
ton  provident  society,  and  was  otherwise  largely
interested  in  devising  measures  for  the  relief  of  the
poor.  During  1853  he  travelled  in  Europe  to
benefit  his  health,  and  spent  the  winter  of  1855-'6  in
St.  Augustine,  Fla.,  with  the  same  object.  He  was
favorably  known  as  a  pulpit  orator.  His  sermons,
with  a  memoir,  were  published  in  1857,  and  a  vol
ume  cf  his  writings,  entitled  "  Christian  Days  and
Thoughts,"  also  appeared  (1858).


PEABODY,  Georare,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Dan-
vers,  Mass.,  18  Feb.,  1795 ;  d.  in  London,  4  Nov..  1809.
He  was  descended  from  a  good  English  family,  his
ancestor,  Francis  Paybody,  having  settled  in  New
England  in  1035.  After  he  had  been  taught  to
read  and  write  at  the  Danvers  school,  he  became  a
clerk  at  the  age  of  eleven  years,  afterward  serving
in  the  same  capacity  at  The! ford,  Vt.,  and  in  New-
buryport,  Mass.,  when  he  went  to  Georgetown,  D.  C.,
and  assumed  the  management  of  a  store  belonging
to  his  uncle,  John  Peabody.  In  1814  lie  became  a
partner  of  Elisha  Riggs  in  a  dry-goods  house,  which
a  year  later  was  removed  to  Baltimore,  Md.,  and  in
18'22  established  branches  in  New  York  and  Phila
delphia.  By  the  retirement,  in  1829,  of  Mr.  Riggs,
he  became  the  head  of  the  firm,  and  in  1837  he  set
tled  in  London,  establishing  the  banking-house  of
George  Peabody  and  Company.  For  negotiating
the  sale  of  $8,000,000  worth  of  bonds,  in  1835,  in
London,  when  others  had  failed,  by  which  he  sus
tained  the  credit  of  Maryland,  and  giving  to  the
state  his  commission  of  $200.000,  a  vote  of  thanks
was  returned  to  him  by  the  legislature.  This  was
his  first  large  gift.  He  supplied  the  sum  required
to  arrange  and  display  the  contributions  from  the
United  States  to  the  great  London  exhibition  of
1851.  The  same  year  he  gave  the  first  of  a  series
of  4th-of-July  dinners  in  London,  which  was  at
tended  by  the  Duke  of  Wellington  and  many  other
distinguished  personages,  and  to  which  the  Queen
sent  her  own  and  Prince  Albert's  portraits  to  deco
rate  the  hall.  These  annual  entertainments  were
a  source  of  great  satisfaction  to  Mr.  Peabody,  who
believed  that  they  contributed  in  no  small  degree
to  a  better  feeling  between  his  native  and  his  adopt
ed  country.  The  year  following  he  presented  $10,-
000  to  the  second  Grinnell  expedition,  under  Dr.
Elisha  K.  Kane,  sent  in  search  of  Sir  John  Frank
lin,  and  $30,000  to  found  the  Peabody  institute
and  library  at  Danvers  (now  Peabody),  to  which  he
subsequently  added  $170,OQO,  with  $50,000  more
for  a  similar  institution  in  North  Danvers.  On
the  occasion  of  his  revisiting  the  United  States  in
1857,  he  founded  the  Peabody  institute  in  Balti
more,  with  $300.000,  subsequently  increased  to
$1,000.000.  He  also  gave  $25,000  to  Phillips  An-
dover  academy,  and  $25,000  to  Kcriyon  college.
Mr.  Peabody  matured  his  plans  in  1802  for  build
ing  lodging-houses  for  the  poor  of  London,  con
tributing  in  all  $2,500,000,  with  which,  to  the  pres
ent  time  (1888),  buildings  have  been  erected  in
different  districts  of  the  metropolis,  capable  of
accommodating  20,000  persons.  Mr.  Peabody's
great  wealth  was  due  in  part  to  his  patriotism  and
sagacity,  which  induced  him  to  invest  largely  in
U.  S.  government  bonds  during  the  civil  war.
While  on  another  visit  to  this  country  in  1800  he
founded  an  institute  of  archaeology,  in  connection
with  Harvard  college,  with  $150.000,  presented  a
like  amount  toward  a  department  of  physical  sci
ence  in  Yale  college,  and  made  a  gift  of  $2,100,000,
increased  in  1809  to  $3,500,000,  for  the  promotion
of  education  in  the  south,  besides  contributing
about  $200,000  to  various  charities.  For  this  un
exampled  liberality  he  received  the  thanks  of  the
United  States  government,  which  also  voted  him  a
gold  medal.  When  he  returned  to  England  in  1807,
the  Queen  offered  him  a  baronetcy,  or  the  grand
cross  of  the  Order  of  the  Bath,  both  of  which  he
declined.  In  answer  to  a  question  as  to  what  gift
he  would  accept,  he  said  :  "  A  letter  from  the  Queen
of  England  which  I  may  carry  across  the  Atlantic
and  deposit  as  a  memorial  of  one  of  her  most  faith
ful  sons."  The  Queen  complied  with  this  request,
writing  Mr.  Peabody  a  graceful  letter  of  acknowl-


PEABODY


PEALE


689


edgment  of  his  "  more  than  princely  munificence."
and  adding  a  painting  of  herself.  'The  letter  and
portrait  are  both  to  be  seen  in  the  Peabody  insti
tute  at  Danvers.  A  year  later  he  endowed  an  art-
school  in  Rome.  Italy,  and  in  1869  he  made  his  last
visit  to  his  native  land,  presenting  the  Peabody
museum  at  Salem  with  $150.000,  and  giving  to  other
objects  $105,000.  During  his  absence  the  Prince
of  Wales  unveiled,  23  July,  a  fine  bronze  statue  of
him,  by  William  W.  Story,  erected  by  the  citizens
of  London  on  the  east  side  of  the  Royal  exchange.
A  replica  of  this  seated  statue  will  be  erected  in
Baltimore  during  the  present  year  (1888).  Two
months  later  Mr.  Peabody  returned  to  London,  and
died  a  few  weeks  afterward.  His  obsequies  were
celebrated  in  Westminster  abbey  on  12  Xov.  For
the  first  time  in  history  the  gates  of  Westminster
abbey  were  opened  for  the  burial  of  a  private  citi
zen  of  another  country,  and,  although  the  historic
building  was  not  Mr.  Peabody's  final  resting-place,
it  was  only  owing  to  his  own  desire  to  sleep  by  the
side  of  his  mother's  grave  in  his  native  land.
Where  the  funeral  service  of  the  English  church
was  read  over  him.  Mr.  Peabody  might  have  re
posed  forever  with  the  universal  consent  and  ap
probation  of  the  British  nation.  The  swiftest  and
finest  frigate  in  the  English  navy  was  selected  to
bear  his  body  across  the  broad  Atlantic,  and  it  was
received  from  the  ship-of-war  "  Monarch  "  by  an
American  squadron  commanded  by  Admiral  Farra-
gut,  and  buried  at  Danvers  (now  Peabody).  Mr.
Peabody  never  married,  and  his  remaining  fortune
of  $5,000,000  was  bequeathed  to  his  relatives.  He
was  the  most  liberal  philanthropist  of  ancient  or
modern  times.  In  the  words  of  Mr.  Gladstone,  he
taught  the  world  how  a  man  may  be  the  master  of
his  fortune,  and  not  its  slave.  It  was  Mr.  Peabody's
own  testimony,  and  that  of  those  most  intimately
acquainted  with  him,  that  his  great  benefactions
were  really  a  triumph  over  a  disposition  naturally
parsimonious,  and  it  was  from  a  sense  of  benefits
conferred  on  him  by  Divine  providence  that  he
overcame  the  natural  tendencies  of  his  strong  will
in  giving,  till  it  became  a  delight  to  him  to  give.
In  the  greatness  of  his  benevolence  George  Peabody
stands  alone  in  history.  See  life,  by  Phebe  A.
Hanaford  (Boston,  1882) ;  and  numerous  addresses
by  Robert  C.  Winthrop  (Boston,  1870);  Severn
Teackle  Wallis  (Annapolis.  1870),  and  others ;  and
numerous  eulogies  and  sermons  delivered  at  the
time  of  his  death.

PEABODY,  Joseph,  merchant,  b.  in  Middle-
ton.  Mass.,  9  Dec.,  1757;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass..  5  Jan.,
1844.  He  was  descended  from  Francis  Peabody,
who  came  from  St.  Alban's,  England,  in  1635,  and
was  one  of  the  first  settlers  of  Topsfield,  Mass.
During  the  war  of  the  Revolution  he  served  as  an
officer  on  privateers,  and  acted  with  credit  as  sec
ond  officer  of  the  letter  of  marque  "  Ranger."  He
afterward  sailed  as  a  captain  of  merchant  vessels,
and  built  and  freighted  eighty-three  ships.  He
became  wealthy  and  was  noted  for  benevolence.

PEABODY.  Nathaniel,  soldier,  b.  in  Topsfield,
Mass.,  1  March.  1741 ;  d.  in  Exeter.  X.  H.,  27  June,
1823.  He  was  educated  at  Leominster,  Mass.,  and,
after  studying  medicine  with  his  father.  Dr.  Jacob
Peabody,  was  licensed  and  began  practice  in  1761
at  Plaistow,  X.  H.  He  was  commissioned  a  lieu
tenant-colonel  in  1774,  and  was  the  first  man  in
Xew  Hampshire  to  resign  the  king's  commission
on  account  of  political  opinions.  He  was  one  of
the  captors  of  Fort  William  and  Mary  at  Xew-
castle,  and  was  constantly  employed  in  the  legisla
ture,  on  committees,  and  in  conventions,  during
the  early  part  of  the  Revolutionary  war,  being  also
VOL.  IT. — 44


elected  one  of  the  committee  of  safety,  10  Jan.,
1776,  and  becoming  its  chairman.  He  was  ap
pointed  adjutant-general  of  Xew  Hampshire  mi
litia.  19  July,  1777,  and  served  in  that  capacity  in
1779  in  Rhode  Island.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
convention  at  Xew  Haven  in  1779  for  regulating
the  price  of  labor,  produce,  manufactures,  and  other
purposes,  a  delegate  to  congress  in  1779-'80,  a
member  of  the  convention,  and  chairman  of  the
committee  to  form  a  state  constitution  in  1782-'3,
and  was  again  elected  a  delegate  to  the  Continental
congress  in  1786,  but  did  not  act.  He  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  legislature  for  eight  years,  its  speaker  in
1793,  and  major-general  of  militia  from  1793  till
1798.  He  passed  the  latter  years  of  his  life  within
the  debtor's  limits  of  the  jail.

PEABODY,  Oliver  William  Bourn,  author,
b.  in  Exeter,  X.  H.,  9  July,  1799 ;  d.  in  Burlington,
Vt.,  5  July,  1848.  He  was  the  son  of  Judge  Oliver
Peabody,  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1816.
He  afterward  studied  law  at  Cambridge,  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  in  1819-'30  at
Exeter.  At  the  same  time  he  edited  the  "  Rocking-
ham  Gazette"  and  "Exeter  Xews-Letter,"  and
served  in  the  legislature.  He  removed  to  Boston
in  1830,  assisted  his  brother-in-law,  Alexander  H.
Everett,  in  editing  the  "  Xorth  American  Review,"
and  was  for  several  years  assistant  editor  of  the
Boston  "  Daily  Advertiser."  From  1836  till  1842
he  was  register  of  probate  for  Suffolk  county,  and
in  the  latter  year  he  became  professor  of  English
literature  in  Jefferson  college,  La.  Returning  to
Boston  in  1843.  he  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the
Unitarian  association  in  1845,  and  soon  afterward
was  appointed  pastor  of  a  church  in  Burlington,
Vt.  He  edited  the  works  of  Shakespeare  (7  vols.,
Boston,  1844),  wrote  lives  of  Gen.  Israel  Putnam
and  Gen.  John  Sullivan  in  Sparks's  "American
Biography,"  and  contributed  to  periodicals. — His
twin-brother,  William  Bourn  Oliver,  clergyman,
d.  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  28  May,  1847.  was  gradu
ated  at  Harvard  in  1842.  He  was  an  instructor  in
Phillips  Exeter  academy  in  1817,  studied  theology
at  Cambridge  divinity-school,  and  was  licensed  to
preach  in  1819.  In  October,  1820.  he  became  pastor
of  the  L'nitarian  church  at  Springfield,  Mass.,  where
he  remained  during  his  lifetime.  He  was  an  accom
plished  scholar  and  poet.  Mr.  Peabody  was  one  of
the  commissioners  of  the  Massachusetts  zoological
survey,  for  which  he  prepared  a  "Report  on  the
Birds  of  the  Commonwealth"  (Boston,  1839).  He
contributed  to  the  "Xorth  American  Review,"
wrote,  for  Sparks's  "  American  Biography,"  lives  of
Alexander  Wilson,  Cotton  Mather,  David  Brainerd,
and  James  Oglethorpe,  and  edited  the  "  Springfield
Collection  of  Hymns  for  Sacred  Worship  "  (Spring
field,  1835).  After  his  death  a  volume  of  his  ser
mons  was  published  by  his  brother  Oliver  (1849). —
William's  son.  Everett,  soldier,  b.  in  Springfield,
Mass.,  in  1831 :  d.  near  Pittsburg  Landing,  Tenn.,
6  April.  1862,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1849,
became  a  railway-engineer,  was  colonel  of  Missouri
volunteers,  and  was  killed  at  Shiloh.  He  completed
the  biography  of  his  uncle  Oliver,  and  edited  the
"Literary  Re'mains"  of  his  father  (Boston,  1850).

PEALE,  Charles  Willson,  artist,  b.  in  Chester-
town,  Md.,  16  April,  1741 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
22  Feb..  1827.  He  followed  for  some  time  the  trade
of  a  saddler  in  Annapolis,  but,  having  seen  a  por
trait  while  visiting  Norfolk.  Va.,  he  determined  to
attempt  art,  and  on  his  return  he  executed  a  like
ness  of  himself.  His  success  induced  him  to  change
his  vocation  from  saddle-making  to  portrait-paint
ing.  He  lived  in  Boston  in  1768-'9,  where  he  had
some  instruction  from  John  Singleton  Copley,  and


690


PEALB


PEALE


in  1770  he  went  to  London,  England,  bearing  let
ters  to  Benjamin  West,  who  received  him  kindly,
and  whose  pupil  he  became.  In  London,  Peale  also
studied  modelling  in  wax,  casting  and  moulding  in
plaster,  engraving  in  muzzotinto,  and  miniature-
painting.  He  returned  to  Annapolis  in  1774,  began
painting  portraits,  and  two  years  later  established
himself  in  Philadelphia.  Later  he  became  a  cap
tain  of  volunteers,  and  was  present  at  the  battles
of  Trenton  and  Germantown.  He  also  began  to
take  an  active  interest  in  political  affairs,  and  was
a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1779.  Afterward  he
turned  his  attention  to  natural  history.  A  mam
moth  that  had  been  disinterred  for  him  in  Ulster
county,  N.  Y.,  in  1801,  led  his  mind  into  this  new
channel,  and  the  idea  of  forming  a  museum  oc
curred  to  him.  He  forthwith  became  a  collector
of  all  manner  of  natural  curiosities,  and  with  these,
and  a  large  number  of  portraits,  opened,  in  1802,
"  Peale's  Museum "  to  the  public.  He  gave  lec
tures  on  natural  history,  and  occupied  himself  also
with  dentistry.  In  1791,  and  again  in  1794,  he
made  earnest  but  ineffectual  endeavors  to  form  an
art  academy  in  Philadelphia,  and  he  lived  to  as
sist  in  establishing  the  Pennsylvania  academy  of  the
fine  arts  and  to  contribute  to  seventeen  of  its  an
nual  exhibitions.  Peale  is  notable  rather  for  versa
tility  than  for  real  genius  in  any  direction.  He
took  up,  in  turn,  the  making  of  coaches,  harnesses,
clocks,  and  watches,  besides  working  as  a  silver
smith,  and  he  was  also  soldier,  politician,  natu
ralist,  taxidermist,  and  dentist.  It  is  said  of  him
that  he  "sawed  his  own  ivory  for  his  miniatures,
moulded  the  glasses,  and  made  the  shagreen  oases."
In  the  course  of  his  various  studies  he  became  an
author  also,  his  writings  including  an  essay  on
"Building  Wooden  Bridges"  (1797);  "Discourse
Introductory  to  a  Course  of  Lectures  on  Natural
History  ..."  (Philadelphia,  1800) ;  "  Epistle  on
the  Means  of  Preserving  Health  "  (Philadelphia,
1803) ;  and  "  Domestic  Happiness  "  (1816).  But  his
fame  rests  mainly  on  his  achievements  as  a  portrait-
painter,  and  is  due  in  a  great  measure  to  the  circum
stance  of  his  having  been  enabled  to  associate  his
name  with  that  of  Washington,  who  gave  him,  it
is  asserted,  no  less  than  fourteen  sittings.  He  exe
cuted  in  1772  his  first  portrait  of  Washington,  who
was  then  a  Virginia  colonel,  and  after  that  painted
him  repeatedly  during  the  Revolutionary  war,  and
afterward  several  of  these  portraits  he  engraved.
He  was  at  one  time  the  only  portrait-painter  in  the
colonies,  and  his  services  were  much  in  demand.
Among  his  portraits,  many  of  which  have  been  en
graved,  are  those  of  George  and  Martha  Wash
ington,  John  Hancock,  Robert  Morris,  Nathanael
Greene,  Horatio  Gates,  Benjamin  Lincoln,  Baron
Steuben,  Count  Rochambeau,  Baron  DeKalb,  Ben
jamin  Franklin,  Peyton  Randolph.  Thomas  Jeffer
son,  Charles  Carroll,  Lord  Stirling,  Bishop  "White,
Albert  Gallatin,  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush,  Count  Volney,
Timothy  Pickering,  John  Witherspoon.  and  Alex
ander  Hamilton.  Those  of  James  Monroe,  Andrew
Jackson,  John  Quincy  Adams,  John  C.  Calhoun,
and  Henry  Clay  were  painted  in  the  winter  of
1818-'19.  The  New  York  historical  society  owns
four  portraits  by  him — Washington.  Hamilton,
John  B.  Bordley,  and  Pieter  Johan  Van  Berckel.
His  "Christ  Healing  the  Sick  at  the  Pool  of
Bethesda"  was  painted  in  his  eighty-first  year,
and  his  last  work  was  a  full-Jength'  portrait  of
himself  at  the  age  of  eighty-ttiree.  It  is  now  in
the  Philadelphia  academy.  See  Elizabeth  B.  John
ston's  "  Original  Portraits  of  Washington  "  (Boston,
1882);  William  Dunlap's  "  History  of  the  Arts  of
Design  in  the  United  States "  (New  York,  1834) ;


and  Scharf  s  "  History  of  Philadelphia  "  (Philadel
phia,  1884). — His  son,  Rembrandt,  artist,  b.-  in
Bucks  county,  Pa.,  22  Feb.,  1778;  d.  in  Philadel
phia,  3  Oct.,  1800,  showed  a  talent  for  art  at  an
early  age,  and  was  but  seventeen  when  he  exe
cuted  a  portrait  of
Washington,  from
whom  he  was  for
tunate  enough  to
obtain  three  sit
tings.  Immediate
ly  after  this,  in
179(5,  he  went  to
Charleston,  S.  C.,
where  he  was  em
ployed  until  1801,
in  which  year  he
went  to  England  to
study  under  Benja
min  West.  While
in  London  he  paint
ed  some  portraits,
and  in  1803  re-
turned  to  the  Unit-
ed  States,  finding
sufficient  occupation  in  Savannah,  Charleston,  New
York,  and  Philadelphia.  He  visited  Paris  in  1807.
and  again  in  1809,  to  paint  the  portraits  of  distin
guished  Frenchmen,  many  of  which  pictures  were
afterward  placed  in  his  father's  museum,  and  to
study  in  the  art  galleries  of  the  city.  From  the
last  trip  he  returned  in  1810,  and  again  opened  a
studio  in  Philadelphia.  He  painted  in  that  city,
New  York,  Baltimore,  and  Boston  until  1829,  and
then  went  abroad  again,  visiting  France,  and
spending  sixteen  months  in  Italy.  In  1832  he  went
to  England,  and  established  himself  in  1833  in
London,  where  he  exhibited  at  the  Royal  academy,
but  the  death  of  his  son  forced  him  to  return.
Peale  was  president  of  the  American  academy,  suc
ceeding  Col.  Trumbull,  and  was  one  of  the  original
members  of  the  Academy  of  design.  On  his  re
moval  to  Philadelphia  in  1827  he  was  made  an
honorary  member.  His  numerous  portraits  include
those  of  Baron  Cuvier,  Bernardin  de  Saint  Pierre,
Jean  Antoine  Houdon,  at  the  Pennsylvania  acad
emy  of  fine  arts,  Thomas  Jefferson,  Mrs.  James
Madison,  Thomas  Sully,  Com.  Oliver  H.  Perry,
Rammohun  Roy,  G.  W.  Bethune,  William  Bain-
bridge,  Dr.  Joseph  Priestley,  and  Stephen  Deca-
tur,  owned  by  the  New  York  historical  society.
Like  his  father,  he  painted  Washington  several
times,  the  last  and  most  notable  portrait  being
executed  in  1823.  It  was  exhibited  in  the  prin
cipal  cities  of  the  United  States  and  Europe
in  1829,  and  in  1832  was  bought  by  congress  for
$2,000.  In  1859-'(50  he  delivered  a  lecture  on
"Washington  and  His  Portraits  "in  most  of  the
large  cities  of  the  Union.  His  most  noted  figure-
compositions  are  "  Napoleon  on  Horseback  "  (1810) ;
"  Babes  in  the  Wood  " ;  "  Song  of  the  Shin  "  ;
"  Jupiter  and  lo  "  (1813) ;  "  Lysippa  on  the  Rock  " :
"Roman  Daughter";  "Ascent  of  Elijah";  and
"Court  of  Death"  (1820).  His  versatility  almost
equalled  that  of  his  father.  He  was  one  of  the  first
artists  to  practise  lithography  in  the  United  States,
gaining  a  silver  medal  at  the  Franklin  institute  in
1827  for  a  portrait  of  Washington.  Like  his  father,
he  lectured  on  natural  history.  He  was  the  author
of  "  An  Account  of  the  Skeleton  of  the  Mammoth  "
(London,  1802) ;  "  Historical  Disquisition  on  the
Mammoth"  (1803);  "Notes  on  Italy"  (Philadel
phia,  1831);  "Graphics"  (1841);  arid  "Reminis
cences  of  Art  and  Artists"  (184o).  He  also  edited
the  " Portfolio  of  an  Artist"  (1839),  and  contrib-


PEALE


PEARCE


691


uted  articles  and  translations  to  the  "  Crayon "
and  other  periodicals. — Another  son,  Raphaelle,
artist,  b.  in  Annapolis,  Md.,  17  Feb.,  1774;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  25  March,  1825.  lie  began  painting
portraits  in  1804,  but  paid  also  much  attention
to  the  painting  of  still-life  subjects,  in  which
branch  of  art  he  was  very  successful.  His  brother
Rembrandt  said  of  him :  "  He  may  perhaps  be
considered  the  first,  in  point  of  time,  who  adopted
this  branch  of  painting  in  America." — Another
son,  Titian  Ramsey,  artist,  b.  in  Philadelphia  in
1800 ;  d.  there,  13  March,  1885,  was  much  devoted
to  the  study  of  natural  history,  and  held  office  in
the  Philadelphia  academy  of  natural  sciences.  He
accompanied  the  South  sea  exploring  expedition  in
1838-'42,  under  Lieut.  Charles  Wilkes,  as  a  natural
ist,  and  drew  several  of  the  plates  in  one  of  the
volumes  of  reports  on  the  expedition,  that  of  John
Cassin.  on  "  Mammology  and  Ornithology  "  (Phila
delphia,  1858).  In  his  artistic  labors  he  appears  also
to  have  devoted  himself  entirely  to  the  delineation  of
animal  life.  He  executed  most  of  the  plates  in  the
1st  and  4th  volumes  of  Charles  Lucien  Bonaparte's
"American  Ornithology"  (1825-'33),  and  exhibited
water-color  drawings  of  animals  at  the  Pennsyl
vania  academy  of  tine  arts.  From  1849  till  1872
he  was  an  examiner  in  the  patent-office  at  Wash
ington.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Mammalia  and
Ornithology  "  (1848).  Joseph  Sabin  says  that  the
volume  "  was  suppressed,  and  is  of  the  greatest
rarity."  —  A  brother  of  Charles  Willson,  James,
artist,  b.  in  Annapolis  in  1749;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
24  May,  1831,  served  during  the  Revolution  as  an
officcr'of  the  Continental  line.  He  turned  his  at
tention  principally  to  portrait-painting,  executing
many  miniatures  and  portraits  in  oil,  including  a
full-length  portrait  of  Washington,  which  has  been
engraved.  One  of  his  portraits  of  Washington  is
in  the  New  York  historical  society,  the  other,
painted  in  1795,  in  Independence  Hall,  Philadel
phia.  He  painted  also  some  landscapes,  and  even
attempted  historical  composition.  Among  his
larger  pictures  are  "  A  Rencontre  between  Col.  Al
len  McLane  and  Two  British  Horsemen"  (1811);
"  View  of  the  Battle  of  Princeton  "  ;  and  "  A  View
of  Belfield  Farm,  near  Germantown "  (1818). —
James's  son,  James,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  6  March,
1779;  d.  there,  27  Oct.,  1876,  engaged  in  banking,
but  devoted  his  leisure  hours  to  the  study  of  art,
and  became  known  as  a  marine  and  landscape
painter.  In  1813  he  exhibited,  at  the  Columbia  so
ciety  of  artists,  a  view  of  High  street  bridge.  His
other  works  include  a  painting  of  an  engagement
between  the  privateer  schooner  "  Cornet,'  of  Balti
more,  and  a  Portuguese  sloop-of-war ;  "  View  of
Germantown"  (1820);  "View  of  Water-Gap  and
Breaking  Away  of  a  Storm  "  (1824) ;  and  "  Fair-
mount  Water-Works  "  (1824). — The  first  James's
daughter,  Anna  Claypoole,  artist,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  6  March,  1791 ;  d.  there,  25  Dec.,  1878,  also
devoted  herself  at  first  to  still-life  subjects,  but
afterward  followed  miniature-painting.  She  ex
ecuted  miniatures  of  Gen.  Lallernand,  James  Mon
roe,  Andrew  Jackson  (1819),  and  Com.  William
Buinbridge.  She  married  William  Staughton,
D.  D.,  and  subsequently  Gen.  William  Duncan.
— Another  daughter.  Sarah  M.,  artist,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  19  May,  1800 ;  d.  there,  4  Feb.,  1885,  stud
ied  under  her  father  and  uncle,  and  began  to  paint
still-life  subjects  about  1816.  Later  she  executed
portraits  of  Com.  William  Bainbridge  (1822),  Henry
A.  Wise,  Caleb  dishing,  Dixon  II.  Lewis,  and  other
public  men.  Lafayette  accorded  her  four  sittings
in  1825.  Her  professional  life  was  spent  in  Phila
delphia,  Baltimore,  Washington,  and  St.  Louis.


PEARCE,  Charles  Spragiie,  artist,  b.  in  Bos
ton,  Mass.,  13  Oct.,  1851.  He  went  to  Europe  in  the
autumn  of  1873,  spent  the  winter  in  Egypt,  and
travelled  in  Algiers  in  1874-'o.  He  was  the  pupil
of  Leon  Bonnat.  in  Paris  (1873-'5),  and  since  that
time  he  has  resided  mostly  in  France.  Since  1876
he  has  exhibited  frequently  at  the  Paris  salon,
and  also  in  New  York,  Boston,  and  Philadelphia.
He  has  received  medals  and  other  honors  at  various
times,  notably  a  medal  of  the  third  class  at  the  sa
lon,  in  1883,  the  Belgian  grand  medal  of  honor  in
1886,  and  the  Temple  gold  medal  of  the  Philadel
phia  academy  in  1885.  His  more  important  works
include  "  Death  of  the  First-Born  of  Egypt  "  (1877) ;
"  Pet  of  the  Harem  "  (1878);  "  Le  sacrifice  d'Abra-
ham "  and  "  Decapitation  of  John  the  Baptist,"
of  which  the  latter  received  honorable  mention  at
the  salon,  a  prize  at  the  Philadelphia  academy,  and
a  medal  in  Boston  (1881) :  "  Rosina  "  (1882) ;  "  Pre
lude,"  which  has  been  etched  by  Los  Rios  (1883) ;
"Water-Carrier"  and  "  Bebe  et  sa  Sceur"  (1883);
"  Prayer  "  and  "  Toilers  of  the  Sea  "  (1884) :  "  Peines
de  conn-  "  (1884);  "  Une  bergere"  (1886);  and  "St.
Genevieve"  (1887).

PEARCE,  Cromwell,  soldier,  b.  in  Willistown,
Pa.,  13  Aug.,  1772;  d.  there,  2  April,  1852.  He
was  brought  up  as  a  farmer,  was  a  captain  of
militia  in  1793-'8,  and  the  next  year  became  1st
lieutenant  in  the  1st  U.  S.  infantry.  He  returned
to  civil  life  on  the  disbanding  of  the  army  in  1800,
was  the  first  postmaster  of  West  Chester,  became
brigadier-general  of  militia  in  1807,  and  major-
general  in  1811.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war  of
1812  he  re-entered  the  service  as  colonel  of  the  6th
United  States  infantry.  He  commanded  his  divis
ion  after  the  fall  of  Gen.  Montgomery  Pike  at
York,  and  led  his  regiment  at  the  capture  of  Fort
George.  He  resigned  from  the  army  in  1815,  be
came  sheriff  of  Chester  county.  Pa.,  was  a  presi
dential  elector  in  1824,  and  in  1825-'39  was  an
associate  justice  of  the  county  court.

PEARCE,  Dutee  Jeranld,  congressman,  b.  in
Prudence  island,  R.  I.,  10  April,  1789 ;  d.  in  New
port,  R.  I.,  9  May,  1849.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1808,  studied  law,  and  became  an  eminent
member  of  the  Newport  bar.  He  was  for  many
years  in  the  state  legislature,  attorney-general  of
Rhode  Island  in  1819-'25,  a  presidential  elector  in

1821,  and  in  1825-'49  a  member  of  congress,  having
been  elected  as  a  Democrat.

PEARCE,  James  Alfred,  senator,  b.  in  Alex
andria,  Va.,  14  Dec.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Chestertown,  Md.,
20  Dec.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in

1822,  studied  law  in  Baltimore,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1824,  after  which  he  began  to  practise
at  Cambridge,  Md. At  the  end  of  a  year  he  went
to  Louisiana  with  his  father  and  engaged  in  sugar-
planting  for  three  years. He then  returned  to
Maryland  and  settled  in  Kent  county,  where  he
resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession. He  was
elected  to  the  Maryland  house  of  delegates  in  1831,
in  1835  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  and  he  served,
except  during  one  term  in 1839-'41,  until  1843,
when  he  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  where  he
remained  until  his  death. During  his  long  service
in  the  senate  he  was  especially  interested  in  the
library  of  congress,  the  Smithsonian institution,
and  the  coast  survey. President  Fillmore  offered
him  a  seat  on  the  bench  of  the  U".  S.  district  court
of  Maryland,  which  he  declined. During  the  same
administration  he  was  nominated  and  confirmed
secretary  of  the  interior,  but  this  honor  was  also
declined  upon  the  ground  that  he  could  be  of  more
use  to  his  country  in  the  senate. He  took  a  deep
interest  in  educational  matters,  and  in  1832  was


692


PEARSE


PEARSON


elected  one  of  the  visitors  and  governors  of  Wash
ington  college,  in  which  institution  he  afterward
lectured  on  law.  Mr.  Pearce  was  regarded  as  one
of  the  wisest  and  safest  members  of  the  senate.

PEARSE,  John  Barnard,  chemist,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  19  April,  1842.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1861,  studied  chemistry  in  Philadelphia  for
the  next  three  years,  and  was  in  charge  of  the
chemical  division  of  the  U.  S.  army  laboratory  there
in  1863-'5.  He  spent  the  next  two  years  in  the
School  of  mines  in  Freiberg,  Saxony,  and  Leoben,
Styria,  made  a  specialty  of  iron  and  steel  metal
lurgy,  and  worked  in  the  German  mines.  He  con
nected  himself  with  the  Pennsylvania  steel  company
in  Harrisburg,  Pa,,  in  1868,  and  became  its  general
manager  in  1870.  In  June,  1874,  he  was  a  com
missioner  and  secretary  of  the  second  geological
survey  of  Pennsylvania.  He  has  made  various  in
ventions  in  connection  with  steel  manufacture,  im
proved  the  design  and  product  of  the  Bessemer
steel  plant,  and  was  instrumental  in  making  Besse
mer  pig-iron  from  native  New  Jersey  and  Penn
sylvania  ores.  He  has  published  "  A  Concise  His
tory  of  the  Iron  Manufacture  of  the  American
Colonies  up  to  the  Revolution,  and  of  Pennsylvania
till  the  Present  Time  "  (Philadelphia,  1876).

PEARSON,  Alfred  L,  soldier,  b.  in  Pittsburg.
Pa.,  28  Dec.,  1838.  He  was  educated  at  Jefferson
and  Allegheny  colleges,  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1861,  and  in  1862  became  captain  and  then  colo
nel  of  the  155th  Pennsylvania  regiment.  He  was
brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  30  Sept.,
1864,  for  services  at  Peeble's  Farm,  and  major-
general  for  a  charge  that  he  made  at  Quaker  Road,
29  March,  1865,  for  which  he  was  also  compli
mented  by  Gen.  Meade.  His  command  fired  the
last  shot  at  Appomattox  Court-House.  On  his  re
turn  he  engaged  in  the  practice  of  his  profession,
and  was  district  attorney  in  1870,  1872,  and  1877.
He  has  been  active  in  militia  matters,  and  as  rank
ing  major-general  of  the  Pennsylvania  national
guard  commanded  in  Pittsburg  during  the  riots
of  1877.  He  also  ended  the  troubles  in  Luzerne
county,  and  for  his  action  in  firing  on  the  rioters
was  arrested  on  a  charge  of  murder,  but  the  grand
jury  did  not  indict  him.  In  1888  he  became  com
mander  of  the  National  Union  veteran  legion.  Gen.
Pearson  edited  the  "  Sunday  Critic "  in  1886-'7,
and  is  the  author  of  three  plays,  none  of  which
have  yet  been  produced.

PEARSON,  Eliphalet,  educator,  b.  in  New-
bury,  Mass.,  11  June,  1752;  d.  in  Greenland,  N.  H.,
12  Sept.,  1826.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1773,  taught  in  Andover,  and  was  licensed  to  preach,
but  was  prevented  by  the  failure  of  his  eyesight
from  accepting  a  charge.  During  the  Revolution
he  executed  a  commission  from  the  general  court
to  manufacture  saltpetre  and  gunpowder  for  the
patriot  army.  He  was  appointed  by  Gov.  Samuel
Phillips  first  preceptorof  Phillips  Andover  acad
emy  in  1778,  continued  in  that  office  for  eight
years,  and  in  1786-1806  was  professor  of  Hebrew
and  oriental  languages  at  Harvard.  In  1804-'6,
after  the  death  of  President  Joseph  Willard,  he  dis
charged  the  duties  of  the  latter's  office.  On  his
resignation  he  returned  to  Andover,  and  was
instrumental  in  establishing  the  theological  semi
nary  there.  He  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of
the  Congregational  church  in  1808,  and  the  same
year  became  first  professor  of  sacred  literature  in
Andover  theological  seminary,  holding  office  one
year,  when  he  retired,  and  devoted  the  remainder
of  his  life,  for  the  most  part,  to  agricultural  pur
suits.  Yale  and  Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  in  1802.  He  was  secretarv  of  the  American


academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  president  of  the
Society  for  promoting  Christian  knowledge,  a
founder  of  the  American  educational  society,  and
a  member  of  numerous  religious  and  charitable
bodies.  He  left  many  unpublished  manuscripts,
the  most  valuable  of  which  is  a  course  of  lectures
on  language  that  he  delivered  at  Harvard.  Among
his  published  works  are  occasional  discourses,  a
Hebrew  grammar,  and  a  "Sermon  on  the  Death  of
President  Joseph  Willard  "  (Cambridge,  1804).

PEARSON,  George  Frederick,  naval  officer,
b.  in  New  Hampshire,  6  Feb.,  1796;  d.  in  Ports
mouth,  N.  H.,  30  June,  1867.  He  was  appointed
midshipman,  11  March,  1815,  and  cruised  in  the
frigates  "United  States  "and  "  Independence  "  in
the  Mediterranean  in  1816-'20,  and  in  the  West
Indies  in  1822-'3.  He  was  commissioned  lieutenant,
13  Jan.,  1825,  commanded  the  schooner  "  Shark  "
at  Norfolk  in  1839,  and  served  at  the  Portsmouth
navy-yard  in  1839-'41.  lie  was  promoted  to  com
mander  on  8  Sept.  of  the  latter  year,  was  in  the
"Falmouth"  at  Norfolk  in  1852-'3,  and  became
captain,  14  Sept.,  1855.  He  commanded  the  steamer
"  Powhatan  "  in  the  East  Indies  in  1858-'60.  Dur
ing  the  civil  war  he  rendered  valuable  service  as
commandant  of  the  Portsmouth  navy-yard,  which
post  he  held  at  his  death.  He  was  retired  by  law,
being  over  sixty-two  years  old,  21  Dec.,  1861,  and
became  commodore  on  the  retired  list,  16  July,
1862,  and  rear-admiral.  25  July,  1866.

PEARSON,  John  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Delaware
county,  Pa.,  25  Oct.,  1800 ;  d.  in  Harrisburg,  Pa..  30
May,  1888.  He  was  educated  at  a  grammar-school
and  by  a  private  tutor,  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1822,  and  practised  in  western  Penn
sylvania.  He  was  elected  to  congress  in  1834,  serv
ing  one  term,  and  in  1837  to  the  state  senate  for  a
term  of  four  years.  On  7  April.  1849,  he  was  com
missioned  president  judge  of  the  12th  judicial  dis
trict,  in  1851,  when  the  change  in  the  state  consti
tution  made  the  judges  elective,  he  was  unanimous
ly  chosen  president  judge  for  ten  years,  and  he  was
re-elected  in  1861  and  again  in  1871,  at  the  end  of
which  term  he  declined  a  further  nomination.
During  his  judicial  term  he  received  from  three
different  colleges  in  Pennsylvania  the  honorary  de
gree  of  LL.  D.  In  1879  appeared  two  volumes  of
his  "  Decisions,"  which  are  considered  equal  to  the
reports  of  the  supreme  court  as  authority.

PEARSON,  Jonathan,  educator,  b.  in  Chi-
chester,  N.  H.,  23  Feb.,  1813.  He  is  descended
from  John  Pearson,  an  English  carpenter  who
settled  at  Rowley,  Mass.,  prior  to  1643.  His  father,
Caleb,  was  a  fifer  in  the  Continental  army  during
the  Revolutionary  war.  The  son  was  graduated  at
Union  in  1835,  served  as  tutor  in  1836-'9,  and  in
1839-'49  was  assistant  professor  of  chemistry  and
natural  philosophy,  lie  was  given  the  chair  of
natural  history  in  1849,  and  that  of  agriculture
and  botany  in  1873,  and  has  also  served  as  college
treasurer  and  librarian.  Beginning  with  a  study  of
his  own  ancestry,  he  has  spent  much  time  in  de
ciphering  the  Dutch  records  in  Albany  and  Sche
nectady,  translating  most  of  the  vast  mass  of
records  in  "  Mohawk  Dutch '' — a  compound  of
Netherlandish,  Indian,  French,  and  English  speech
— in  the  archives  of  the  churches  and  public  offices
in  the  Mohawk  valley.  He  has  published  "Early
Records  of  the  County  of  Albany"  (Albany,  1869);
"  Genealogy  of  the  First  Settlers  of  Albany'"  (1872) ;
"  Genealogies  of  the  First  Settlers  of  Schenectady  "
(1873) :  "  History  of  the  Reformed  Protestant  Dutch
Church  of  Schenectady  "  (Schenectady,  1880);  and
"  A  History  of  the  Schenectady  Patent,"  edited  by
J.  W.  MacMurray  (Albany,  1883).


PEARSON


PEASLEE


693


PEARSON,  Richard  Mnmford,  jurist,  b.  in
Davie  county,  N.  C.,  28  June,  1805 ;  d.  in  Winston,
N.  C.,  12  Jan.,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  North  Carolina  in  1823,  licensed  to
practise  law  in  1826,  was  in  the  legislature  in
1829-'33,  and  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  con
gress  in  1834.  He  was  a  judge  of  the  superior
court  in  1836-'48,  and  at  the  latter  date  he  was
elevated  to  the  supreme  bench,  succeeding  Chief-
Justice  Frederick  Nash  in  1850,  and  holding  office
until  his  death.  He  conducted  a  law-school  at  his
residence  at  Richmond  Hill  for  many  years.  It
was  attended  by  hundreds  of  students  from  his  own
and  the  adjacent  states.  Judge  Pearson  was  re
garded  as  one  of  the  leading  lawyers  of  his  day.

PEARSONS,  Daniel  Kimball,  benefactor,  b.
in  Bradford,  Vt.,  14  April,  1820.  lie  was  gradu
ated  at  the  Medical  college  of  Woodstock,  Vt.,
practised  for  some  time  at  Chicopee,  Mass.,  and  in
1857  removed  to  Ogle  county,  111.,  where  he  became
a  farmer.  From  18GO  till  1877  he  was  a  real  estate
and  loan  agent  in  Chicago.  From  1877  till  1880
the  treasury  of  the  city  of  Chicago  was  in  bad  con
dition,  and  certificates  of  indebtedness  were  issued
for  the  payment  of  city  debts.  During  this  cri
sis  Dr.  Pearsons  entered  the  council  as  alderman.
His  integrity,  financial  ability,  and  positive  assur
ance  to  capitalists  in  Chicago,  New  York,  and  else
where,  that  Chicago  would  pay  all  of  its  indebted
ness,  did  much  to  restore  confidence  and  relieve
the  embarrassment.  Having  accumulated  a  fortune,
he  retired  from  active  business.  During  1887  he
gave  away  more  than  $150,000  for  the  advance
ment  of  Christianity,  morality,  and  the  relief  of
the  suffering  poor.

PEASE,  Alfred  Humphreys,  musician,  b.  in
Cleveland,  Ohio,  6  May,  1838  ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
12  July,  1882.  He  was  educated  at  Ken  yon  college,
Ohio,  and  later  studied  music  in  Germany  under
Theodor  Kullak,  Richard  Wuerst,  Wieprecht,  and,
on  a  second  visit  to  Europe,  under  Hans  von  Bil
low,  for  three  years.  After  his  return  he  gave
concerts  in  different  cities  of  the  Union,  and  be
came  known  as  a  brilliant  and  graceful  pianist.
Of  his  compositions,  his  songs,  of  which  "Break,
break,  break  "  (1804)  was  the  earliest,  were  perhaps
most  popular,  and  they  found  favor  with  some  of
the  foremost  vocalists  of  the  day.  His  piano-music
also  met  with  success,  and  his  orchestral  composi
tions  include  a  "  Reverie  and  Andante,"  "  Andante
and  Scherzo,"  "  Romanze,"  and  "  Concerto  "  (1875),
all  of  which  have  been  performed  by  Theodore
Thomas's  orchestra  in  New  York  and  other  cities.

PEASE,  Calvin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Canaan.  Litch-
field  co..  Conn.,  12  Aug.,  1813;  d.  in  Burlington,
Vt,,  17  Sept.,  1863.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Vermont  in  1838,  and  was  president  of
Montpelier  academy  in  1839-'41.  He  became  pro
fessor  of  Latin  and  Greek  in  the  University  of
Vermont  in  1842,  and  in  1845  was  appointed  its
president,  and  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the  Con
gregational  church.  While  president  of  the  uni
versity,  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  board  of
education,  president  of  the  Vermont  teachers'
organization,  and  took  an  active  part  in  unifying
the  common-school  system.  Failing  health  induced
his  resignation  in  1861,  and  he  became  pastor  of
the  1st  Presbyterian  church  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
where  he  was  especially  active  in  the  revival  of
1863.  Middlebury  gave*  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1865,  and  he  became  a  member  of  the  American
philosophical  society  in  1883.  He  was  a  constant
contributor  to  the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra."  His  pub
lished  addresses  include  '•  A  Discourse  on  the
Import  and  Value  of  the  Popular  Lecturing  of  the


Day "  (Montpelier,  1840) :  "  Address  before  the
Medical  Department  of  the  University "  (1856) ;
and  "Baccalaureate  Sermons"  (1856-'60).

PEASE,  Henry  Roberts,  senator,  b.  in  Con
necticut,  19  Feb.,  1835.  He  was  educated  for  a
teacher,  followed  that  calling  several  years,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1859.  During  the  civil  war
he  was  a  captain  on  staff  duty  in  the  National
army.  He  was  appointed  superintendent  of  edu
cation  in  Louisiana  while  it  was  under  military
rule,  became  superintendent  of  the  education  of
freedmen  in  Mississippi  in  1867,  took  an  active  part
in  the  reconstruction  of  that  state,  and  was  ap
pointed  state  superintendent  of  education  in  1869.
He  also  published  and  edited  the  "  Mississippi
Educational  Journal,"  which  was  the  first  of  that
character  in  the  south.  He  was  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate  as  a  Republican  in  1874,  to  fill  the  va
cancy  occasioned  by  the  resignation  of  Adelbert
Ames,  served  in  1874-'5,  and  in  the  latter  year  was
appointed  postmaster  of  Vicksburg.  but  was  re
moved  a  few  weeks  afterward  for  political  reasons.

PEASE,  Joseph  Ives,  engraver,  b.  in  Norfolk,
Conn.,  9  Aug.,  1809 ;  d.  at  Twin  Lakes,  near  Salis
bury,  Conn.,  2  July,  1883.  At  the  age  of  fourteen
he  was  placed  in  a  dry-goods  store  in  Hartford,
where  he  employed  his  time  in  imitating  labels  and
such  other  designs  as  came  under  his  notice.  He
early  showed  the  inventive  faculty,  and  when  a
mere  boy  constructed  a  turning-lathe.  Before  he
knewthat  such  a  thinghad  been  thought  of  by  others,
he  built  a  power-loom  with  which  he  wove  a  strip
of  cloth  six  inches  wide  by  simply  turning  a  crank.
He  also  devised  a  propeller  on  the  plan  of  those
that  are  now  in  use.  and  fitted  it  into  a  boat  with
perfect  success.  This  was  several  years  before  the
adoption  of  the  propeller  for  steam  navigation.
He  abandoned  trade  very  soon,  and  made  an  at
tempt  at  engraving,  with  an  awl  for  a  tool  and  a
piece  of  thermometer  brass  for  a  plate.  This  re
sulted  in  his  being  placed  with  Oliver  Pelton,  an
engraver  in  Hartford,  with  whom  he  remained  un
til  he  was  of  age.  In  1835  Pease  went  to  Philadel
phia,  and  there  he  engraved  some  of  his  choicest
plates  for  the  '•  Gift,"  an  annual.  He  left  Phila
delphia  in  1848.  went  to  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  and
finally  settled  on  a  farm  at  Twin  Lakes,  where  he
died.  Like  most  of  our  engravers,  he  found  em
ployment  during  his  later  years  on  bank-note  work.
His  plates  are  engraved  in  pure  line,  with  much
taste  and  excellence  of  execution,  and  are  faithful
renderings  of  the  original  paintings.  His  "  Tough
Story  "  after  Mount,  "  Mumble  the  Peg  "  after  In-
man,  and  •'  Young  Traders  "  after  Page,  are  choice
examples  of  his  work.

PEASE,  Phineas,  soldier,  b.  in  Somers,  Conn.,
16  April.  1826.  He  was  educated  in  the  common
schools,  and  subsequently  was  employed  on  rail
roads  in  Illinois.  He  became  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  49th  Illinois  infantry  at  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war,  was  severely  wounded  at  Shiloh,  partici
pated  in  the  battle  of  Corinth,  commanded  a  bri
gade  at  Du  Glaise,  La.,  Little  Rock.  Ark.,  and
Franklin,  Mo.,  and  was  at  the  battle  of  Nashville,
and  numerous  subsequent  small  engagements.  In
March,  1865,  he  received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers.  He  became  general  super
intendent  of  the  Indiana,  Bloom ington,  and  West
ern  railroad  in  1875,  and  superintendent  of  the
Ohio  Central  railroad  in  1880,  and  in  1885  became
receiver  and  general  manager  of  the  Cleveland  and
Marietta  railroad.

PEASLEE.  Edmund  Randolph,  physician,  b.
in  Rockingham  county,  N.  H.,  22  Jan.,  1814;  d.  in
New  York  city,  12  Jan.,  1878.  He  was  graduated


694


PECH


at  Dartmouth  in  1836,  and  at  the  medical  depart
ment  of  Yale  in  1840.  While  he  was  abroad,  the
next  year,  he  was  elected  professor  of  anatomy  and
physiology  in  Dartmouth,  which  chair  he  occupied
till  1871,  and  was  then  transferred  to  that  of  gyne-
cology.  He  removed  to  New  York  city  in  1858.
became  eminent  in  his  profession,  and  established
a  wide  reputation  as  a  gynecologist.  He  performed
the  first  successful  ovariotomy  in  New  England  by
the  abdominal  section,  and  made  the  first  use  of
injections  into  the  peritoneal  cavity  after  ovarioto
my  in  1855.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  surgeon
to" the  New  England  hospital,  New  York  city,  and
to  the  New  York  state  hospital.  He  was  at  differ
ent  times  president  of  the  New  Hampshire  state
medical  society,  of  the  New  York  city  pathological
society,  of  the'New  York  obstetrical  society,  of  the
New  York  academy  of  medicine,  of  the  "  Medical
Journal "  association,  and,  at  his  death,  of  the
American  gynecological  society.  He  was  professor
of  anatomy'in  the  New  York  medical  college  for
many  years,  was  subsequently  transferred  to  the
chair  of  general  pathology  and  physiology,  and
still  later  to  that  of  the  diseases  of  women  and  of
obstetrics.  He  lectured  on  this  branch  in  Albany
medical  college  in  1872-'4.  and  from  1874  till  his
death  was  professor  of  gynecology  in  Bellevue  hos
pital  medical  college.  He  was  one  of  the  editors
of  the  "American  Medical  Monthly,"  contributed
largely  to  professional  journals,  and  is  the  author
of  "  Ovarian  Tumors,  their  Pathology,  Diagnosis,
and  Treatment "  (New  York,  1872).

PECH,  James  (peck),  musician,  b.  in  Roches
ter,  England,  23  Dec.,  1830.  He  is  the  son  of  a
major  in  the  British  army.  James  was  a  chorister
in  Rochester  cathedral,  and  subsequently  assistant
organist.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  was  admitted
as  a  student  in  the  Royal  academy  of  music,  Lon
don,  and  he  afterward  studied  at  Oxford,  where  he
was  given  the  degree  of  doctor  of  music.  He  subse
quently  received  the  same  degree  by  diploma  from
the  archbishop  of  Canterbury.  He  then  travelled
and  studied  in  France,  Germany,  and  Austria,  and
on  his  return  to  London  became  a  member  of  the
Drury  Lane  theatre  orchestra,  under  the  leadership
of  Carl  Anchutz.  When  the  latter  came  to  the
United  States,  Pech  succeeded  him  as  musical  di
rector.  He  afterward  led  the  "  People's  Philhar
monic  Concerts  "  at  Exeter  hall,  and  was  also  a
conductor  of  the  London  orchestral  association.
In  1866  he  arrived  in  New  York  city,  where  he  was
appointed  an  organist  of  Trinity  parish.  During
his  connection  with  that  corporation  he  did  much
to  encourage  the  study  of  church  music.  He  sub
sequently  established  the  Church  music  associa
tion,  by  which  Mozart's  "  Requiem  "  and  Beetho
ven's  "  Mass  in  D,"  with  an  orchestra  of  ninety
and  a  chorus  of  400,  were  produced  for  the  first
time  in  this  country.  He  also  conducted  the  ora
torios  that  were  given  by  the  Santley  concert  troupe,
and  was  one  of  the  leaders  at  the  Beethoven  cen
tennial  in  New  York  city  in  1871.  Dr.  Pech  has
since  resided  partly  in  Europe  and  partly  in  New
York  city.  He  has  delivered  a  course  of  lectures  on
aesthetics  at  St.  Francis  Xavier  and  other  colleges,
and  has  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the
University  of  the  State  of  New  York.  Besides  pro
ducing  many  musical  compositions  and  writing
on  music  and  cognate  subjects,  he  is  the  author
of  several  volumes  printed  privately.  Dr.  Pech
also  wrote  the  analytical  and  critical' programmes
of  the  Church  music  association.

PECK,  Ebenezer,  jurist,  b.  in  Portland,  Me.,
22  May,  1805 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  25  May,  1881.
He  received  an  academical  education,  was  admitted


PECK

to  the  bar  of  Montreal,  Canada,  in  1827,  twice
elected  to  the  general  assembly  of  the  province  of
Lower  Canada,  and  made  king's  counsel  in  1833.
He  removed  to  Illinois  in  1835,  settled  in  Chicago,
and  served  several  terms  in  both  houses  of  the
legislature.  He  was  clerk  of  the  supreme  court  of
Illinois  in  1841-'5.  and  its  reporter  in  1850-'63.  At
the  latter  date  he  became  judge  of  the  court  of
claims  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  holding  office  several
years.  Judge  Peck  was  the  personal  friend  of
Abraham  Lincoln.  He  published  "  Rejiorts  of  the
Cases  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Illinois"  (8  vols.,
Springfield.  185()-'04).

PECK,  Edwin  James,  donor,  b.  near  New
Haven,  Conn.,  16  Oct.,  1806;  d.  in  Indianapolis,
Ind.,  6  Nov.,  1876.  He  was  a  successful  merchant
in  Indianapolis  for  many  years,  accumulated  a
large  fortune,  and  occupied  various  offices  of  trust
in  that  city,  including  the  presidency  of  the  Tcrre
Haute  railroad  and  that  of  the  Union  railway  com
pany.  Among  his  gifts  to  benevolent  and  religious
institutions  were  $25,000  to  the  board  of  home
missions  of  the  Presbyterian  church,  an  equal  sum
to  the  support  of  Indiana  orphans,  and  $115,000  to
Wabash  college,  Ind.

PECK,  Ferdinand  Wythe,  philanthropist,  b.
in  Chicago,  111.,  15  July,'  1848.  His  father  was
one  of  the  early  settlers  of  Chicago,  and  died  there
in  1871,  leaving  a  valuable  estate.  The  son  was
educated  in  Chicago,  studied  law,  and  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1869.  On  coming  into  possession  of  his
estate,  he  devoted  himself  largely  to  the  improve
ment  of  the  condition  of  the  poor  of  his  native
city.  In  1870  he  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
Illinois  humane  society,  having  for  its  special  pur
pose  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to  children  and
animals.  Since  that  time  he  has  been  an  active
member  of  the  board  of  government  of  the  Chicago
athenanim,  of  which  he  is  now  (1888)  president.
It  was  organized  immediately  after  the  great  fire
of  1871,  and  is  similar  to  the  Cooper  Union  of
New  York.  Mr.  Peck  is  also  vice-president  of  the
city  board  of  education.  He  has  contributed  lib
erally  to  the  cultivation  of  musical  taste,  and  in
1886  organized  and  became  president  of  a  joint-
stock  company  for  the  erection  of  the  "Chicago
auditorium"  and  hotel,  the  largest  building  of  its
kind  in  the  United  States,  which  was  begun  in
1887.  It  will  cost,  with  the  ground,  $3,000,000,
and  will  have  sittings  for  5,000  people.

PECK,  George,  clergyman,  b.  in  Middlefield,
N.  Y.,  8  Aug.,  1797;  d.  in  Scranton.  Pa.,  20  May,
1876.  He  began  preaching  in  1816,  and  rapidly
rose  to  leadership  in  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church.  He  was  principal  of  Cazenovia
seminary  in  1835-'9,  editor  of  the  "  Methodist
Quarterly  Review"  in  1840-'8,  and  of  the  New
York  "Christian  Advocate"  in  1848-'52.  He  was
a  member  of  every  general  conference  from  1824
till  1872,  and  was  also  a  delegate  to  the  first  evan
gelical  alliance  in  London  in  1846,  taking  an  active
part  in  its  deliberations.  One  of  his  contempora
ries  says  of  him  :  "  I  view  him  as  one  of  the  most
remarkable  men  of  our  times — one  whose  genius
and  piety  are  indellibly  stamped  on  the  ecclesiasti
cal  polity  and  wonderful  growth  of  the  church —
whose  wise  counsels  and  herculean  labors  are  inter
woven  in  its  development  for  the  past  fifty  years."
His  published  works  are  "  Universalism  Exam
ined  "  (New  York,  1826) ;  "  History  of  the  Apostles
and  Evangelists "  (1836) :  "  Scripture  Doctrine  of
Christian  Perfection"  (1841);  "Rule  of  Faith"
(1844) ;  "  Reply  to  Dr.  Bascom  on  Slavery  "  (1845) ;
"  Manly  Character  "  (1852) ;  "  History  of  Wyoming  "
(1858);  "Early  Methodism  within 'the  Bounds  of


PECK


PECK


695


the  Old  Genesee  Conference  "  (1800) ;  "  Our  Coun
try,  Its  Trials  and  its  Triumphs"  (1865);  and
"  Life  and  Times  of  G.  Peck,  D.  D."  (1874).— His
son.  Luther  Wesley,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wyoming
valley,  Pa.,  in  1825,  was  graduated  at  Xew  York
university  in  1845.  and  entered  the  ministry.  He
has  published  "  The  Golden  Age,"  a  poeni  (Xew
York,  1858). — George's  brother, "Jesse  Trnesdell,
M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Middlefield,  Otsego  co.,  X.  Y.,
4  April,  1811 ;  d.  in  Syracuse,  X.  Y.,  17  May.  1883,
was  educated  at  Cazenovia  seminary,  began  to
preach  in  1829,  and  became  a  member  of  the  Oneida
conference  in  1832.  He  was  principal  of  Gouverneur
seminary  in  1837-'41,  of  Troy  conference  academy
in  1841-'8.  and  president  of  Dickinson  college.  Pa.,
in  1848-'52.  After  a  short  pastorate  in  Washing
ton.  I).  C..  he  was  appointed  secretary  and  editor
of  the  Tract  society,  removing  to  Xew  York.  In
1856  he  became  pastor  of  a  church  in  that  city,  but
after  two  years  he  was  transferred  to  California,
where  he  served  as  pastor  and  presiding  elder  for
eight  years  in  San  Francisco  and  Sacramento.  He
was  also  president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the
University  of  the  Pacific,  and  president  of  the  Cali
fornia  state  Bible  society.  Subsequently,  he  was
pastor  of  churches  in  Peekskill,  Albany,  and  Syra
cuse,  where  he  became  the  chief  founder  of  Syra
cuse  university,  serving  as  president  of  the  board
of  trustees  and  chairman  of  the  building  committee.
In  1872  he  was  elected  bishop,  and  in  1881  he  was
a  delegate  to  the  Methodist  ecumenical  conference
in  London,  where  his  ability  as  a  presiding  officer
won  recognition.  In  the  summer  of  1881  he  made
a  tour  of  Europe,  holding  conferences  and  studying
educational  systems  and  facilities.  His  principal
works  are  "  The  Central  Idea  of  Christianity "
(Xew  York,  1855);  "The  True  Woman"  (1857);
"  What  Must  I  do  to  be  Saved?  "  (1858) ;  and  "  The
Great  Republic  "  (1868).

PECK,  George  Washington,  author,  b.  in
Rehoboth,  Bristol  co.,  Mass.,  4  Dec.,  1817;  d.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  6  June,  1859.  His  ancestor,  Joseph,
came  from  Hingham,  Xorfolk,  England,  to  Reho
both  in  1641.  After  spending  his  boyhood  on  his
father's  farm,  he  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1837,
taught  in  Indiana,  and  edited  "  The  Daily  Sun  "
and  •'  Republican  "  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  He  then
studied  law  in  Boston,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1843.  He  became  musical  and  dramatic  critic  for
the  "Boston  Post,"  and  in  1845  issued  "The  Bos
ton  Musical  Review."  He  was  subsequently  con
nected  with  the  "  Xew  York  Courier,"  the  "  Ameri
can  Review."  "  The  Literary  World,"  and  various
other  publications,  until  1853.  when  he  sailed  for
Australia.  He  witnessed  in  Melbourne  the  excite
ment  that  followed  the  discovery  of  gold,  and  de
livered  the  first  Fourth  of  July  address  on  that
continent.  On  his  return  he  visited  Lima  and  the
Chincha  islands.  He  published  "  Melbourne  and
the  Chincha  Islands,  with  Sketches  of  Lima  and  a
Voyage  Round  the  World "  (Xew  York,  1854).
Among  his  novelties  in  prose  and  verse  were  a
series  of  "Sonnets  of  the  Sidewalk,"  '•  Aurifodina,  '
or  Adventures  in  the  Gold  Region."  and  "  Sum
mer  Sketches."  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  •
engaged  upon  an  essay  on  Shakespeare,  part  of  I
which  was  printed  in  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly."

PECK,  George  Wesley,  clergyman,  b.  in  Kings
ton,  Pa..  7  Feb..  1849. He  is  a  great-nephew  of
Bishop  Jesse  T.  Peck,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  the  '
Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1872,  graduated  at  i
Syracuse  university  in  1878.  and  at  once  elected
president  of  Hedding  college,  111.,  where  he  served
four  years,  receiving  there  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in
1882. After  one  year's  leave  of  absence  in  Europe  (


and  the  Orient,  he  resigned  the  presidency  and
held  pastorates  in  Buffalo,  Medina,  and  Dansville,
XT.  Y.  In  1881  he  was  appointed  a  delegate  to  the
Methodist  ecumenical  conference  in  London.  He
is  a  popular  lecturer,  and  author  of  "  The  Realiza
tion  and  Benefit  of  Ideals"  (Syracuse.  1879) :  '•  Walk
in  the  Light"  (1882):  and  is  :  "  The  Life

of  Bishop  Jesse  T.  Peck."

PECK,  Henry  Ererard,  clergyman,  b.  in
Rochester,  X.  Y..  27  July.  1821  :  d.  in  Port  au
Prince,  Hayti,  9  June.  1867.  He  was  graduated
at  Bowdoin  in  1841,  studied  theology,  and,  enter
ing  the  Congregational  ministry,  preached  in
Rochester.  He  was  associate  professor  of  intel
lectual  and  moral  philosophy  at  Oberlin  from  1852
till  1865,  an  ardent  champion  of  the  anti-slavery
cause,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  presidential
canvass  of  1856.  In  1858  he  was  arrested  under
the  charge  of  violating  the  fugitive-slave  law.  and
confined  with  others  in  the  county  jail  in  Cleve
land,  Ohio.  From  1862  till  1865  he"  was  IT.  S.  com
missioner  to  Hayti.  and  was  then  appointed  U.  S.
minister  to  that  republic. — His  half-brother,  Will
iam  Farley,  journalist,  b.  in  Rochester,  X.  Y.,
4  Feb.,  1840,  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1861,
and  at  the  Albany  law-school  in  1863.  He  was
chairman  of  one  of  the  boards  of  municipal  exam
iners  for  the  civil  service  of  Rochester,  and  a  mem
ber  of  the  local  board  of  state  examiners.  He  was
connected  with  the  press  of  Rochester  for  several
years,  and  is  the  author  of  "Semi-Centennial  His
tory  of  Rochester  "  (Syracuse,  1884).

PECK,  John  Jariies.  soldier,  b.  in  Manlius.
N.  Y.,  4  Jan..  1821 ;  d.  in  Syracuse,  X.  Y.,  21  April.
1878.  His  father  was  one  of  the  earliest  settlers  in
Onondaga  county.  The  son  was  graduated  at  the
17.  S.  military  academy  in  1843.  assigned  to  the  2d
artillery,  and  was  on  garrison  duty  in  Xew  York
harbor  till  he  was  ordered  to  Texas  in  1845.  During
the  Mexican  war  he  was  at  Palo  Alto  and  Resaca
de  la  Palma,  took  part  in  the  assault  on  Federa
tion  Hill  at  Monterey,  and  afterward  received  two
brevets  for  gallantry — that  of  captain  for  Contreras
and  Chumbusco,  and  that  of  major  for  Molino
del  Rey,  where  he  had  turned  a  captured  gun  on
the  enemy  with  great  effect.  "His  name  and
services,"  said  his  division  commander,  Gen  Worth,
"will  be  found  in  the  official  account  of  every
battle  save  one  from  the  commencement  of  the
war  to  the  conquest  of  the  basin  of  Mexico."  He
was  given  a  sword  on  his  return  home  in  1848.  and
after  serving  against  the  Xavajo  Indians  in  Xew
Mexico,  and  on  recruiting  service,  resigned  his
commission  on  31  March,  1853.  He  was  then  con
nected  with  a  projected  railroad  from  Xew  York
to  Syracuse  by  way  of  Xewburg.  and  also  organ
ized  in  Syracuse  the  Burnet  bank,  of  which  he  was
cashier  till  the  civil  war.  He  was  also  president
of  the  board  of  education  in  that  city  in  1859-'61,
and  was  interested  in  politics,  serving  as  a  delegate
at  the  Democratic  national  convention  of  1856,
and  in  that  at  Charleston  in  1860.  running  for  con
gress  in  1856  and  1858,  and  once  declining  a  foreign
mission.  He  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  on  9  Aug.,  1861.  and  served  first  in  the
defences  of  Washington  and  then  in  the  peninsular
campaign.  He  rendered  signal  service  at  York-
town  :  and  at  Williamsburg.  where  he  arrived  with
re-enforcements  at  a  critical  point  in  the  battle,  his
troops,  by  steadily  withstanding  repeated  attacks
from  a  superior  force,  did  much  to  preserve  the
army  from  rout.  At  Fair  Oaks  a  horse  was  shot
under  him,  and  he  afterward  covered  the  left  flank
of  the  army  by  holding  White  Oak  swamp.  He
held  an  important  place  in  the  seven  days'  change


696


PECK


PECK


of  base,  leading  the  rear-guard  in  the  movement
from  Turkey  creek  to  Harrison's  landing.  He
was  promoted  major-general  of  volunteers,  4  July,
1862,  and  till  September  was  in  Yorktown,  where
he  put  the  works  in  condition  for  defence.  On  22
Sept..  1862,  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  all
the  Nfltionnl  <"^^ps  in  Virginia  south  of  James
river,  where  he  rendered  important  service  by  his
brilliant  defence  of  Suffolk  against  a  superior  force
under  Longstreet,  whose  position  on  Hill's  point
he  stormed  and  captured  on  4  May,  1863,  thus
virtually  ending  the  siege.  After  an  absence  of
several  months,  which  was  necessitated  by  injuries
that  he  had  received  at  Suffolk,  he  held  command
in  North  Carolina  till  April,  1864,  and,  after  an
other  leave  of  absence,  on  the  Canada  frontier  till
the  close  of  the  war.  He  was  mustered  out  of
service,  24  Aug.,  1865,  and  in  1866  organized  at
Syracuse  the  New  York  state  life  insurance  com
pany,  of  which  he  was  president  till  his  death.

PECK,  John  Mason,  clergyman,  b.  in  Litch-
field,  Conn.,  31  Oct.,  1789;  d.  in  Rock  Spring,  St.
Clair  co.,  111.,  15  March,  1858.  He  was  the  son  of
a  farmer  in  humble  circumstances,  and.  after  being
educated  at  the  common  schools,  removed  in  1811
to  Greene  county,  N.  Y.,  where  he  united  with  the
Baptist  church.  The  same  year  he  was  licensed  to
preach,  and  began  his  pastoral  work  at  Catskill,
while  prosecuting  his  studies  and  supporting  him
self  by  teaching.  He  was  ordained  in  Catskill,  9
June,  1813,  and  the  following  year  became  pastor
of  the  church  at  Amenia,  N.  Y.  He  was  then  sent
to  the  west  by  the  Baptist  general  convention  as  a
missionary,  and  reached  St.  Louis  at  the  end  of
1817.  During  the  next  nine  years  he  was  engaged
as  an  itinerant  preacher  and  a  teacher,  travelling
in  the  former  capacity  through  Missouri  and  Illi
nois,  and  finally  fixing  his  residence  at  Rock  Spring,
in  the  latter  state.  In  1826  he  raised  money  and
aided  in  organizing  the  Rock  Spring  seminary  for
educating  common-school  teachers  and  ministers.
In  April,  1829,  he  began  the  publication  of  "The
Pioneer,"  the  first  organ  of  the  Baptist  church  in
the  western  states.  In  1831  he  spent  three  months
in  planning  with  Rev.  Jonathan  Going  the  Ameri
can  Baptist  home  missionary  society,  and  the  same
year  he  issued  "A  Guide  for  Emigrants"  (Bos
ton),  a  small  but  useful  publication.  He  soon
afterward  began  a  monthly  periodical  entitled  "  The
Illinois  Sunday-School  Banner."  In  1834  appeared
his  "Gazetteer  of  Illinois"  (Jacksonville,  1834;
Philadelphia.  1837).  In  1835  Shurtleff  college  was
founded  at  Upper  Alton,  111.,  to  take  the  place  of
his  Rock  Spring  seminary.  To  endow  this  institu
tion  Dr.  Peck  travelled  nearly  6,000  miles,  and  col
lected  $20,000.  In  watching  over  and  helping  the
new  enterprise,  and  in  aiding  in  the  establishment
of  a  theological  institution  at  Covington,  Ky.,  he
was  occupied  until  1843.  which  year,  with  the  two
following,  he  spent  in  Philadelphia  as  correspond
ing  secretary  and  financial  agent  of  the  American
Baptist  publication  society.  Returning  to  the  west,
he  was  pastor  of  several  important  churches  in
Missouri,  Illinois,  and  Kentucky.  In  1852  he  re
ceived  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Harvard.  Dr.
Peck  was  a  master  spirit  among  the  pioneers.
"  Perhaps  no  man  of  the  class,"  says  an  intimate
friend,  ••  did  more  than  he  to  guide  the  thoughts,
mould  the  manners,  and  form  the  institutions  of
the  west.  He  was  an  embodiment  of  western  char
acter,^  plain,  frank,  self-reliant,  fearless,  indomi
table."  He  was  an  important  contributor  to  nearly
all  the  historical  societies  of  the  northwestern
states  and  territories,  and  published,  besides  the
works  already  mentioned,  "New  Guide  for  Emi


grants  to  the  West "  (Boston,  1836)  and  "  Father
Clark,  or  the  Pioneer  Preacher"  (New  York,  1855).
He  is  also  the  author  of  a  "  Life  of  Daniel  Boone  "
in  Sparks's  "American  Biography,"  and  edited  the
2d  edition  of  "  Annals  of  the  West  "  (Cincinnati).
His  large  and  valuable  collection  of  newspapers
and  pamphlets  was  destroyed  by  fire  a  few  years
before  his  death,  but  he  left  his  large  collection  of
manuscripts  to  the  Rev.  Rufus  Babcock,  who  pub
lished  "  Forty  Years  of  Pioneer  Life :  Memoir  of
John  Mason  Peck,  edited  from  his  Journals  and
Correspondence"  (Philadelphia,  1864).

PECK,  William  Daiidridjare,  naturalist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  8  May,  1763 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
3  Oct.,  1822.  His  father,  John,  attained  reputa
tion  as  a  ship-builder  during  the  Revolution.  The
son,  after  graduation  at  Harvard  in  1782,  spent
some  time  in  a  counting-house  in  Boston,  and  for
twenty  years  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  natu
ral  history.  He  was  an  ingenious  mechanic,  and
made  a  microscope  and  many  other  delicate  instru
ments.  After  living  a  life  of  seclusion  and  study,
he  was  made  professor  of  his  specialty  in  Harvard,
which  chair  he  held  from  1805  till  1822.  He  was
sent  to  visit  the  scientific  institutions  of  Europe,
being  absent  three  years,  and  during  this  time  he
collected  many  books  and  specimens.  He  pub
lished  a  catalogue  of  "  American  and  Foreign
Plants  "  (1818)  and  several  articles  in  the  collections
of  the  Massachusetts  historical  society,  which  in
clude  "  The  Description  of  the  Atherine,"  "  History
of  the  Slug- Worm,"  and  "  Method  of  taking  Im
pressions  of  Vegetable  Leaves  by  Means  of  Smoke."
He  also  published  an  account  of  a  sea-serpent  in
the  "  Memoirs  of  the  American  Academy."

PECK,  William  Guy,  mathematician,  b.  in
Litchfield.  Conn.,  16  Oct.,  1820.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1844  at  the
head  of  his  class,  was  assigned  to  the  topographi
cal  engineers,  served  in  the  third  expedition  of
John  C.  Fremont  in  1845,  and  was  with  the  Army  of
the  West  under  Gen.  Stephen  W.  Kearny  during
the  Mexican  war.  He  was  assistant  professor  of
natural  philosophy  at  West  Point  in  1846,  and  of
mathematics  from  1847  till  1855,  when  he  resigned
from  the  army.  After  declining  a  chair  in  Kenyon
college,  Ohio,  he  was  professor  of  physics  and
civil  engineering  in  the  University  of  Michigan
till  1857.  In  that  year  he  became  adjunct  profes
sor  of  mathematics  in  Columbia,  and  since  1861  he
has  held  the  chair  of  mathematics,  mechanics,  and
astronomy  there,  also  teaching  in  the  School  of
mines.  He  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  Co
lumbia  in  1877  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Trinity  in
1863.  In  1868  he  was  a  member  of  the  board  of
visitors  to  the  U.  S.  military  academy.  He  assisted
his  father-in-law,  Prof.  Charles  Davies,  in  compil
ing  his  "  Dictionary  and  Cyclopaedia  of  Mathemati
cal  Science  "  (New  York,  1855),  and  is  the  author
of  a  full  set  of  school  and  college  text-books  on
mathematics,  including  a  "  Calculus  "  and  an  "  An
alytical  Geometry  " ;  an  edition  of  Ganot's  "  Natural
Philosophy"  (New  York,  I860;  last  revised  ed.,
1881) ;  "  Elementary  Mechanics  "  (185!)) ;  and  "  Pop
ular  Astronomy  "  (1883).

PECK,  William  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Augusta,
Ga.,  30  Dec.,  1830.  His  ancestor,  Paul,  emigrated
to  this  country  from  Essex,  England,  in  1635,  and
settled  in  Hartford,  Conn.  After  studying  in
Western  military  institute,  Georgetown.  'Ky.,  he
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1853.  From  1854
till  1856  he  was  principal  of  a  public  school  in
New  Orleans,  and  from  1856  till  1858  professor  of
belles-lettres,  history,  and  elocution  in  the  Univer
sity  of  Louisiana.  He  then  went  to  New  York,  but


PECKHAM


returned  to  Georgia  and  established  there  a  liter
ary  quarto,  entitled  "  The  Georgia  Weekly,"  which
was  a  failure.  In  1860  he  became  president  of  the
Masonic  female  college  in  Greenville,  Ga.,  where
he  revived  the  "  Weekly.''  In  1864-'5  he  was  pro
fessor  of  languages  in  Le  Vert  female  college,  Ga.,
removing  his  newspaper  there.  He  has  contrib
uted  many  tales  and  romances  to  periodicals,  and
is  the  author  of  "  The  McDonalds,  or  the  Ashes  of
a  Southern  Home"  (Xew  York,  18f>7)  and  "The
Confederate  Flag  on  the  Ocean  "  (1867).

PECKHAM,  Rufus  Wheeler,  jurist,  b.  in
Rensselaerville,  Albany  co.,  X.  Y.,  20  Dec.,  1809;
d.  at  sea,  22  Nov.,  1873.  He  studied  law,  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar.  and  in  1830  settled  in  Albany,
where  he  attained  note  at  the  bar.  In  1838  he  was
appointed  district  attorney  of  Albany  county,  and
he  served  in  congress,  having  been  chosen  as  a
Democrat,  from  5  Dec.,  1853,  till  3  March,  1855,
after  which  he  resumed  his  law  practice  in  partner
ship  with  Judge  Lyman  Tremain.  In  1859  he  was
elected  justice  of  the  supreme  court,  and  after
serving  eight  years  he  was  re-elected.  In  1870  he
was  chosen  to  the  court  of  appeals,  of  which  he
was  a  member  at  the  time  of  his  death.  Owing  to
impaired  health,  he  sought  the  climate  of  southern
France,  and  was  lost  at  sea  in  the  "  Ville  de
Havre."— His  son,  Wheeler  Hazard,  lawyer,  b.  in
Albany,  X.  Y.,  1  Jan.,  1833.  was  educated  at  Albany
academy,  and  at  Union,  which  he  left  owing  to  im
paired  health.  He  was  appointed  district  attorney
of  Xew  York  in  1884,  which  office  he  resigned  in
the  same  year.  For  many  years  he  has  practised
law  in  Xew  York  city.

PECKHAM,  Stephen  Farnimi,  chemist,  b.
near  Providence,  R.  I.,  26  March,  1839.  After  a
special  course  in  the  chemical  laboratory  of  Brown
he  was  two  years  in  a  pharmaceutical  laboratory
in  Providence,  after  which  he  completed  his  studies
in  1861  by  a  further  course  in  chemistry  at  Brown.
Subsequently, -in  association  with  Nathaniel  P.
Hill  (q.  r.)  and  others,  he  began  the  manufacture
of  illuminating  oils  from  petroleum.  The  works
were  planned  and  successfully  constructed  by  him,
but  their  operation  was  unremunerative.  and  he
became  in  1862  hospital  steward  of  the  7th  Rhode
Island  regiment.  He  continued  in  the  military
service  until  near  the  close  of  the  civil  war,  having
at  that  time  charge  of  the  chemical  department  of
the  U.  S.  army  laboratory  in  Philadelphia.  His  next
engagement  was  as  expert  for  the  California  pe
troleum  company,  for  which  corporation  he  spent
a  year  in  southern  California  studying  the  occur
rence  of  petroleum  in  that  region.  He  subsequently
prepared  for  the  geological  survey  of  that  state
several  reports  on  similar  subjects,  including  a
technological  examination  of  California!!  bitumen,
which  he  made  on  his  return  to  the  east  in  1867.
In  that  year  he  also  bogan  to  teach  chemistry  in
Brown,  and  he  afterward  held  chairs  on  that  subject
successively  in  Washington  and  Jefferson  college,
the  state  agricultural  college.  Orono.  Me.,  Buchtel
college,  Akron,  Ohio,  and  in  the  University  of
Minnesota,  where  he  was  also  chemist  to  the  geo
logical  survey  of  that  state.  In  1880  he  returned
to  Providence,  and  he  has  since  been  engaged  in
various  chemical  industries.  Prof.  Peckham  has
contributed  many  articles  to  current  scientific  lite
rature,  both  in  the  United  States  and  abroad,
chiefly  on  his  specialty  of  petroleum,  its  manufac
ture  and  applications.  He  served  in  1880  as
special  agent  on  the  United  States  census,  and  con
tributed  to  the  reports  a  valuable  monograph  on
the  subject,  including  a  fall  bibliography.  In
addition  to  his  reports  he  wrote  the  article  on


PEDRARIAS-DlVILA


697


"  Petroleum"  for  the  "Encyclopaedia  Britannica,"
and  he  has  published  an  "  Elementary  Treatise  on
Chemistry  "  (Louisville,  1876).

PEDDER,  James,  agriculturist,  b.  in  Xewport,
Isle  of  Wight,  England,  29  July,  1775;  d.  in  Rox-
bury,  Mass..  30  Aug.,  1859.  He  came  to  this  coun
try  about  1832  and  engaged  in  the  manufacture
of  sugar  in  Philadelphia.  For  seven  years  he  eon-
ducted  the  "Farmers'  Cabinet,"  an' agricultural
journal  of  great  merit,  and  from  1844  until  his
death  he  edited  the  "  Boston  Cultivator."  Sev
eral  editions  of  his  famous  conversations,  entitled
"  Frank,"  have  been  published,  and  "  The  Yellow
Shoestrings"  went  through  seventeen  editions  in
London  and  several  in  this  country.  He  published
a  "  Report  made  to  the  Beet-Sugar  Society  of  Phila
delphia  on  the  Culture  in  France  of  the  Beet  Root "
(Philadelphia,  1836).  and  also  wrote  "  The  Farmer's
Land  Measure  "  (Xew  York,  1854).

PEDLEY,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hanley,
Staffordshire,  England.  6  Aug.,  1821 ;  d.  in  Cold-
springs,  Canada,  17  Feb.,  1872.  He  was  educated
at  Rotherdam,  Yorkshire,  and,  after  holding  Con
gregational  pastorates  in  Durham,  came  to  Canada,
where  he  held  charges  in  Coburg  and  Coldsprings.
He  wrote  a  "  History  of  Xewfouridland  "  from  the
earliest  times  to  1860  (London,  1863).

PEDRARIAS  -  DAVILA  (pay-drah'-re-as-dah'-
vee-lah),  first  Spanish  governor  of  South  America,
b.  in  Segovia  about  1460:  d.  in  Spain  about  1530.
His  real  name  was  Pedro  Arias  de  Avila,  but  the
contracted  form  is  commonly  used.  He  served
with  distinction  during  the  Moorish  war,  and,  on
account  of  his  ability  in  tournaments,  was  named
"  the  jouster."  When  Enciso  (q.  v.)  appeared  in
Spain  in  1512  to  complain  that  Balboa  (q.  r.)  had
taken  from  him  the  government  of  Castilla  de
Oro,  King  Ferdinand  appointed  Pedrarias  governor
of  the  colony.  Many  noblemen  and  adventurers
joined  his  expedition,  which  consisted  of  nearly
2.000  men.  and  sailed  in  twenty-two  vessels  from
Seville,  arriving  in  May,  1514,  in  Santa  Maria  la
Antigua.  After  the  discovery  of  the  Pacific  ocean
by  Balboa,  Pedrarias,  for  the  purpose  of  trans
ferring  the  seat  of  government  nearer  to  the
isthmus,  founded  and  fortified  in  1516  the  town  of
Acla,  near  the  site  called,  by  Xieuesa,  Xombre  de
Dios.  When  the  despatches  that  appointed  Balboa
adelantado  and  governor  of  the  South  sea  arrived,
Pedrarias,  envious  of  his  glory,  imprisoned  the
latter  on  a  charge  of  treason,  and  executed  him  in
Acla  in  1517.  This  outrage  caused  great  indigna
tion  at  court,  and  the  young  king  Charles  sent  in
1518  Lope  de  Sosa  to  relieve  Pedrarias,  and  Judge
Alarcon  to  try  him.  But  Sosa  died  on  the  passage,
and  Alarcon  was  prevailed  upon  to  postpone  the
trial,  so  that  Pedrarias  remained  as  governor.  In
1518  he  founded  Panama,  and  in  the  next  year  he
transferred  the  seat  of  government  to  that  city.
He  despatched  in  1519  an  expedition  under  Gaspar
de  Espinosa  (q.  v.)  from  Panama  to  the  northward,
which  discovered  the  Gulf  of  Nicoya,  and  in  1522
another,  under  Pascual  de  Andagoya  (q.  v.),  to  the
southward,  which  discovered  the  river  San  Juan
and  brought  the  first  news  about  Peru.  After  the
discovery  of  Xicaragua  by  Gil  Gonzalez  Davila  in

1522.  and  while  the  latter  had  gone  to  Ilispaniola
to  seek  resources  for  founding  colonies,  Pedrarias.
wishing  to  anticipate  him,  sent,  toward  the  end  of

1523.  an  expedition  under  Francisco  Hernandez  de
Cordova,  who  founded  the  cities  of  Granada  and
Leon,  and.  exploring  Lake  Xicaragua.  discovered
San  Juan  river,  which  he  explored  to  its  mouth  in
the  Atlantic  in  1524. Under  his  government  also
the  first  expedition  to  Peru  set  out  in  1525  under


698


PEDRO  I.


PEDRO  II.


Francisco  Pizarro  (q.  r.) ;  but,  always  envious  of  the
glory  of  others,  Pedrarias  did  everything  in  his
power  to  hamper  Pizarro 's  operations.  Meanwhile,
Cordova,  trying  to  withdraw  from  the  authority  of
Pedrarias,  had  opened  negotiations  with  Hernan
Cortes,  who  at  that  time  (1525)  was  at  Honduras,
offering  to  submit  to  his  authority ;  but  the  latter
refused  the  offer,  although  he  ordered  Pedro  de
Alvarado  (q.  v.)  to  aid  Cordova  in  case  of  need.
When  Pedrarias  heard  of  these  negotiations  he
hastened  with  a  small  force  to  Nicaragua  in  1520,
captured  Cordova  in  Leon,  and,  after  a  short  trial,
executed  him  in  the  latter  city.  During  his  ab
sence  he  had  been  superseded  in  the  government
of  Panama  by  Pedro  de  los  Rios  and  remained  in
Nicaragua,  but  had  repeated  difficulties  with  Alva
rado,  who  resented  the  execution  of  Cordova,  and
when  Pedrarias  heard  in  1527  that  Alvarado  had
obtained  in  Spain  the  title  of  adelantado  and  cap
tain-general  of  Guatemala,  fearing  for  his  posses
sions,  for  which  he  held  no  legal  title,  he  went  to
Spain  in  the  next  year  to  legalize  his  conquest,
and  he  must  have  died  soon  afterward,  as  he  is  not
mentioned  again.

PEDRO  I.  DE  .ALCANTARA,  emperor  of  Brazil,  b.
in  Lisbon,  Portugal,  12  Oct.,  1798;  d.  there,  24
Sept.,  1834.  He  was  son  of  the  prince-regent  Joao,
heir-presumptive  of  the  crown  of  Portugal,  and  he
was  hardly  nine  years  of  age  when  the  Portuguese
government,  foreseeing  that  imminent  peril  threat
ened  the  royal  family  and  the  independence  of  the
kingdom,  resolved  to  send  him  to  Brazil  with  the
title  of  constable.  But  the  march  of  the  French
army  upon  Portugal  precipitated  events.  On  29
Nov.  the  Portuguese  royal  family,  flying  before  the
French,  emigrated  to  Brazil,  and  in  March,  1808,
the  city  of  Rio  Janeiro  became  the  capital  of  the
Portuguese  monarchy.  By  the  elevation  of  his
father  to  the  throne  in  1816,  Dom  Pedro  became
heir-presumptive  to  the  crown,  but,  being  entirely
removed  from  public  affairs,  he  had  no  political
education.  In  1818  he  married  the  Archduchess  of
Austria,  Leopoldina  Carolina  Josepha.  When  the
revolution  of  Oporto  in  1820  proclaimed  a  pro
visional  junta  and  the  calling  of  a  congress  to  form
a  constitution,  the  garrison  of  Rio  Janeiro,  together
with  the  people,  rose  on  26  Feb.,  1821,  and  forced
the  king  to  swear  to  recognize  the  future  constitu
tion  for  Brazil  also.  In  March  the  king  announced
his  intention  to  return  to  Portugal,  leaving  Dom
Pedro  as  regent  in  Brazil,  and  ordered  elections  for
the  cortes  of  Lisbon.  But  on  21  April  the  people
decided  not  to  let  the  king  depart,  and  formed  a
plan  to  take  possession  of  the  forts  and  prevent  the
sailing  of  the  fleet.  The  crown  prince,  at  the  head
of  the  troops,  dispersed  the  mutineers  on  the  22d,
and  on  the  26th  the  royal  family  sailed  for  Portu
gal,  and  Pedro  entered  upon  the  regency.  The
Portuguese  cortes,  afraid  that  the  presence  of  the
prince  in  Brazil  would  cause  a  gradual  separation,
decreed  the  re-establishment  of  the  colonial  govern
ment  and  the  return  of  the  prince  to  Portugal,
under  the  pretext  that  his  education  should  be
finished.  When  the  decrees  arrived,  10  Dec..  1821,
the  people  rose,  and  representations  from  all  parts
of  the  country,  begging  the  prince  to  establish  him
self  in  Brazil,  were  signed,  and  presented  to  him
on  9  Jan.,  1822,  in  Rio  Janeiro.  Pedro  consented
to  remain,  thus  disobeying  the  cortes.  He  issued
a  decree  calling  deputies  from  the  provincial  legis
latures  to  assemble  in  Rio  Janeiro  to  consult  about
the  future  of  the  country,  and  ordered  that  no
decree  of  the  cortes  be  promulgated  in  Brazil  with
out  his  approbation.  Pedro  was  the  object  of  con
tinuous  manifestations  of  loyalty,  and  on  13  May


he  was  honored  by  the  municipality,  the  people,
and  troops,  with  the  title  of  "  perpetual  defender
of  Brazil,"  but  the  cortes  of  Portugal  continued  in
an  attitude  of  hostility.  While  he  was  on  a  trip  to
the  province  of  Sao  Paulo,  Pedro  heard  that  the
cortes  had  annulled  his  acts  and  had  declared  the
governing  junta  and  the  prince's  advisers  subject
to  criminal  prosecution,  and  he  answered  by  declar
ing  on  7  Sept.,  on  the  borders  of  Ypiranga  river,
the  absolute  independence  of  Brazil.  This"  declara
tion  was  received  everywhere  with  enthusiasm,  and
on  his  return  to  Rio  Janeiro  he  was  proclaimed
emperor  of  Brazil  on  his  twenty-fourth  birthday,
and  consecrated  in  the  cathedral  on  1  Dec.  Under
the  guidance  of  Jose  Bonifacio  de  Andrada  e  Silva
(q.  v.),  his  minister  of  foreign  relations,  he  organized
an  army  to  attack  Bahia,  the  stronghold  of  the
Portuguese  forces,  and  improvised  a  navy  under
Lord  Thomas  Cochrane  to  blockade  that  port.
Hunger  and  the  fear  of  Cochrane's  fire-ships  caused
the  Portuguese  authorities  to  evacuate  the  city  in
the  night  of  2  July,  1823,  with  the  fleet,  the  army,
and  seventy  vessels  laden  with  riches.  On  27  July
Maranhao  capitulated,  and  in  September  the  em
peror's  authority  was  acknowledged  everywhere.
On  25  March,  1824,  the  new  constitution  was  pro
claimed,  but  the  northern  provinces  opposed  it,  and
a  revolution  began  in  Pernambuco,  which  was  sub
dued  after  a  heroic  resistance.  In  1825  Portugal,
yielding  to  the  influence  of  England,  recognized
the  independence  of  Brazil,  and  on  29  Aug.  a  treaty
of  peace  was  signed.  The  recognition  by  the  treaty
of  a  debt  of  £2,000,000  to  Portugal  burdened  the
finances  of  the  new  empire  heavily,  and  the  opposi
tion  began  to  attack  the  government,  especially  as
the  Brazilian  arms  were  unfortunate  in  attempting
to  suppress  the  insurrection  of  the  Banda  Oriental
(now  Lruguay).  In  1826  the  death  of  King  John
VI.  added  a  new  difficulty,  as  Pedro  I.,  his  legal
successor,  seemed  to  be  inclined  to  unite  the  two
monarchies  again,  but  he  found  such  strong  and
general  opposition  that,  after  a  consultation  with
his  councillors,  he  abdicated  the  throne  of  Portugal
in  favor  of  his  daughter,  Maria  da  Gloria.  But  the
unhappy  result  of  the  Cisplatine  war  and  the  recog
nition  of  the  independence  of  Uruguay,  and  also
his  inclination  for  personal  government  and  for
sustaining  the  ministry  against  the  expressed  desire
of  the  majority,  made  him  unpopular.  He  was
accused  of  spending  the  resources  of  the  nation  in
reconquering  for  his  daughter  the  throne  of  Por
tugal,  which  had  been  usurped  by  his  brother,  Dom
Miguel,  and.  tired  of  the  continual  strife,  he  abdi
cated  the  throne  on  7  April,  1831,  in  favor  of  his
son,  then  in  his  sixth  year.  He  then  retired  with
the  empress  and  Queen  Maria  of  Portugal  on  board
the  British  ship  of  the  line  "  Warspite,"  and  sailed
for  England,  accompanied  by  the  French  frigate
"  Seine,"  which  carried  his  family  to  France.  He
organized  in  France  a  small  army  and  fleet,  and
sailed  on  10  Feb.,  1832,  for  the  Azores,  leaving
those  islands  with  fresh  troops  in  June  to  invade
Portugal,  and  after  a  two  years'  campaign  he  estab
lished  his  daughter  on  the  throne,  the  capitulation
of  Evora,  26  May,  1834,  finishing  the  civil  war.
His  health  being  undermined  by  the  campaign,  he
caused  the  cortes  to  declare  his  daughter  of  age  on
17  Sept.,  and  died  a  few  days  afterward. — His  son,
Pedro  II.  (JoXo  CARLOS  LEOPOLDO  SALVADOR
BIBIANO  FRANCISCO  XAVIER  DA  PAULA  LEOCADIO
MIGUEL  GABRIEL  RAFAEL  GONZAGA),  emperor  of
Brazil,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  2  Dec.,  1825,  by  the  abdi
cation  of  his  father,  became  sovereign  of  Brazil
when  not  yet  six  years  old.  He  had  for  two  years,
in  1831-'33,  as  tutor  and  sole  regent  Dom  Boni-


PEDRO II.


PEET


699


facio  Jose  de  Andracla  e  Silva  (q.  v.).  the  leader  of
the  Democratic  party  in  Brazil.  After  the  fall  of
Andrada  in  18-So,  Pedro  became  a  ward  of  a  council
of  regency.  In  1840,  though  still  under  age,  he
was  declared  by  the  chambers  to  have  attained  his
majority,  assumed  the  government  on  23  July,  and
on  18  July,  1841,  was  solemnly  crowned  emperor  of
Brazil.  On  4  Sept.,  1843,  he  married  Princess
Theresa  Carolina  Maria  de  Bourbon,  daughter  of
Francis  I.,  king  of  the  Two  Sicilies.  Soon  after
assuming  the  government.  Pedro  dissolved  the
Brazilian  parliament,  but  this  measure  occasioned
innumerable  difficulties.  There  were  insurrections
in  Sao  Paulo  in  1841,  which  Gen.  Caxias  repressed
with  vigor,  but  in  1842  the  province  of  Minas
Geraes  offered  a  more  serious  resistance,  until  the
insurgent  army  of  G,000  men  was  completely  routed
at  Santa  Lucia.  In  1848  the  Liberals  made  another
attempt  at  revolution  in  Pernambuco,  but  since
that  time  Brazil  has  enjoyed  internal  peace,  and
the  Democrats  have  abandoned  all  hope  of  foment
ing  more  revolutionary  movements.  The  emperor
steadily  increased  the  power  of  Brazil,  and  numer
ous  internal  improvements  were  carried  on  through
out  the  empire.  Pedro,  who  is  a  man  of  literary
and  scientific  achievements,  has  developed  the  com
mercial  prosperity  of  the  country,  and  has  founded
schools,  colleges,  and  universities.  By  a  decree  of
4  Sept.,  1850,  he  forbade  the  sale  of  the  slaves  in  the
interior  of  his  dominions,  and  thus  avoided  diffi
culties  with  England.  In  1852  he  afforded  aid  to
Gen.  Urquiza  and  enabled  him  to  overthrow  the
dictator  Rosas  (q.  v.),  Brazil  gaining  an  increase  of
territory  and  the  free  navigation  of  the  river  Plate.
In  1800  Pedro  undertook  extensive  journeysthrough
the  provinces  of  the  empire  to  inquire  into  their
wants,  and  in  1862  a  difficulty  with  England  was
arranged  by  the  arbitration  of  King  Leopold  of
Belgium.  In  1865,  in  conjunction  with  the  Argen
tine  and  Uruguayan  republics,  he  declared  war
against  Paraguay,  and  personally  assisted  in  the
opening  campaign,  receiving  in  September  of  that
year  the  surrender  of  the  Paraguayan  invading
army  of  10,000  men  at  Uruguayana.  In  1867  he
opened  the  navigation  of  the  Amazon  river  to  all
nations.  During  the  war  with  Paraguay  he  refused
repeatedly  to  treat  with  Lopez  (q.  v.),  and  by  his
energy  created  new  resources  to  forward  re-enforce
ments  to  the  front.  The  peace  of  20  June,  1870,
gave  to  Brazil  an  increase  of  territory.  Under
Pedro's  impulse  the  parliament  voted,  on  27  Aug.,
1871,  a  preliminary  measure  for  the  emancipation
of  the  slaves.  A  few  months  before,  in  May,  the
emperor  had  embarked  for  Europe,  and  visited
England  and  the  continent,  attending  in  Paris  the
sessions  of  the  Geographical  society,  of  which  he
has  been  a  member  since  1868.  He  sailed  again  for
Brazil,  13  March,  1872,  but  in  1876  undertook  a
new  journey,  visiting  the  United  States  on  the
occasion  of  the  Centennial  exhibition,  and  travelling
through  Europe,  the  Holy  Land,  and  Egypt,  re
turning  on  24  Sept.,  1877,'  to  Petropolis.  In  1874
a  difficulty  with  the  ecclesiastical  dignitaries  cul
minated  in  the  condemnation  of  the  bishops  of
Olinda  and  Para  to  four  years'  imprisonment,  but
the  emperor,  after  giving  the  church  a  proof  of  his
firmness,  pardoned  them  in  1876.  In  1887  he  set
out  on  a  new  visit  to  Europe  for  the  purpose  of  re
storing  his  health,  and  during  his  absence  his
daughter  Isabella  has  been  appointed  regent  of  the
empire.  The  emperor  is  one  of  the  most  enlightened
monarchs  of  the  19th  century.  He  speaks  and
writes  Portuguese,  French,  English,  German,  Span
ish,  and  Italian  correctly,  is  a  liberal  patron  of
letters,  arts,  and  sciences,  and  of  every  branch  of


industry  and  commerce,  and  since  1877  has  been  an
associate  member  of  the  French  academy  of  sciences.
During  his  reign,  and  through  his  influence,  Brazil
has  steadily  grown  in  power  and  importance.  The
national  finances  are  in  a  prosperous  condition,
railways  have  been  built,  telegraphs  and  cable  lines
have  been  extended  in  every  direction,  the  naviga
tion  of  rivers  has  been  promoted,  slavery  has  been
abolished,  and  free  education  has  been  made  almost
universal  throughout  the  empire.  His  heir  is  his
only  daughter,  Isabel  Christina  Leopoldina  Augus
ta,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  29  July,  1846,  who  married,
on  15  Oct.,  1864,  Prince  Louis  Plilippe  d'Orleans,
Count  d'Eu  (q.  v.).  They  have  two  sons,  Pedro,  b.
15  Oct.,  1875,  and  Luiz  Felipe,  b.  26  Jan.,  1878.

PEEBLES,  Mary  Louise,  author,  b.  in  Lan-
singburg,  N.  Y.,  10  Dec.,  1833.  Her  maiden  name
was  Parmelee.  She  was  graduated  at  the  Lan-
singburg  academy  in  1850,  and  married  Augustus
A.  Peebles  in  July,  1862.  She  is  the  author  of
"The  Little  Captain  "  (Boston,  1861) ;  "Helps  over
Hard  Places  "  (1862) ;  "The  Good  Fight "  (1865) ;
"The  Honorable  Club"  (1867);  "Drifting  and
Steering"  (Troy,  1867);  "One  Day's  Weaving"
(1868);  "  Archie's  Shadow  "  (1869) ;  "John— Jack"
(1870);  and  "Jeannette's  Cisterns"  (1882).

PEELE,  John  Thomas,  artist,  b.  in  Peterbor
ough,  England,  in  1822.  He  came  to  this  country
when  a  child,  and  during  his  youth  painted  por
traits  here,  and  also,  during  18"41-'4,  in  England.
Later  he  turned  his  attention  to  genre  painting,
children  being  a  favorite  subject  with  him.  About
1846  he  settled  in  New  York,  where  he  was  elected
an  associate  of  the  National  academy  in  that  year.
In  1851  he  finally  returned  to  England,  where  he
became  a  member  of  the  Society  of  British  artists,
and  where  he  has  since  had  his  studio,  residing  on
the  Isle  of  Man  from  1858  till  1865.  He  has  ex
hibited  in  London  and  in  New  York.  Among  his
works  are  "  Children  of  the  Wood  "  (1847) ;  "  Music
of  the  Reeds"  (1857);  "Children  of  Robert  Thorn
ton"  (1872);  "Highland  Supper";  "The  Little
Laundress  "  ;  "  Prayer  for  Health  "  ;  "  Recitation
for  Grandpa  "  ;  "  The  Village  School  " ;  "  Heavily
Laden"  (1879);  "Cornish  Fish  Girl"  (1884);  "A
Bit  of  Gossip  "  ;  and  "  The  Bird's  Nest  "  (1885).

PEERS,  Benjamin  Orrs,  clergyman,  b.  in
Loudoun  county.  Va.,  in  1800;  d.  in  Louisville,
Ky.,  20  Aug.,  1842.  His  father,  Maj.  Valentine
Peers,  served  in  the  Revolutionary  army,  and  re
moved  to  Kentucky  in  1803.  The  son  was  edu
cated  at  Transylvania  university,  studied  in  Prince
ton  theological  seminary  in  1822-'3,  and  afterward
united  himself  with  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church,  and  was  ordained.  He  settled  in  Lexing
ton,  Ky.,  where  he  established  the  Eclectic  insti
tute,  of  which  he  was  principal.  In  1827-'9  he  was
president  of  Transylvania  university  (now  Univer
sity  of  Kentucky). "  He  labored  much  in  the  cause
of  common-school  education,  and  was  instrumental
in  arousing  public  attention  to  the  importance  of
this  subject,  and  was  the  author  of  the  present
system  of  common-school  education  in  Kentucky.
At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  editor  of  the  Sun-


Strictures  on  the  Nature,  Necessity,  and  Practica
bility  of  a  System  of  National  Education  Suited
to  the  United  States,"  with  an  Introductory  Letter
by  Francis  L.  Hawks  (New  York,  1838).

'  PEET,  Harvey  Prindle,  educator,  b.  in  Bethle
hem,  Litchfield  co.,  Conn.,  19  Nov.,  1794 :  d.  in  New
York  city,  1  Jan.,  1873.  His  early  life  was  spent
on  his  father's  farm,  and  by  teaching  in  the  district


700


PEET


PEGRAM


school  he  earned  means  to  procure  his  education.
After  graduation  at  Yale  in  1822  he  became  an
instructor  in  the  asylum  for  the  deaf  and  dumb  in
Hartford,  of  which  he  was  soon  made  superintend
ent.  In  1831  he  was  appointed  principal  of^the
institution  for  the  deaf  and  dumb  in  New  York
city,  which  under  his  care  became  successful,  lie
resigned  the  principalship  in  1868,  but  was  emeritus
principal  until  his  death.  For  fourteen  years  he
was  president  of  its  board  of  directors.  Dr.  Peet
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the  University
of  New  York  in  1849,  and  that  of  Ph.  D.  from  the
National  deaf-mute  college  in  1871.  The  want  of
suitable  elementary  books  for  deaf-mutes  led  him
to  prepare  a  series,  which  is  now  in  general  use.
entitled  "  Course  of  Instruction  for  the  Deaf  and
Dumb"  (New  York,  1844-'6).  He  also  wrote
"Scripture  Lessons  for  the  Deaf  and  Dumb"
(1846) ;  "  Statistics  of  the  Deaf  and  Dumb  "  (1852) ;
"  Report  on  Education  of  the  Deaf  and  Dumb  in
Higher  Branches"  (1852);  ''Letters  to  Pupils  on
Leaving  the  New  York  Institution  for  the  Deaf
and  Dumb  "  (1854) ;  "  Legal  Rights,  etc.,  of  the  Deaf
and  Dumb  "  (Utica,  1856) ;  "  History  of  the  United
States  of  America"  (New  York,  1869);  and  con
tributed  articles  on  his  specialty  to  the  "  American
Journal  of  Insanity  "  and  to  the  "American  Annals
for  the  Deaf  and  Dumb."— His  son,  Isaac  Lewis,
educator,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  4  Dec.,  1824,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1845,  and  at  the  Union  theo
logical  seminary  in  1849.  In  1851  he  visited  Europe
to  study  methods  of  teaching  deaf-mutes.  On  his
return  in  1852  he  was  elected  vice-principal  of  the
New  York  institution  for  the  deaf  and  dumb,  and
since  1867  he  has  been  its  principal.  In  1881  he
went  as  the  representative  of  all  the  American
institutions  for  the  deaf  and  dumb  to  the  Inter
national  congress  in  Milan,  Italy.  He  has  been
active  in  shaping  the  legislation  of  the  state  of
New  York  with  regard  to  deaf-mute  instruction,
and  also  secured  provision  for  the  instruction  of
children  under  the  age  of  twelve  years.  Columbia
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1872.  He  has
written  many  reports,  memoirs,  and  works  on  the
education  of  deaf-mutes. — Another  son,  Edward,
educator,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  28  May,  1826 ;  d.
in  New  York  city,  27  Jan.,  1862,  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  New  York  in  1847.  He  then
visited  France,  and  on  his  return  studied  law,  and
in  1849  was  chosen  professor  in  the  New  York
institution  for  the  deaf  and  dumb.  He  studied
theology  at  Union  theological  seminary,  but  never
preached.  He  was  the  author  of  text-books  for
mutes.  —  Another  son,  Dudley,  physician,  b.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  9  July,  1830;  d.  in  New  York
city,  18  April,  1862,  was  "graduated  at  Yale  in  1852,
studied  and  practised  medicine  in  New  York,  and
became  an  instructor  in  the  New  York  institu
tion  for  deaf-mutes.  He  was  the  author  of  a
"Manual  of  Inorganic  Chemistry  for  Students"
(New  York,  1865),  which  was  revised  and  enlarged
by  Isaac  L.  Peet  (1868).

PEET,  Stephen,  missionary,  b.  in  Sandgate,
Vt.,  in  1795 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  21  March.  1855.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1823,  and  preached
for  seven  years  near  Cleveland,  Ohio.  Afterward
he  was  a  chaplain  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y..  editing  there
the  "  Bethel  Magazine  "  and  the  "  Buffalo  Specta
tor."  In  1837  he  became  minister  of  Green  Bay,
Wis.,  and  assisted  in  founding  Beloit  college  and
thirty  churches.  He  then  went  to  Milwaukee,  and
subsequently  took  charge  of  an  institute  in  Batavia,
111.  He  was  the  author  of  a  "  History  of  the  Pres
byterian  and  Congregational  Churches  and  Minis
ters  of  Wisconsin"  (Milwaukee,  1851).


PEET,  Stephen  Denison,  clergyman,  b.  in
Euclid,  Ohio,  2  Dec.,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at
Beloit  college  in  1851,  and,  after  spending  two  years
at  Yale  theological  seminary,  was  graduated  at
Andover  theological  seminary  in  1854.  After  his
ordination,  in  February,  1855,  he  became  pastor  of
the  Congregational  church  in  Genesee,  Wis.,  and
from  that  time  until  1866  he  held  various  charges
in  that  state.  He  then  was  called  to  New  Oregon,
Iowa,  but  in  1879  returned  to  Wisconsin.  Mr.  Peet
has  achieved  reputation  by  his  archaeological
writings.  In  1879  he  was  secretary  of  the  American
anthropological  association,  and  he  is  a  member  of
the  American  oriental,  philological,  and  antiqua
rian  societies,  and  of  similar  organizations  in  Great
Britain.  He  became  editor  of  "The  American
Antiquarian  and  Oriental  Journal  "  in  1879,  and
held  that  post  until  1888.  His  principal  works  are
"  The  Ashtabula  Disaster"  (Chicago,  1879);  "  His
tory  of  Ashtabula  County,  Ohio  "  (Cleveland,  1879) ;
"Ancient  Architecture  in  America"  (Chicago,
1884);  "Picture  Writing"  (1885);  "History  of
Early  Missions  in  Wisconsin "  (Madison,  1886)  ;
"Primitive  Symbolism"  (Chicago,  1887);  and
"  The  Effigy  Mounds  of  Wisconsin"  (1888).

PEdrRAM,  Robert  Baker,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Dinwiddic  county,  Va.,  10  Dec.,  1811.  He  entered
the  U.  S.  navy  as  midshipman  on  2  Feb.,  1829,
served  in  the  Mediterranean  squadron,  and  on  8
Sept.,  1841,  was  appointed  lieutenant.  He  was  or
dered  to  the  "  Saratoga,"  under  Capt.  David  G.  Far-
ragut,  in  1847,  served  in  the  Mexican  war,  and  in
1852  took  part  in  the  Japan  expedition.  In  1855
he  participated  in  a  joint  expedition  from  the  Brit
ish  ship  "  Rattler  "  and  the  U.  S.  vessel  "  Povvha-
tan  "  against  a  piratical  flotilla  of  thirty-one  war-
junks,  and  captured  sixteen,  with  100  cannon.  For
this  service  he  received  the  thanks  of  Admiral  Sir
James  Stirling,  flag-officer  of  the  British  East  India
squadron,  of  the  governor  of  Hong  Kong,  and  of
the  British  government,  and  was  presented  with  a
sword  by  the  state  of  Virginia,  lie  served  in  the
Norfolk  navy-yard  in  1856-'8,  in  the  Paraguay  ex
pedition  in  1858,  and  in  1859  was  a  commissioner
to  define  the  limits  of  the  Newfoundland  fisheries.
He  resigned  from  the  U.  S.  navy  on  17  April,  1861,
became  a  captain  in  the  Virginia  service,  com
manded  at  the  navy-yard  in  Norfolk  after  its  evacu
ation  by  the  U.  S.  forces,  and  erected  a  battery  at
Pig  Point,  Nansemond  river,  with  which  he  dis
abled  the  U.  S.  steamer  "  Harriet  Lane,"  which  was
surveying  the  river  and  placing  buoys.  He  after
ward  commanded  the  steamer  "  Nashville,"  which
left  Charleston  on  26  Oct.,  1861,  and  returned  in
the  following  February,  having  eluded  pursuit  and
destroyed  several  merchant-vessels.  He  was  or
dered  to  superintend  the  shielding  and  armament
of  the  iron-clad  steamer  "  Richmond,"  and,  after
taking  her  to  Drewry's  Bluff,  was  transferred  to
the  "  Virginia."  In  1864  a  fund  was  raised  in  Vir
ginia  to  purchase  and  equip  in  England  a  naval
force  to  be  called  the  "Virginia  volunteer  navy,"
and  to  be  commanded  by  Capt.  Pegmm.  He  had
one  vessel  prepared  for  service  at  the  time  of  Gen.
Lee's  surrender.  Since  the  close  of  the  war  he  has
resided  in  Norfolk,  Va. — His  nephew,  John,  sol
dier,  b.  in  Petersburg,  Va.,  24  Jan.,  1832  ;  d.  near
Hatcher's  Run,  Va.,  6  Feb.,  1865.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1854,  assigned
to  the  1st  dragoons,  became  1st  lieutenant,  28  Feb.,
1857,  and  was  actively  engaged  on  frontier  duty
for  several  years.  He  resigned  his  commission  in
the  U.  S.  army.  10  May,  1861,  and  was  appointed
lieutenant-colonel  in  the  Confederate  army  soon
afterward.  On  7  Nov.,  1862,  he  was  appointed  a


PEIRCE


PEIRCE


701


brigadier-general  in  the  provisional  army,  and  he
subsequently  acquired  the  rank  of  major-general.
Mis  brigade  was  composed  of  five  regiments  of  Vir
ginia  infantry  in  the  Army  of  northern  Virginia.
As  a  major-general  he  commanded  Gen.  Jubal  A.
Early's  old  division.  He  was  engaged  in  all  the
campaigns  of  the  Army  of  northern  Virginia,  and
was  killed  in  action  at  Hatcher's  Run. — John's
brother,  William  Johnson,  soldier,  b.  in  Peters
burg,  Va.,  in  1841 ;  d.  there,  2  April,  1865,  left  the
University  of  Virginia,  where  he  was  a  law  student,
at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  to  enter  a  Con
federate  regiment  of  artillery  as  a  private,  and  won
promotion  in  that  arm  of  the  service  at  Cedar  Run,
Chancellorsville,  and  Gettysburg.  Early  in  1865
he  was  made  brigadier-general,  and  he  was  killed
during  the  siege  of  Petersburg,  Va.

PEIRCE,  Benjamin  (purse),  librarian,  b.  in
Salem,  Mass.,  30  Sept.,  1778;  d.  in  Cambridge,
Mass..  26  July,  1831.  He  was  graduated  at  Har
vard  in  1801,  and  settled  with  his  father  as  a  mer
chant  in  Salem.  For  several  years  he  represented
Salem  in  the  lower  branch  of  the  legislature,  and  in
1811  he  was  sent  to  the  state  senate.  In  1826  he
became  librarian  of  Harvard,  which  post  he  then
filled  until  his  death.  He  published  "  A  Catalogue
of  the  Library  of  Harvard  University "  (4  vols.,
Cambridge,  1830-'!),  and  "A  History  of  Harvard
University  from  its  Foundation  in  the  Year  1636
to  the  Period  of  the  American  Revolution,"  issued
posthumously  by  John  Pickering,  who  prepared  a
sketch  of  his  life  for  the  preface  of  the  work  (1833).
— His  son,  Benjamin,  mathematician,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  4  April,  1809 :  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  6  Oct.,
1880,  was  graduated  in  1829  at  Harvard,  where  he
was  tutor  in  mathematics,  after  first  teaching  for
two  years  at  Round  Hill  school,  Northampton,

Mass.  In  1833  he
was  appointed  uni
versity  professor  of
mathematics  and
natural  philosophy,
and  in  1842  he  be
came  professor  of  as
tronomy  and  mathe
matics,  which  chair
he  held  until  his
death,  when  he  had
been  connected  with
the  university  for
a  longer  time  than
any  other  person  ex
cept  Henry  Flynt,

/T) .  - srt •  of  the  class  of  1693.

(J3€^y6<sw^ 6/^M.ce Tho pursilit of

mathematics as a

living  science  was  the  ambition  of  his  life.  Prof.
Peirce  was  frequently  called  upon  to  assist  in  mat
ters  connected  with  the  U.  S.  coast  survey,  and  in
1852-'67  had  direction  of  the  longitude  determina
tions  of  that  service.  On  the  death  of  Alexander  D.
Bache  (q.  r.)  in  1867  he  was  appointed  to  the  office
of  superintendent,  which  he  then  filled  until  1874.
During  the  civil  war  the  regular  work  of  the  survey
had  been  largely  suspended,  but  under  Prof.  Peirce
its  continuation,  according  to  plans  laid  down  by
his  predecessor,  was  taken  up,  and  its  extension  to
a  great  geodetic  system,  stretching  from  ocean  to
ocean,  was  begun  under  his  administration,  thus
laving  the  foundations  for  a  general  map  of  the
country  that  should  be  entirely  independent  of
detached  local  surveys.  With  this  object  the
great  diagonal  arc  was  extended  from  the  vicin
ity  of  Washington  to  the  southward  and  west
ward  along  the  Blue  Ridge  eventually  to  reach  the


Gulf  of  Mexico  near  Mobile.  He  also  planned  the
important  work  of  measuring  the  arc  of  the  paral
lel  of  39°  to  join  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  systems
of  triangulation ;  and  for  determining  geographi
cal  positions  in  states  where  geological  or  geo
graphical  surveys  were  in  progress.  Prof.  Peirce
took  personal  charge  of  the  American  expedition
to  Sicily  to  observe  the  eclipse  of  the  sun  in  De
cember,  1870 ;  and  for  the  transit  of  Venus  in  1874
he  organized  two  parties  from  the  coast  survey— one
to  observe  at  Chatham  island,  in  the  South  Pacific
ocean,  and  the  other  at  a  station  in  Japan.  He  re
signed  from  the  superintendency  in  1874,  but  after
his  retirement  continued  to  hold  the  office  of  con
sulting  geometer,  exercising  a  general  supervision
over  the  scientific  part  of  the  work.  Prof.  Peirce
also  held  the  appointment  of  consulting  astron
omer  to  the  "American  Ephemeris  and  Nauti
cal  Almanac  "  from  its  establishment  in  1849  till
1867,  having  direction  of  the  theoretical  depart
ment  of  that  work,  for  which,  in  1852,  he  prepared
4i  Tables  of  the  Moon  "  (Washington,  1853).  Prof.
Peirce's  great  fame  was  due  to  his  mathematical
ability,  which  was  first  brought  to  general  notice
by  his  announcement  that  Leverrier's  discovery  of
the  planet  Neptune  was  a  happy  accident,  not  that
Leverrier's  calculations  had  not  been  exact  and
deserving  of  the  highest  honor,  but  because  there
were,  in  fact,  two  very  different  possible  solutions
of  the  perturbation  of  Uranus.  Leverrier  had  cor
rectly  calculated  one,  but  the  actual  planet  in  the
sky  represented  the  other,  and  Leverrier's  ideal  one
lay  in  the  same  direction  from  the  earth  only  in
1846.  This  work  verified  Leverrier's  labors  suffi
ciently  to  establish  their  marvellous  accuracy  and
minuteness  as  well  as  their  herculean  amount.  His
next  investigation  was  in  reference  to  Saturn's
rings.  Prof.  Peirce  demonstrated  that  the  rings,
if  fluid,  could  not  be  sustained  by  the  planet,  that
satellites  could  not  sustain  a  solid  ring,  but  that
sufficiently  large  and  numerous  satellites  could
sustain  a  fluid  ring,  and  that  the  actual  satellites
of  Saturn  are  sufficient.  His  later  mathematical
work  included  a  series  of  very  laborious  and  exact
calculation  of  the  occupations  of  the  Pleiades,  fur
nishing  an  accurate  means  of  studying  the  form  of
the  earth  and  her  satellite.  His  criterion  for  re
jecting  doubtful  observations  is  an  ingenious  and
valuable  extension  of  the  law  of  probabilities  to  its
own  correction ;  and  his  detection  of  the  mental
error  of  lurking  personal  preferences  for  individual
digits  is  a  curious  specimen  of  that  acuteness  of
observation  that  characterized  his  mind.  The  re
turn  of  Encke's  comet  in  1842,  and  the  appearance
of  the  great  comet  of  February  and  March,  1843,
afforded  him  an  opportunity  to  attract  public  at
tention  to  the  need  of  a  well-furnished  observatory
for  Harvard,  and  to  his  efforts  the  movement  was
due  that  resulted  in  the  establishment  of  the
present  institution.  In  1855  he  was  one  of  the
scientific  council  that  established  the  Dudley  ob
servatory,  and  he  took  part  in  the  struggle  of  1859
between  that  body  and  the  trustees  of  the  institu
tion.  In  conjunction  with  Alexander  D.  Bache
and  Joseph  Henry  he  published  the  defence  of  the
director,  Benjamin  A.  Gould  (q.  r.).  Prof.  Peirce
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the  University
of  North  Carolina  in  1847,  and  from  Harvard  in
1867.  He  was  a  member  of  the  American  acad
emy  of  arts  and  sciences  and  of  the  American  philo
sophical  society,  and  was  elected  an  associate  of  the
Royal  astronomical  society  of  London  in  1847,  and
in  1852  an  honorary  fellow  of  the  Royal  society  of
London,  besides  membership  in  other  foreign  so
cieties.  In  1853  he  presided  over  the  Cleveland


702


PEIRCE


PEIRCE


meeting  of  the  American  association  for  the  ad
vancement  of  science,  and  in  1803  he  was  one  of  the
corporate  members  of  the  National  academy  of  sci
ences.  He  issued  five  numbers  of  the  "  Cambridge
Miscellany  of  Mathematics  and  Physics,"  and  was
a  generous  contributor  to  scientific  journals  and
the  proceedings  of  the  scientific  societies  of  which
he  was  a  member.  Prof.  Peirce's  text-books  on
mathematics  have  had  a  lasting  effect  upon  the
methods  of  teaching  in  this  country.  lie  acted
independently  in  the  introduction  of  infinitesi
mals  into  elementary  books,  and  supplanted  many
traditional  methods  in  mathematics  by  concise
and  axiomatic  definitions  and  demonstrations  of
his  own  invention.  He  surpassed  other  mathe
maticians  particularly  in  the  choice  of  notation,
which  enabled  his  mind  to  carry  its  power  of  ab
stract  reasoning  to  a  higher  degree  by  reducing
mental  labor.  His  books  include  "Elementary
Treatise  on  Plane  Trigonometry"  (Boston,  1835),
and  "  Elementary  Treatise  on  Spherical  Trigonome
try  "  (1836).  published  as  a  single  volume  in  later
editions ;  "  Elementary  Treatise  on  Sound  "  (1836) ;
"  Elementary  Treatise  on  Plane  and  Solid  Geome
try  "  (1837 ;  printed  for  the  blind,  1840) ;  "  Elemen
tary  Treatise  on  Algebra"  (1837);  "Elementary
Treatise  on  Curves,  Functions,  and  Forces "  (2
vols.,  1841-'6) ;  "  Physical  and  Celestial  Mechanics,
Developed  in  Four  Systems  of  Analytic  Mechanics,
Celestial  Mechanics,"  Potential  Physics,  and  Ana
lytic  Morphology,"  of  which  the  "Analytic  Mechan
ics  "only  was  published  (1855):  "  Linear  Associa
tive  Algebra"  (Washington,  1870);  and  "  Ideality
in  the  Physical  Sciences"  (Boston,  1881).  His
classmate  and  colleague  in  the  faculty  at  Harvard,
Oliver  Wendell  Holmes,  commemorated  his  death
by  a  graceful  poem,  in  which  he  said :

"  To  him  the  wandering  stars  revealed
The  secrets  in  their  cradle  sealed :
The  far-off,  frozen  sphere  that  swings
Through  ether,  zoned  with  lucid  rings ;
The  orb  that  rolls  in  dim  eclipse,
Wide  wheeling  round  its  long  ellipse —
His  name  Urania  writes  with  these,
And  stamps  it  on  her  Pleiades."
See  "Benjamin  Peirce.  a  Memorial  Collection,''  by
Moses  King  (Cambridge, Mass., 1881). — Another
son  of  the  first  Benjamin,  Charles  Henry,  physi
cian,  b.  in  Salem.  Mass.,  28  Jan.,  1814 ;  d.  in  Cam
bridge,  Mass.,  16  June,  1855,  was  graduated  at  Har
vard  in  1833,  and  at  the  medical  department  in
1836. Settling  in  Salem,  he  there  followed  his  pro
fession  until  1847,  whan  he  became  a  special  stu
dent  of  chemistry  at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school
of  Harvard  for  two  years,  and  in  1850  he  received
the  appointment  of  examiner  of  medicines  for  the
port  of  Boston. Dr.  Peirce  was  a  member  of  va
rious  medical  societies,  and  the  translator  of  Dr.
Julius  A.  Stockhardt's  "  Principles  of  Chemistry"
(Cambridge, 1850), of which more than 15,000
copies  were  sold. He  also  published  "  Examina
tion  of Drugs, Medicines,  Chemicals,  etc.,  as  to
their Purity" (1852).— The second Benjamin's
son,  James Mills, mathematician, b. in  Cam
bridge,  Mass.,  1  May,  1834,  was  graduated  at  Har
vard in 1853, and'  was  tutor there in 1854-'8
and  in  I860-'!. He  was  made  assistant  professor
of  mathematics  in  1861,  and  in 1867 university
professor  of  that  subject, In 1885  he  was  given
the  clrair  of  astronomy  and  mathematics,  which  he
now  (1888)  holds. He  is  a  fellow  of  the  American
academy  of  arts  and  sciences  and  of  the  American
association  for  the  advancement  of  science,  and  a
member of other  scientific bodies. Besides  his
special  papers  in  various  transactions  and  reviews,


he  has  published  "  A  Text-Book  of  Analytic  Geom
etry  "  (Cambridge,  1857) ;  "  Three-  and  Four-Place
Tables  of  Logarithmic  and  Trigometric  Functions  "
(Boston,  1871);  "The  Elements  of  Logarithms"
(1873);  and  "Mathematical  Tables  Chiefly  to  Four
Figures ;  1st  Series "  (1879) ;  and  he  has  edited
"  Ideality  in  the  Physical  Sciences,"  written  by  his
father  (1881). — Another  son  of  the  second  Benja
min,  Charles  Sanders,  physicist,  b.  in  Cam
bridge,  Mass.,  10  Sept.,  1839,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1859,  and  subsequently  pursued  the
chemical  course  at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1863  with  the  degree  of
S.  B.  He  soon  afterward  entered  the  service  of  the
U.  S.  coast  survey,  and  in  1872  became  assistant  in
that  work,  engaging  in  important  investigations,
notably  a  series  of  pendulum  experiments  to  de
termine  the  density  of  the  earth,  its  ellipsity,  and
other  constants.  His  scientific  work  has  also  in
cluded  valuable  researches  in  meteorology,  meas
urements  of  wave  lengths  of  light,  researches  on
sensation  of  color,  and  work  on  stellar  photometry.
He  has  held  lectureships  on  logic  at  Harvard  and
at  the  Johns  Hopkins  university,  and  in  1869  he
delivered  a  course  of  lectures  on  scholastic  philoso
phy  before  the  Lowell  institute  in  Boston.  Mr.
Peirce  is  a  member  of  the  American  academy  of
arts  and  sciences,  and  in  1877  was  elected  to  the
National  academy  of  sciences.  He  is  also  a  mem
ber  of  the  International  commission  on  weights  and
measures.  In  addition  to  many  articles  on  his  spe
cialties  in  the  "  Journal  of  Speculative  Philosophy  "
and  in  the  proceedings  of  societies  of  which  he  is  a
member,  he  has  edited  with  additions  his  father's
"  Linear  Associative  Algebra"  (New  York,  1882)  and
"Studies  in  Logic  by  Members  of  the  Johns  Hop
kins  University  "  (Boston,  1883). — His  kinsman,
Benjamin  Osgood,  physicist,  b.  in  Beverly,  Mass.,
11  Feb..  1854,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1876,
and  continued  as  assistant  in  the  physical  labora
tory  for  a  year.  Subsequently  he  studied  abroad,
and  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  the  Univer
sity  of  Leipsic  in  1879,  after  which  he  spent  a  year
under  Helmholtz  in  the  University  of  Berlin.  On
his  return  he  taught  in  the  Boston  Latin-school
until  he  was  appointed  in  1881  instructor  in  mathe
matics  in  Harvard,  which  place  he  held  until  1884,
and  then  was  advanced  to  the  assistant  professor
ship  of  mathematics  and  physics.  Dr.  Peirce  is  a
member  of  scientific  societies,  and  has  contributed
several  important  memoirs  on  physical  science  to
the  "  American  Journal  of  Science "  and  to  the
"  Proceedings  of  the  American  Academy  of  Arts
and  Sciences."  He  has  published  "  The  Elements
of  the  Theory  of  the  Newtonian  Potential  Func
tion  "  (Boston,  1886).

PEIRCE,  Bradford  Kinney,  clergyman,  b.  in
Royalton,  Windsor  co.,  Vt.,  3  Feb.,  1819.  He  was
graduated  at  Wesleyan  university,  Middletown,
Conn.,  in  1841,  and  in  1843  entered  the  ministry  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church.  He  was  ed'itor
of  the  "  Sunday-School  Messenger  and  Sunday-
School  Teacher  "  in  Boston  in  1844-'5,  and  agent  of
the  American  Sunday-school  union  in  1854-'6.  His
efforts  in  behalf  of  public  charities  led  to  the  estab
lishment  of  the  state  industrial  school  for  girls  in
Lancaster,  of  which  he  was  superintendent  and
chaplain  from  1856  till  1862.  He  was  chaplain  of
the  House  of  refuge  on  Randall's  island,  N.  Y.,
from  1863  till  1872,  when  he  returned  to  Boston
to  become  editor  of  "  Zion's  Herald,"  which  post  he
now  (1888)  holds.  In  1868  he  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Wesleyan  university,  of  which  he
was  a  trustee  from  1870  till  1881.  lie  has  also
been  a  trustee  of  the  Boston  university  since  1874,


PEIRCE


PEIXOTTO


703


and  of  Wellesley  college  since  1876.  His  works  in
clude  "  Temptation  "  (Boston,  1840) ;  "  The  Eminent
Dead  "  (1846) ; "  Bible  Scholar's  Manual "  (New  York,
1847);  "Notes  on  the  Acts"  (1848);  "Bible  Ques
tions  "  (3  vols.,  1848) ;  "  Life  in  the  Woods :  Advent
ures  of  Audubon"  (1803);  a  collection  of  "Hymns
and  Ritual  for  the  House  of  Refuge  "  (1864) ;  "  Trials
of  an  Inventor :  Life  and  Discoveries  of  Charles
Goodyear"  (1866);  "Stories  from  Life  which  the
Chaplain  Told  "  (Boston,  1866) ;  its  "  Sequel "  (1867) ;
"A  Half-Century  with  Juvenile  Offenders"  (1869);
"  Chaplain  with  the  Children  "  (1870) ;  "  The  Young
Shetlander  and  his  Home  "  (New  York,  1870) ;  and
"  Hymns  of  the  Higher  Life  "  (Boston,  1871).  He
has  prepared,  by  order  of  the  Massachusetts  legis
lature,  a  new  annotated  edition  of  the  proceedings
of  the  State  convention  of  1788,  which  ratified  the
national  constitution  (Boston,  1856).

PEIRCE,  Ebenezer  Weaver  (purse),  soldier,
b.  in  Freetown,  Mass.,  5  April,  1822.  He  received
an  academical  education,  and  held  various  local
offices  in  Freetown  and  Lakeville,  Mass.  He  was
commissioned  major  of  the  Old  Colony  regiment  in
1844,  and  was  made  brigadier-general  of  state  mili
tia  in  1855.  In  1859  he  became  lieutenant  of  the
Ancient  and  Honorable  artillery  company.  He
commanded  as  brigadier-general  the  Massachusetts
troops  in  Virginia  in  1861,  for  three  months,  and
was  appointed  colonel  of  the  29th  Massachusetts
regiment  on  13  Dec.  of  that  year.  He  lost  an
arm  at  White  Oak  Swamp,  Va.,  30  June,  1862,
and  commanded  a  brigade  in  the  9th  army  corps
from  September,  1863,  till  November.  1864,  when
he  resigned,  after  serving  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,
and  Virginia.  He  was  appointed  in  August,  1866,
collector  of  internal  revenue  for  the  1st  district  of
Massachusetts,  which  appointment  was  not  con
firmed  by  the  senate.  He  is  the  author  of  "  The
Peirce  Family  of  the  Old  Colony"  (Boston,  1870);
"  Contributions,  Biographical.  Genealogical,  and
Historical"  (1874);  "Indian  History,  Biography,
and  Genealogy"  (1878);  "Civil,  Military,  and  Pro
fessional  Lists  of  Plymouth  and  Rhode  Island
Colonies"  (1881);  and  sketches  of  Bristol  and
Plymouth  county  towns.

PEIRCE,  Thomas,  poet,  b.  in  Chester  county,
Pa.,  4  Aug.,  1786;  d.  in  Cincinnati.  Ohio,  in  1850.
Losing  his  father  at  an  early  age,  he  supported
himself  in  various  ways,  taught  in  Philadelphia,
and  in  1813  went  to  Cincinnati,  where  he  engaged
in  mercantile  pursuits  until  1822.  He  then  retired
and  studied  medicine,  but  in  1827  resumed  his
former  life.  In  1821  he  contributed  a  series  of
satirical  odes  to  the  "  Western  Spy,"  entitled  "  Hor
ace  in  Cincinnati,"  which  were  afterward  published
in  book-form  (Cincinnati,  1822),  and  in  1825  he
wrote  a  second  series  for  the  "  National  Republi
can,"  entitled  "  Billy  Moody,"  recounting  the  educa
tion  and  experience  of  a  Yankee  who  had  taught
school  in  the  east,  and  then  wandered  to  the  west.
He  wrote  numerous  prize  poems,  the  chief  of  which
was  "  Muse  of  Hesperia  "  (1823).  and  contributed
largely  to  literary  journals.  His  last  published
poem,  "  Knowledge  is  Power,"  appeared  in  1827.

PEIRCE,  William,  ship-master,  d.  in  New
Providence.  Bahama  islands,  in  1641.  He  was
master  of  "  The  Ann  "  in  1623,  afterward  of  "  The
Mayflower,"  and  of  "  The  Lyon,"  and  was  ship
wrecked  in  Virginia  in  1633.  *  In  1638  he  carried
captive  Pequot  Indians  to  the  West  Indies  for  sale,
and  brought  back  negro  slaves  from  the  Tortugas,
which  was  the  first  slave  traffic  in  New  England.
He  met  a  violent  death.  Peirce  was  the  author  of
the  first  almanac  printed  in  the  English-American
colonies  (Cambridge,  1639).


PEIRCE,  William  Shannon,  jurist,  b.  in  New
|  Castle,  Del.,  3  Sept.,  1815  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4
;  April,  1887.  He  was  descended  from  Abraham  Peirce,
i  an  early  Plymouth  colonist. He  was  educated  in  his
native  town  and  in  the  high-school  at  Philadelphia,
j  and  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits. A  few  years
I  later  he  studied  law  with  Charles  Chauncey,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  Philadelphia  in  1845,  and
won  reputation  in  his  profession. He  was  an  earn
est  advocate  of  emancipation,  and  was  the  counsel
of  the  slave  in  nearly  every  fugitive-slave  case  that
occurred  in  Philadelphia  under  the  fugitive-slave
act  of  1850. The  last  important  case  was  the  great
Dangerfield  case,  in  which  trial  he  and  his  col
leagues  argued  before  the  court  and  jury  from  the
opening  of  the  court  in  the  morning  until  sunrise
the  next  morning. He  took  an  active  part  in  pub
lic  affairs,  and  in  1856  was  a  delegate  to  the  con
vention  that  nominated  John  C.  Fremont  for  the
presidency. In  1866  he  became  a  judge  of  the  court
of  common  pleas  in  Philadelphia,  which  office  he
held  by  subsequent  elections  until  his  death. In
1886  he  had  been  chosen  by  both  parties  for  a  term
of  ten  years. He  took  an  active  part  in  founding
the  Woman's  medical  college  in  Philadelphia.

PEIRSON,  Lydia  Jane  Wheeler,  author,  b.
in  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1802  ;  d.  in  Adrian,  Mich.,
in  1862.  She  early  developed  literary  tastes,  and
wrote  verses  before  her  twelfth  year.  She  married
Oliver  Peirson  in  1844,  and  subsequently  resided
in  Tioga  county,  Pa.,  till  1853,  when  she  settled  in
Adrian,  Mich.  She  contributed  many  prose  and
poetical  sketches  to  magazines  and  newspapers,  and

Eublished  two  volumes  of  poems,  entitled  "Forest
eaves  "  (Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1845)  and  the  "  Forest
Minstrel,"  edited  by  Benjamin  S.  Schneck  (1847).

PEIXOTO,  Ign'acio  Jose  de  Alvarenga  (pi-
sho'-to),  Brazilian  patriot,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro  in
1748;  d.  in  Ambaca,  Angola,  22  May,  1792.  He
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Coimbra  as
bachelor  of  divinity,  and  appointed  judge  of  Cin-
tra,  and  afterward  district  judge  of  Rio  das
Mortes.  On  his  arrival  in  Rio  Janeiro  he  became
intimate  with  the  viceroy,  the  Marquis  of  Lavradio,
to  whom  he  dedicated  many  of  his  poetical  works.
Peixoto  was  one  of  the  most  devoted  followers  of
Paula  Freire  de  Andrade  (q.  r.),  and  was  preparing
for  the  coming  revolution  in  his  province,  when
the  Viscount  of  Barbacena,  governor  of  the  cap
taincy  of  Minas  Geraes,  warned  by  informers,
caused  him  to  be  arrested.  Peixoto  was  carried  in
chains  to  Rio  Janeiro,  placed  in  solitary  confine
ment  in  the  dungeons  of  the  island  of  Cobras,  and
on  18  April,  1792,  condemned  to  death;  but  the
penalty  was  commuted  to  transportation  for  life,
and  he  embarked  for  the  penal  settlement  of  Am
baca  in  Angola,  where  he  died  a  few  months  later.

PEIXOTTO,  Daniel  Levy  Maduro,  physician,
b.  in  Amsterdam.  Holland,  18  July,  1800;  d.  in
New  York  city,  13  May.  1843.  He  came  at  an  early
age  with  his  parents  to' New  York,  where  his  father,
Moses  L.  M.  Peixotto,  became  subsequently  minis
ter  of  a  Jewish  synagogue.  The  son  was  graduated
at  Columbia  in  1816,  and  took  the  degree  of  M.  D.
in  1819.  After  a  few  years  of  travel  he  returned
to  New  York  in  1823,  where  he  pursued  his  profes
sion  with  success,  and  gained  a  place  among  the
foremost  practitioners  of  his  day.  Pie  was  one  of
the  physicians  of  the  city  dispensary  in  1827.  and
president  of  the  New  York  county  medical  society
in  l830-'2,  and  took  an  active  part  in  public  chari
table  work  as  well  as  in  Jewish  educational  move
ments.— His  son,  Benjamin  Franklin,  lawyer,  b.
in  New  York  city.  13  Nov..  1834,  after  attending
school  in  New  York  went  to  Cleveland,  Ohio,  where


704


PELAGE


PELLEPART


he  studied  law  under  Stephen  A.  Douglas  and
wrote  for  the  "  Plaindealer.  In  1867  he  removed
to  San  Francisco,  where  he  continued  his  practice
as  a  lawyer.  In  1870-'5  he  was  U.  S.  consul  in
Bucharest,  Roumania,  where  his  influence  was
marked  in  securing  civil  and  religious  liberty.  In
1876  he  returned  to  the  United  States  and  took
part  in  the  presidential  canvass  in  favor  of  Ruther
ford  B.  Hayes.  In  1877  he  declined  the  appoint
ment  of  consul-general  at  St.  Petersburg.  He  was
subsequently  made  U.  S.  consul  at  Lyons,  France,
which  post  he  held  until  1885,  when  he  returned  to
New  York  and  resumed  the  practice  of  law.  Mr.
Peixotto  has  been  largely  identified  with  educational
and  charitable  movements  among  the  Jews  of  this
country,  is  favorably  known  as  a  lecturer,  and  edits
the  "  Menorah,"  a  monthly,  established  in  1886,  de
voted  to  the  interests  of  the  Independent  order  of
Benai  Berith  and  Judaism  and  Jewish  literature.

PELACiE,  Magloire,  West  Indian  soldier,  b.  in
Martinique  in  1769;  d.  there  in  1840.  He  was
of  African  descent.  In  the  disturbances  in  Mar
tinique  that  followed  the  French  revolution  he
took  the  side  of  the  planters,  and  showed  con
siderable  military  skill.  He  served  in  the  colo
nial  militia  when  the  island  was  attacked  by  the
English,  and  was  wounded  during  the  assault  on
Vert  Pre.  Rochambeau  made  him  a  lieutenant
on  the  field  of  battle,  and  gave  him  the  com
mand  of  a  fort  which  he  defended  with  ability,
but  he  was  obliged  to  yield  to  numbers  and  trans
ported  as  a  prisoner  of  war  to  England.  On  his
exchange  he  went  to  France,  where  he  was  named
captain  of  the  battalion  of  the  Antilles,  which  had
been  raised  at  Brest.  In  1795  his  corps  was  sent
to  Guadeloupe  to  recover  this  island  from  the  Eng
lish.  In  an  attack  on  St.  Lucia  he  won  the  grade
of  major,  and  he  was  appointed  governor  of  this
colony,  where  he  remained  until  it  was  retaken
by  the  English  in  1796.  He  was  wounded  and
again  sent  as  a  prisoner  of  war  to  England,  but
exchanged  in  1798  and  returned  to  Guadeloupe,
with  the  rank  of  colonel,  in  1799.  When  Admiral
Lacrosse  arrived  in  the  island  in  1801,  commissioned
to  restore  order  in  the  colony  and  reduce  the
negroes  to  obedience,  he  was  opposed  by  Pelage,
and  an  attempt  to  arrest  the  latter  resulted  in  an
insurrection.  A  new  government  was  organized
and  Lacrosse  was  compelled  to  fly.  Pelage  gov
erned  the  island  till  1803,  when  Gen,  Richepanse,
having  arrived  with  re-enforcements,  defeated  the
negroes  and  seized  Pelage  with  the  leaders  of  his
army.  The  negro  leaders  were  taken  to  Paris,  but,
owing  probably  to  the  fact  that  their  resistance
was  not  without  provocation,  they  were  released,
after  a  few  months'  imprisonment,  in  1803.  Pelage
lived  for  several  years  in  France  in  obscurity,  but
finally  returned  to  the  French  colonies.

PELBY,  William,  actor,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
16  March,  1793 ;  d.  there,  28  May,  1850.  He  made
his  debut  in  the  Walnut  street  "theatre,  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  in  1821,  as  Macbeth,  and  subsequently
gained  reputation  as  a  successful  portrayer  o'f
Shakespeare's  characters.  He  became  manager  of
the  Tremont  theatre,  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1827,  and
afterward  built  the  Warren  street  theatre  in  that
city. — His  wife,  Rosalie  French,  actress,  b.  in
Kinderhook,  N.  Y.,  17  March,  1793 ;  d.  at  sea  in
June,  1857,  had  little  early  education,  but  possessed
unusual  intellectual  gifts  and  powers  of  acquisi
tion.  She  made  her  debut  at  the  Federal  street
theatre,  Boston,  Mass.,  as  a  chorus-singer  in  1813,
rose  rapidly  to  leading  parts  in  melodrama,  and
became  one  of  the  most  popular  actresses  on  the
American  stage.  Her  first  husband  was  an  Eng


lishman  named  Brown,  who  died  about  1825,  and
afterward  she  married  Mr.  I'd  by.  In  1847  she
sailed  for  England,  but  was  wrecked,  and  returned
to  Boston.  She  went  to  California  in  1853,  estab
lished  a  wax-work  manufactory,  and  subsequently
an  exhibition,  which  proved  successful.  She  died
on  her  way  from  San  Francisco  to  New  York.

PELHAM,  Herbert,  colonist,  b.  in  Lincoln
county,  England,  in  1602;  d.  in  Suffolk  county,
England,  12  June,  1673.  He  was  graduated  at
Oxford  in  1C19,  was  early  interested  in  emigration,
and  in  1629  became  a  member  of  the  Massachu
setts  company  in  England.  lie  visited  this  coun
try  in  1638,  resided  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  and  was
an  assistant  in  1645-'9.  He  was  intrusted  by  the
colony  with  some  of  its  most  important  affairs,
was  active  in  the  service  of  the  Society  for  propa
gating  the  gospel  among  the  Indians,  and  became
first  treasurer  of  Harvard  in  1643.  He  was  a  com
missioner  of  the  united  colonies  of  New  England,
in  making  the  treaty  of  1646,  with  the  Narragan-
sett  and  Niantic  Indians.  Pelham  returned  to
England  in  1650,  and  engaged  in  the  formation  of
a  society  for  the  religious  instruction  of  the  In
dians. — His  daughter,  PENELOPE,  married  Gov.
Josiah  Winslovv.

PELHAM,  Peter,  artist,  b.  in  England ;  d.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  in  December,  1751.  He  is  supposed
by  some  to  have  been  a  son  of  Peter  Pelham,  an
English  engraver,  who  was  born,  according  to
Michael  Bryan,  about  1684,  but  more  probably  he
is  the  same  man,  Bryan's  record  of  him  arid  list
of  works  being  before  he  came  to  this  country.  He
was  the  first  engraver  and  earliest  known  artist  in
New  England,  and  came  from  London  to  Boston  at
the  close  of  the  first  quarter  of  the  18th  century.
His  earliest  known  work  here  is  a  portrait  of  Cot
ton  Mather,  dated  1727,  and  inscribed  "  P.  Pelham,
ad  vivum  pinxit,  ab  origini  fecit  et  excud."  He
also  engraved  after  his  own  originals  portraits  of
Rev.  John  Moorhead  (1731)  and  Rev.  Mather  Byles.
His  productions  on  copper  are  executed  in  the  deep
mezzotint  so  prevalent  in  the  early  part  of  the  18th
century,  closely  resembling  the  work  of  the  well-
known  English  scraper  John  Smith.  Pelham.  in
addition  to  his  labors  as  an  artist,  kept  a  school  in
Boston  where  he  taught,  as  well  as  the  ordinary
branches,  drawing,  painting,  and  needlework.  On
22  May,  1748,  he  married  the  widow  of  Richard  Cop
ley,  the  mother  of  John  Singleton  Copley,  to  whom
Pelham  gave  instruction.  His  known  plates,  be
sides  those  already  named,  are  likenesses  of  Rev.
Benjamin  Coleman  (1734),  Rev.  William  Cooper
(1743),  and  Rev.  Joseph  Sewall,  all  after  Smibert;
"  Plan  of  the  City  and  Fortress  of  Louisburg,"
after  Richard  Gridley  (1746),  Gov.  Shirley  (1747),
Rev.  Edward  Ilolyoke  (1749),  Rev.  Thomas  Prince
(1750),  and  Thomas  Hollis.  after  Highmorc  (1751).

PELLEPART,  or  PELLEPRAT,  Pierre  (pel-
lay-par),  French  missionary,  b.  in  Bordeaux.  France,
in  1606;  d.  in  Puebla  de  los  Angeles,  Mexico,  21
April,  1667.  He  was  admitted  into  the  Jesuit  order
at  the  age  of  seventeen,  and,  after  teaching  and
acting  as  rector  in  several  colleges,  went  to  Paris,
where  he  gained  reputation  as  a  pulpit  orator.  He
embarked  for  the  American  missions  in  1639,
visited  the  different  Jesuit  houses  in  the  French
islands,  and  then  passed  into  Mexico,  where  he
labored  among  the  natives  for  eleven  years.  His
works  include  "Relation  des  missions  des  PP.  de  la
compagnie  de  Jesus  dans  les  isles,  et  dans  la  terre
ferme  de  1'Amerique  Meridionale,  divisee  en  deux
parties;  avec  une  introduction  a  la  langue  des
Galibis,  sauvages  de  la  terre  ferine  de  1'Amerique  "
(Paris,  1655).  This  volume  is  very  rare.


PELLETIER


PEMBERTOX


705


PELLETIER.  Charles  Alphonse  Pentaleon,

Canadian  senator,  b.  in  Rive  re  Ouelle,  Quebec,  22
Jan.,  1837.  He  was  educated  at  St.  Anne's  col
lege  and  at  Laval  university,  where  he  was  gradu
ated  in  law  in  1858.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar
of  Lower  Canada  in  1800.  appointed  Queen's  coun
sel  in  1879,  and  has  been  syndic  of  the  Quebec
bar.  He  was  for  several  years  major  of  the  Volti-
geurs  de  Quebec,  and  was  in  command  of  that  bat
talion  during  the  Fenian  raid  of  1806.  He  was
elected  to  the  Dominion  parliament  for  Kamou-
raska  in  18!>9,  re-elected  in  1872,  and  again  by
acclamation  in  1874.  He  represented  Quebec  East
in  the  Quebec  assembly  from  February,  1873,  till
January,  1874,  when,  in  consequence  of  the  dual
representation  act,  he  resigned  from  the  Quebec
assembly  to  retain  his  seat  in  the  parliament  of
Canada,  in  which  he  represented  Kamouraska  till
1877.  He  was  a  member  of  the  privy  counsel  as
minister  of  agriculture  from  January,  1877,  till
October,  1878,  when  he  resigned  with  his  colleagues
in  office.  He  was  called  to  the  senate  in  1877.  Mr.
Pelletier  was  president  of  the  Canadian  commis
sion  for  the  Paris  universal  exhibition  of  1878.  and
for  his  services  was  created  a  companion  of  the
order  of  St.  Michael  and  St.  George,  29  Oct.,  1878.
He  is  a  Liberal  in  politics.

PELLICER,  Anthony  Dominic,  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  St.  Augustine,  Fla.,  in  1825;  d.  in  San  An
tonio.  Tex.,  14  April.  1880.  He  studied  for  the
priesthood  in  Spring  Hill  college,  near  Mobile,  Ala.,
was  ordained  priest  in  1850.  and  appointed  pastor
of  St.  Peter's  church,  Montgomery,  Ala.,  having
at  the  same  time  several  distant  stations  under  his
charge.  He  built  a  church  in  Carnden  in  185G,  and
afterward  organized  a  congregation  in  Selma.  He
was  attached  to  the  cathedral  of  Mobile  in  18G5,
appointed  a  member  of  the  bishop's  council,  and
vicar-general  in  1867.  During  the  civil  war  he  was
a  chaplain  in  the  Confederate  army,  and  was  noted
for  the  devotion  with  which  he  attended  the  sick
and  wounded  on  both  sides.  In  1875  he  was  elected
bishop  of  the  newly  created  diocese  of  San  Anto
nio,  embracing  that  part  of  Texas  between  Colo
rado  and  Nueces  rivers.  He  began  his  administra
tion  by  visiting  every  parish  in  his  diocese,  travel
ling  over  the  prairies  on  horseback,  and  sometimes
sleeping  in  the  open  air.  He  built  churches  and
schools  where  they  were  most  needed,  but  exposure
and  excessive  labor  affected  his  health.

PELOTAS,  Patricio  Jose  Correa  da  Camara
(pay-lo'-tas),'  Viscount  of,  Brazilian  soldier,  b.  at
sea  about  1740;  d.  in  Rio  Pardo,  28  May,  1827.
He  wras  brought  up  in  Portugal,  enlisted  in  an  in
fantry  regiment,  and  during  the  earthquake  at
Lisbon  in  1755  was  on  duty  at  the  royal  treasury.
He  served  for  some  time  in  Indian  garrisons,  but
was  afterward  sent  to  Rio  Janeiro.  On  his  arrival
he  was  appointed  to  superintend  the  conversion  of
the  Jesuit  college  into  a  military  hospital,  but
when  the  war  against  the  Spaniards  in  the  south
began  in  1774  the  governor-general,  the  Marquis
of  Lavradio  (q.  r.),  sent  him  to  the  field,  where  he
assisted  at  the  taking  of  Fort  S.  Tec-la.  In  1801
hostilities  were  renewed,  and  Correa  participated
in  the  five  months'  campaign  that  followed,  retak
ing  Fort  St.  Tecla  and  the  town  of  Batohy,  and
checking  the  invasion  of  Rio  Grande  by  the  army
of  the  Marquis  of  Sobremonte.  In  1812  and
1816-'18  he  served  again  with  the  rank  of  general.

PELOUBET,  Francis  Nathan,  clergyman,  b.
in  New  York  city.  2  Dec.,  1831.  He  was  gradu
ated  at  Williams  in  1853.  and  at  the  Congrega
tional  theological  seminary  in  Bangor,  Me.,  in
1857.  Since  the  latter  year  he  has  been  pastor  of


churches  in  Massachusetts.  The  University  of
East  Tennessee  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1884.  He  has  published  "  International  Question-
Books"  (15  annual  issues,  Boston,  1874-'88)  and
other  books,  and  edited  William  Smith's  "Bible
Dictionary"  (Philadelphia,  1884).

PELOtZE,  Louis  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Penn
sylvania.  30  May.  1841 :  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C..  1
June,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili
tary  academy  in  1853,  assigned  to  the  artillery,  and
promoted  2d  lieutenant  on  11  Nov.  In  1857-'8
he  was  on  duty  in  Kansas  during  the  anti-slavery
disturbances,  and  accompanied  the  second  column
of  the  Utah  expedition  as  acting  assistant  adju
tant-general.  He  was  commissioned  as  captain  on
14  May,  1861,  and  served  during  the  civil  war,
first  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  John  A.  Dix.  then  in  the
Port  Royal  expedition,  in  Georgia  when  Fort  Pu-
laski  was  captured,  with  Gen.  James  Shields  at
Port  Republic,  and  as  major  on  the  staff  with  the
2d  corps  of  the  Army  of  Virginia  in  the  Shenan-
doah  campaign  until  he  was  severely  wounded  at
Cedar  Mountain,  9  Aug.,  1862.  After  his  recovery
he  served  till  the  close  of  hostilities  as  assistant
adjutant-general  of  volunteers  with  the  rank  of
lieutenant-colonel,  being  on  special  duty  in  the
defences  of  Washington  in  the  autumn  of  1862,
then  with  the  troops  of  the  Department  of  Vir
ginia  till  August,  1863.  and  in  the  adjutant-gen
eral's  department  at  Washington  till  May,  1864,
and  afterward  in  charge  of  the  records  of  colored
troops  in  the  war  department  till  14  June,  1868.
For  his  gallantry  at  Cedar  Mountain  he  was  bre-
vetted  lieutenant-colonel,  and  on  13  March,  1865,
he  received  the  brevets  of  colonel  and  brigadier-
general  for  valuable  services  in  the  field  and  in  the
adjutant-general's  department.  He  was  adjutant-
general  of  the  Department  of  the  Lakes  in  18(,9-'73,
and  afterward  till  his  death  assistant  in  the  office
of  the  adjutant-general  of  the  army.

PEMBERTON.  Ehenezer,  clergyman,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass..  in  January,  1671 ;  d.  there,  13  Feb.,
1717.  His  father,  James,  was  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Old  South  church,  Boston.  Ebenezer  was-
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1691,  was  tutor  and  fel
low  in  that  college,  and  from  his  ordination  in
1700  till  his  death  was  pastor  of  the  Old  South
church.  He  published  a  large  number  of  occa
sional  discourses,  which,  with  three  prefatory  epis
tles,  were  printed  collectively  (Boston,  1727). — His
son,  Ehenezer,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston.  Mass..  in
1704 ;  d.  there.  9  Sept..  1779,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1721,  was  chaplain  at  Fort  William  in
1722-'6,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  ordained  pas
tor  of  the  1st  Presbyterian  church  in  New  York
city,  in  which  he  continued  for  twenty-six  years.
He  then  took  charge  of  the  Brick  church  in  Bos
ton  till  1775.  His  known  friendship  for  Gov.
Thomas  Hutchinson.  who  was  a  member  of  his
congregation,  caused  him  to  be  accused  of  loyalty
to  the  crown,  which  diminished  his  popularity
and  usefulness.  In  1771  he  was  the  only  minister
in  Boston  who  read  the  governor's  proclamation
from  the  pulpit,  for  the  annual  thanksgiving,  the
Whigs  '•  walking  out  of  the  meeting  in  great  indig
nation."  In  1775  his  church  was  closed,  and  he
probably  did  not  preach  again  after  the  evacua
tion.  Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1770.  the  first  that  the  college  ever  conferred.  lie
was  an  eloquent  preacher,  and  is  described  as  a
'•  man  of  polite  breeding,  pure  morals,  and  warm
devotion."  During  his  residence  in  New  York  he
was  president  of  the  board  of  correspondents  com
missioned  by  the  Society  in  Scotland  for  propa
gating  Christian  knowledge  among  the  Indians.


708


PEMBERTON


PEMBERTON


His  publications  include  "  Sermons  on  Several  Sub
jects  "  (New  York,  1738);  "Practical  Discourses"
(1741) ;  "Salvation  by  Grace,  through  Faith"  (1741) ;
and  "Occasional  Sermons"  (Boston,  1771).

PEMBERTON,  Phiueas,  colonist,  b..in  Lan
caster,  England,  31  Jan.,  1650;  d.  in  Bucks  county,
Pa.,  1  March,  1702.  He  was  of  Quaker  parentage,
was  apprenticed  to  a  grocer,  and  afterward  began
business  on  his  own  account  at  Bolton,  England,
where  he  subsequently  served  as  an  overseer  of  the
poor.  On  account  of  his  Quaker  principles,  he  suf
fered  persecution,  being  fined  and  several  times  im
prisoned.  In  1682,  accompanied  by  his  family  and
his  aged  father,  Ralph  Pemberton,  he  emigrated  to
Pennsylvania. where  he  purchased  a  large  plantation
in  Bucks  county  on  the  banks  of  Delaware  river.
naming  it  Grove  Place.  In  1683  he  was  appointed
deputy  register  of  Bucks  county,  and  commissioned
by  Penn  clerk  of  the  courts  of  the  county,  which
latter  office  he  held  until  his  death,  and  in  1684  he
became  the  register  of  the  county.  In  1685  he  be
came  a  member  of  the  provincial  council,  serving
in  this  office  most  of  the  time  till  his  death,  and
he  was  for  many  years  a  member  of  the  assembly.
In  1686  he  was  appointed  deputy  master  of  the
rolls,  and  in  1696  succeeded  Thomas  Lloyd  as  mas
ter  of  the  rolls.  He  ranked  among  the  chief  men
in  the  colony.  On  hearing  of  his  death.  Penn  wrote
from  England :  "  I  mourn  for  poor  Phincas  Pem
berton,  the  ablest  as  well  as  one  of  the  best  men
in  the  province."  See  "Annals  of  the  Pemberton
Family  "  in  "  Friends'  Miscellany  "  (vol.  vii.). — His
son,  Israel,  merchant,  b.  in  Grove  Place,  Bucks
co.,  Pa.,  20  Feb.,  1685;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  19  Jan.,
1754,  was  carefully  educated,  and  came  to  be  one
of  the  wealthiest  and  best-known  merchants  of  his
time.  He  served  for  nineteen  years  in  the  pro
vincial  assembly,  and  held  numerous  other  offices.
He  occupied  a  position  of  great  importance  in  the
affairs  of  the  Friends,  was  largely  employed  in
looking  after  its  property,  in  watching  over  the
interests  of  its  schools  under  its  care,  and  in
adjusting  differences  between  its  members.  In
1729  he  was  chosen  an  elder,  which  post  he  held
until  his  death.  His  house  was  the  general  resort
of  Friends  from  Europe.  His  mansion  was  large,
and  was  the  scene  of  a  hospitality  that  was  unri
valled  in  the  province. — Israel's  son,  Israel,  philan
thropist,  b.  in  Philadelphia  in  1715;  d.  there,  22
April,  1779,  received  a  liberal  education,  and  en
gaged  in  business  with  his  father,  lie  was  called
the  king  of  the  Quakers,  and  stood  in  the  forefront
of  those  who  sought  to  maintain  Penn's  peace  pol
icy  against  some  of  the  governors.  Owing  to  his
outspoken  criticism  of  Gov.  Thomas,  a  warrant
was  issued  by  the  governor  for  Pemberton's  arrest,
but  he  obtained  a  writ  of  habeas  corpus  from  the
supreme  court,  and  was  released  on  bail.  The  gov
ernor  declared  this  "  the  first  instance  of  a  habeas
corpus  being  granted  to  take  a  person  suspected  of
endeavoring  to  disturb  and  break  the  peace  of  the
province  out  of  the  hands  of  an  officer  before  ex
amination,"  and  he  caused  a  second  warrant  of  ar
rest  to  be  issued,  but  it  does  not  appear  that  Pem
berton  was  taken  into  custody  under  it.  Pember
ton  was  a  friend  of  the  Indians,  and  the  people
dubbed  him  King  Wampum.  In  1756,  when  a
majority  of  the  people  were  calling  for  a  war  of
extermination  against  the  Delawares  and  other
Indians,  Pemberton,  with  others,  went  on  a  mis
sion  that  resulted  in  a  conference  at  Easton,  where
a  treaty  of  peace  was  formed.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  "  Friendly  association  for  regain
ing  and  preserving  peace  with  the  Indians  by
pacific  measures,"  was  active  in  establishing  the


Pennsylvania  hospital,  being  a  member  of  its  first
board  of  managers,  and  was  also  a  manager  of
the  Society  for  the  cultivation  of  silk.  To  these,
and  to  many  other  benevolent  organizations,  he
gave  liberally  of  his  means.  His  Quaker  principles
led  him,  with  others,  to  look  with  disfavor  on  the
war  for  independence,  and  in  1777  congress,  sus
pecting  that  their  influence  would  be  exerted
against  the  colonies,  recommended  their  arrest  and
imprisonment,  whereupon,  by  order  of  the  supreme
executive  council  of  Pennsylvania,  he,  with  his
brothers  James  and  John  and  a  score  more  of  the
wealthiest  and  most  influential  Quakers  in  the  city,
were  arrested,  and,  without  a  hearing  or  trial,  sent
into  Virginia,  where  they  were  kept  in  exile  for  eight
months.  See  "  Exiles  in  Virginia,"  by  Thomas  Gil-
pin  (1848). — Another  son,  James,  merchant,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  26  Aug.,  1723 ;  d.  there,  9  Feb.,  1808,
after  completing  his  education  in  the  Quaker
schools,  entered  on  a  successful  mercantile  career.
Although  not  so  distinguished  a  mini  among  the
Quakers  as  his  brother  Israel,  he  wielded  a  large
influence  in  both  church  and  public  affairs.  lie
was  one  of  the  founders,  and  a  member  of  the
board  of  managers,  of  the  Pennsylvania  hospital,
was  early  interested  in  the  negroes,  and  became
one  of  the  organizers  of  the  Pennsylvania  abolition
society,  of  which,  on  Benjamin  Franklin's  death  in
"1790.  he  was  chosen  president.  During  the  Indian
wars  he  united  with  his  brothers  to  restore  peace.
Many  of  the  Indian  chiefs  that  came  to  Philadel
phia  enjoyed  his  hospitality.  An  important  object
with  him  during  his  life  was  the  distribution  of
religious  and  instructive  books,  for  which  he  gave
liberally.  In  1756,  while  holding  a  place  in  the
assembly,  he  resigned  his  seat  because  the  service,
involving  the  consideration  of  military  measures,
was  incompatible  with  his  principles.  In  the  fol
lowing  year  he  published  "An  Apology  for  the
People  called  Quakers,  containing  some  Reasons
for  their  not  complying  with  Human  Injunctions
and  Institutions  in  Matters  relative  to  the  Wor
ship  of  God."  He  was  among  those  that,  in  1777,
were  exiled  to  Virginia.  His  country-seat,  on
Schuylkill  river,  was  occupied  by  some  of  Lord
Howe's  officers  when  the  British  held  Philadel
phia.  It  passed  into  the  possession  of  the  National
government,  and  is  now  the  site  of  the  U.  S.  naval
asylum. —  Another  son,  John,  Quaker  preacher,
b.'in  Philadelphia,  27  Nov.,  1727;  d.  in  Pyrmont,
Westphalia,  Germany,  31  Jan.,  1795,  received  a
good  education,  and  engaged  in  business  as  a  mer
chant-.  In  1750  he  made  a  voyage  to  Europe  for
his  health  and  the  prosecution  of  some  business
matters.  Shortly  after  his  arrival  in  London,
Pemberton  accompanied  his  friend,  John  Church
man,  on  a  religious  tour.  He  subsequently  trav
elled  with  Churchman,  preaching  the  doctrines  of
the  Friends,  through  England,  Ireland,  Scotland,
and  Holland,  and  after  three  years  returned  to
this  country.  He  took  a  deep  interest  in  the  In
dians,  and  was  active  in  his  efforts  to  maintain
peaceful  relations  between  them  and  the  whites.
In  1777  he  was  among  those  Quakers  who  were
arrested  in  Philadelphia  and  sent  in  exile  to  Vir
ginia.  His  journal,  containing  an  account  of  the,
same,  is  printed  in  "Friends'  Miscellany"  (vol.
viii.).  In  1782  he  made  another  religious  visit  to
Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  which  continued  until
1789,  his  meetings  being  frequently  held  in  barns
and  in  the  open  air,  because  other  places  could  not
be  had.  "An  Account  of  the  Last  Journey  of  John
Pemberton  to  the  Highlands  and  other  Places  in
Scotland  in  the  Year  1787,"  written  by  his  com
panion,  Thomas  Wilkinson,  is  printed  hi  "  Friends'


PEMBERTOX


PENA Y PENA


707


Miscellany."  Pemhertnn  returned  to  Philadelphia
in  1789,  and  in  1704  again  went  abroad  on  a  mis
sionary  tour  into  Holland  and  Germany,  in  which
countries  he  labored  until  his  death.  On  quitting
Amsterdam,  he  issued  an  address  to  the  inhabitants
of  that  city,  entitled  "Tender  Caution  and  Advice
to  the  Inhabitants  of  Amsterdam.''  See  his  jour
nal  of  travels  in  Holland  and  Germany  in  "Friends'
Miscellany"  (vol.  viii.).  He  left  a"  large  estate,
much  of  which  he  gave  by  his  will  to  the  several
charitable,  benevolent,  and  religious  organizations
with  which  he  had  been  associated,  and  for  the
purpose  of  aiding  in  the  formation  of  like  organi
zations. — The  first  Israel's  great-great-grandson,
John  Clifford,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
10  Aug..  1814;  d.  in  Penllyn.  Pa..  13  July,  1881,
was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  military  academy  on  his

own  application
by  President  Jack
son,  who  had  been
a  friend  of  his
father.  After  his
graduation  in  1837
he  was  assigned  to
the  4th  artillery,
and  served  against
the  Indians  in
Florida  in  1837-'9.
and  on  the  north
ern  frontier  during
the  Canada  bor
der  disturbances
in  1840-'2.  He
was  promoted  1st
lieutenant  on  19
March.  1842,  and
was  on  garrison  duty  till  the  Mexican  war,  dur
ing  which  he  served  with  credit  as  aide  to  Gen.
Worth,  receiving  the  brevet  of  captain  for  gal
lantry  at  Monterey,  and  that  of  major  for  services
at  Molino  del  Rev.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he
was  presented  with  a  sword  by  citizens  of  Phila
delphia,  and  thanked,  with  other  Pennsylvania
officers,  by  resolution  of  the  legislature  of  that
state.  In  1848  he  married  Martha,  daughter  of
William  H.  Thompson,  of  Norfolk,  Va.  He  was
promoted  captain  on  16  Sept.,  1850,  took  part  in
operations  against  the  Seminole  Indians  in  1849-'50
and  185G-'7,  and  served  at  Fort  Leavenworth  dur
ing  the  Kansas  troubles,  and  in  the  Utah  expedi
tion  of  1858.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
he  was  ordered  from  Fort  Ridgely,  Minn.,  to
Washington,  and  after  his  arrival  there,  in  spite  of
the  personal  efforts  of  Gen.  Winfield  Scott  to  pre
vent  him.  resigned  his  commission  and  was  ap
pointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  Virginia  state  troops,
to  date  from  28  April,  1861.  He  was  intrusted
with  the  organization  of  the  artillery  and  cavalry
of  the  state,  and  became  colonel  on  8  May,  1861.
On  15  June  he  was  made  major  of  artillery  in  the
Confederate  army,  and  two  days  later  a  brigadier-
general.  On  13  Feb..  1862,  he  was  promoted  major-
general,  and  at  the  request  of  Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee,
whom  he  succeeded,  was  appointed  to  command
the  department  that  included  South  Carolina,
Georgia,  and  Florida,  with  headquarters  at  Charles
ton.  Here  he  strengthened  the  harbor  defences,
planning  and  beginning  Fort  Wagner  and  Battery
B,  and  planting  submarine  obstructions.  On  13
Oct..  1862,  he  was  promoted  lieutenant-general,
and  assigned  to  the  charge  of  the  department  that
comprised  Mississippi,  Tennessee,  and  eastern  Lou
isiana,  with  headquarters  at  Jackson,  Miss.  Pern-
berton's  operations  around  Vicksburg  and  his  de
fence  of  that  citv  against  Gen.  Grant  are  described


'  in  the  article  GRANT.  ULYSSES  S. After  his  sur
render  of  the  city  and  garrison  on  4  July,  1863.  he
;  returned  on  parole  to  Richmond,  where  he  remained
i  until  he  was  duly  exchanged. As  a  man  of  north-
I  ern  birth  he  had  many  enemies  at  the  south  dur-
i  ing  the  early  period  of  the  war,  but  he  had  always
j  the confidence of the Confederate authorities.
I  After  his  exchange,  finding  no  command  that  was
commensurate  with  his  rank,  he  resigned,  and  was
reappointed  as  inspector  of  ordnance,  with  the  rank
of  colonel,  in  which  capacity  he  served  until  the
close  of  the  war. He  then  retired  to  a  farm  near
Warrenton,  Va.,  but  in  1876  returned  to  Philadel
phia,  which  was  the  home  of  his  brothers  and  sis
ters. In  the  spring  of  1881  his  health  began  to
fail,  and  he  removed,  in  the  hope  of  benefiting  it.
to  Penllyn.  near  Philadelphia,  where  he  died.

PEMBERTON,  Thomas,  historian,  b.  in  Bos
ton  in  1728;  d.  there,  5  July.  1807.  He  was  a  suc
cessful  merchant  of  his  native  city,  but  devoted
muoh  of  his  time  to  historical  research.  He  was
an  active  member  of  the  Massachusetts  historical
society,  contributed  largely  to  its  collections,  and
bequeathed  all  his  manuscripts  to  it.  He  wrote  a
Massachusetts  chronology  of  the  18th  century,
containing  in  five  manuscript  volumes  the  remark
able  events  of  each  year,  biographical  notices  of
eminent  men,  and  other  items  of  interest.  This
work  was  used  by  Dr.  Abiel  Holmes  in  compiling
his  "Annals  of  America"  (Boston,  1805).  Mr.
Pemberton's  manuscript  memoranda  were  also  ex
tensive.  His  historical  journal  of  the  American
Revolution  is  printed  in  the  collections  of  the
Massachusetts  historical  society.

PEXAFIEL,  Alfonso  (pam-yah-fe-el'),  clergy-
!  man,  b.  in  Riobamba.  Peru,  in  the  latter  part  of  the
j  16th  century.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Society  of
!  Jesus,  taught  philosophy  and  theology  at  Lima  and
:  Cuzco,  and  was  distinguished  for  his  eloquence  and
I  learning.  He  wrote  "  Cursum  Artium "  (Lyons,
I  1654);  "  Theologiam  "  (1666);  "  De  Metaphysics"
i  (1670);  and  "  Obligaciones  y  excelencias  de  las  tres
Ordenes  Militares  de  Santiago,  Calatrava  y  Alcan-
;  tara"  (Madrid.  1643).

PEXA Y PEXA. Manuel  de  la  (pain -yah),
'  president  of  Mexico,  b.  in  Tacuba.  10  March,  1789;
:  d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  2  Jan.,  1850. He  studied
in  the  seminary,  was  graduated in  law,  16  Dec.,
1811,  and  on  26  Dec..  1813.  appointed  attorney-
general  of  the  corporation  of  Mexico. In  1820  lie
1  was  elected  a  member  of  the  audiencia  of  Quito,
;  but,  on  account  of  political  events,  could  not  take
charge  of that office,  and filled provisionally  a
vacancy  in  the  audiencia  of  Mexico. In April,
1822,  he  was  given  an  appointment  in  the  treasury,
and  on  21  Oct.,  Iturbide,  who  had  proclaimed  him
self  emperor,  appointed  him  minister  to  Colombia,
i  but  he  did  not  leave  Mexico,  on  account  of  the  fall
i  of  the  empire. Two  years  afterward  he  was  elected
,  to  the  supreme  court  of  justice.  In  1837  he  formed
j  part  of  Bustamante's  cabinet  as  minister  of  the
•  interior,  and the following  year  he  was elected
j  member  of  the  supreme  conservative  power. This
was  a  third  power  instituted  in  1837,  besides  the
legislative  and  executive  powers,  a  sort  of  senate.
:  It  was  abolished  in  1838. He  taught  public  law
in  the  university  and  was  president  of  the  Acad
emy  of  jurisprudence  and  rector  of  the  College  of
lawyers. In  1841  he  was  a  commissioner  for  the
,  formation  of  the  civil  code. In  1843  he  was  ap
pointed  councillor  of  state  and  senator,  but  soon
;  entered the  cabinet again  as  secretary  of  state.
On  26 Sept..  1847.  as  president  of  the  supreme
court,  he  took  charge  of  the  executive  of  the  na-
:  tion  in  Queretaro,  and  held  it  till  12  Nov.,  when


708


FENDER


PENDLETON


congress  elected  Gen.  Anaya  provisional  president,
but,  as  it  failed  to  agree  on  the  election  of  a  consti
tutional  president,  Pena  took  charge  again  on  8
Jan.,  1848.  During  his  government  the  American
invasion  took  place,  which  was  ended  by  the  treaty
of  Guadalupe  Hidalgo.  On  3  June  he  delivered
the  •  government  to  the  constitutional  president,
Gen.  Tlerrera  (q.  v.),  and  returned  to  the  presidency
of  the  supreme  court,  which  he  held  till  his  death.
He  published  "  Lecciones  de  practica  forense  Mexi-
cana  "  (Mexico,  1843).

FENDER,  William  Dorsey,  soldier,  b.  in  Edge-
combe  county,  N.  C.,  6  Feb.,  1834;  d.  in  Staunton,
Va.,  18  July.  1863.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1854,  and  assigned  to  the  ar
tillery,  but  was  'transferred  to  the  2d  dragoons  on
3  March,  1853,  and  promoted  1st  lieutenant,  17
May,  1858.  He  was  engaged  in  active  service  on
the  frontier  until  21  March,  1801,  when  he  resigned
his  commission.  He  was  appointed  colonel  of  the
Oth  North  Carolina  regiment  on  27  May,  1861,  and
brigadier-general  in  the  provisional  Confederate
army,  3  June,  1862.  He  was  promoted  to  the  rank
of  major-general,  27  May,  1803.  His  brigade  was
composed  of  five  North  Carolina  regiments  of  in
fantry,  and  formed  part  of  Anderson's  division,  of
Ambrose  P.  Hill's  corps,  in  the  Army  of  northern
Virginia.  His  division  was  composed  of  the  bri
gades  of  Fender,  McGowan,  Lane,  and  Thomas,  in
the  same  army.  He  died  from  wounds  received  at
the  battle  of  Gettysburg.

PENDERGRAST,  Uarrett  Jesse,  naval  offi
cer,  b.  in  Kentucky,  5  Dec.,  1802;  d.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  7  Nov.,  1862.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  navy,
1  Jan.,  1812,  and  saw  twenty-two  years  of  sea  ser
vice,  becoming  lieutenant  in  1821,  commander  in
1841,  and  captain  in  1855.  In  1860  he  was  ap
pointed  flag-officer  of  the  home-squadron.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  in  command  of
the  West  India  squadron,  and  subsequently  he  was
appointed  to  the  frigate  "  Cumberland ''  at  Norfolk
navy-yard,  Va.,  and  protected  the  waters  of  Hamp
ton  Roads.  Before  the  surrender  of  Norfolk  to  the
Confederates  the  authorities  of  Virginia  endeavored
to  get  possession  of  the  U.  S.  ships-of-war  lying
off  that  city  by  sinking  obstructions  in  the  mouth
of  the  channel  in  order  to  prevent  their  egress.
Among  other  vessels  that  were  thus  blockaded  was
the  "  Cumberland,"  then  under  Com.  Pendergrast's
command.  Finding  himself  in  danger  of  being
hemmed  in,  he  sent  word  to  the  authorities  that  if
the  obstructions  were  not  removed  within  a  speci
fied  time  he  would  open  fire  on  the  city.  This
message  had  the  desired  effect,  and,  the  channel
being  cleared,  the  "  Cumberland  "  and  other  vessels
were  brought  out  in  safety.  Soon  afterward  he
was  appointed  commandant  of  the  Philadelphia
navy-yard,  which  post  he  filled  until  two  days  be
fore  his  death.  Under  the  reorganization  of  the
navy  he  was  twelfth  commodore  on  the  retired  list,
which  rank  he  attained  on  16  July,  1862. — His  son,
Austin  (1829-'74),  entered  the  navy  in  1848,  and
had  attained  the  rank  of  commander  at  his  death.

PENDLETON,  Edmniid,  statesman,  b.  in  Caro
line  county,  Va.,  9  Sept.,  1721 ;  d.  in  Richmond,
Va.,  23  Oct.,  1803.  His  grandfather,  Philip,  who
was  descended  from  Pendleton,  of  Manchester  co.,
Lancashire,  came  from  Norwich.  England,  to  this
country  in  1676.  Edmund  had  few  early  educa
tional  advantages,  and  began  his  .career  in  the
clerk's  office  of  Caroline  county,  Va.  He  was
licensed  to  practise  law  in  1744,  became  a  county
justice  in  1751,  and  in  the  following  year  was
elected  to  the  house  of  burgesses.  He  took  an
active  part  in  the  debates  of  that  body,  and  in


1764  was  one  of  the  committee  to  memorialize  the
king.  During  the  session  of  1766  he  gave  the
opinion  "  that  the  stamp-act  was  void,  for  want  of
constitutional  authority  in  parliament  to  pass  it,"
and  voted  in  the  affirmative  on  the  resolution  that
the  "act  did  not  bind  the  inhabitants  of  Vir
ginia."  He  was  one  of  the  committee  of  corre
spondence  in  1773,
county  lieutenant
of  Caroline  in  1774,
a  member  of  the
colonial  conven
tion  of  the  latter
year  that  was  con
sequent  on  the
Boston  port  bill,
and  was  chosen  by
that  body  to  the
first  Continental
congress.  Accord
ingly,  in  company
with  George  Wash
ington.  Peyton  s~\
Randolph,  Patrick  Co  ),
Henry,  Benjamin  I  ^t^n.
Harrison.  and

Richard  Henry  Lee.  he  attended  in  Philadelphia  in
1774.  As  president  of  the  Virginia  convention  he
was  at  the  head  of  the  government  of  the  colony
from  1775  till  the  creation  of  the  Virginia  constitu
tion  in  1776,  and  was  appointed  president  of  the
committee  of  safety  in  that  year.  In  May,  1776,  he
presided  again  over  the  convention,  and  drew  up  the
celebrated  resolutions  by  which  the  delegates  from
Virginia  were  instructed  to  propose  a  declaration
of  independence  in  congress,  using  the  words  that
were  afterward  incorporated  almost  verbatim  in
the  declaration,  "  that  the  delegation  be  instructed
to  propose  to  declare  the  United  Colonies  free  and
independent  states,  absolved  from  all  allegiance  or
dependence  upon  the  crown  or  parliament  of  Great
Britain."  As  the  leader  of  the  cavaliers  or  planter
class,  he  was  the  opponent  of  Patrick  Henry,  and
as  the  head  of  the  committee  of  safety  he  was
active  in  the  control  of  the  military  and  naval
operations  and  of  the  foreign  correspondence  of
Virginia.  On  the  organization  of  the  state  govern
ment  he  was  chosen  speaker  of  the  house,  and
appointed,  with  Chancellor  George  Wythe  and
Thomas  Jefferson,  to  revise  the  colonial  laws.  In
March,  1777,  he  was  crippled  for  life  by  a  fall  from
his  horse,  but  in  the  same  year  he  was  re-elected
speaker  of  the  house  of  burgesses,  and  on  the  or
ganization  of  the  chancery  court  he  was  unani
mously  chosen  its  president.  In  1779,  on  the  es
tablishment  of  the  court  of  appeals,  he  became
president  of  that  body,  holding  office  until  his  death.
He  presided  over  the  State  convention  that  ratified
the  constitution  of  the  United  States  in  1788.  His
masterly  advocacy  of  the  document  gained  him
the  encomium  from  Jefferson  that  "taken  all  in
all,  he  was  the  ablest  man  in  debate  that  I  ever
met  with."  "  There  is  no  quarrel,"  said  Pendleton,
'•  between  government  and  liberty ;  the  former  is
the  shield  and  protector  of  the  latter.  Who  but
the  people  can  delegate  powers,  or  have  a  right  to
form  government?  The  question  must  be  between
this  government  and  the  confederation  :  the  latter
is  no  government  at  all.  Government,  to  be  effect
ual,  must  have  complete  powers,  a  legislature,  a
judiciary,  and  executive.  No  gentleman  in  this
committee  would  agree  to  vest  these  three  powers
in  one  body.  The  proposed  government  is  not  a
consolidated  government.  It  is,  on  the  whole  com
plexion  of  it,  a  government  of  laws,  and  not  of


PEXDLETOX


PEXDLETOX


709


men.'' He  was  appointed  judge  of  the  U.  S.  dis-  I
trict  court  of  Virginia in 1789.  but  declined  to  j
serve,  and  did  not  hold  office  again. In  1798.  when  :
a  rupture  with  France  was  imminent,  he  published  ;
a  pamphlet  in  which  he  protested  against  "  war  '
with  a  sister  republic." Pendleton  county,  Va.,  is  ]
named  in  his  honor. Washington  Irving  said  of  j
him  :  "  Pie  was  schooled  in  public  life,  a  veteran  in  ;
council,  with  native  force  of  intellect,  and  habits  ',
of  deep  reflection." — His  nephew.  Henry,  jurist,  I
b.  in  Culpeper  county.  Va.,  in  1750:  d.  in  Green-  !
ville  district,  S.  C.. 10  Jan.,  1789.  was  educated  !
in  Virginia. With  his  brother  Xathaniel  he  joined  j
the  Culpeper  minute  men.  the  first  patriot  regi
ment  that  was  organized  in the  south. At  the
close  of  the  war  he  settled  in  South  Carolina,  and
was  elected  a  judge  of  the  law  court. He  origi
nated the county-court act of South Carolina,
which  was  passed  on  17  March,  1785. He  was  one
of  the  three  judges  that  were  appointed  to  revise
the  laws  of  the  state  in  the  same  year,  and  a  mem
ber  of  the  Constitutional  convention  in  1788. Pen
dleton  county,  S.  C.,  is  named  in  his  honor. — Ed
mund's  nephew,  Nathaniel,  jurist,  b.  in  Culpeper
county.  Va..  in  1756 :  d.  in  Xew  York  city,  20  Oct.,
1821.  entered  the  Revolutionary  army  at  nineteen
years  of  age.  served  with  the  rank  of major  on
the  staff  of  Gen.  Xathanael  Greene,  and  received
the  thanks  of  congress  for  his  gallantry  at  Eutaw.
He  afterward  settled  in  Georgia,  studied  law,  and
became U.  S. district judge. Washington  sug
gested  his  name  for  the  office  of  secretary  of  state,
but the proposition was  opposed by  Alexander
Hamilton,  who  said of him : "  Judge  Pendleton
writes  well,  is  of  respectable  abilities,  and  a  gen
tleman-like,  smooth  man,  but  I  fear  he  has  been
somewhat  tainted  with  the  prejudices  of  Mr.  Jef
ferson  and  Mr.  Madison." Later  they  became  per
sonal  friends,  and  Mr.  Pendleton  acted  as  Hamil
ton's  second in  his  duel  with  Aaron Burr. Mr.
Pendleton  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention  that
framed the  constitution  of the  United  States  in
1787,  but,  not  being  present  on  the  last  day  of  its
proceedings,  failed  to  sign. He  removed  to  Xew
York  city  in  1796,  married  Susan,  daughter  of  Dr.
John  Bard,  of  Xew  York,  attained  to  eminence  at
the  bar,  and  became  a  judge  of  Dutchess  county.
— His  son,  Nathaniel Greene,  congressman,  b.
in  Savannah,  Ga.,  in  August,  1793;  d.  in  Cincin
nati,  Ohio,  16  June,  1861,  removed  with  his  father

to  Xew  York  city
in  1776.  was  gradu
ated  at  Columbia
in  1813,  and  the
same  year  joined
the  army  as  aide  to
his  kinsman,  Gen.
Edmund  Pendle
ton  Gaines,  serving
till  the  close  of  the
war.  He  removed
to  Ohio  in  1818,
settled  in  the  prac
tice  of  law,  was  a
member  of  the  state
senate  in  1825-'6,
and  in  1840  was
elected  to  congress
as  a  Whig,  serving
from  1841  till  his
voluntary  retire
ment  in  1843.  He  then  resumed  his  profession.
in  which  he  continued  until  his  death. — Xathaniel
Greene's  son.  Georsre  Hunt,  senator,  b.  in  Cincin
nati,  Ohio,  25  Julv,  1825,  received  an  academic


education,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  Cincinnati.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state
senate  in  1854—'5.  and  was  elected  to  congress  as
a  Democrat  in  1856,  serving  till  1865.  He  was  a
member  of  the  committee  on  military  affairs  dur
ing  each  term,  and  in  the  38th  congress  served  on
the  committee  of  ways  and  means,  and  as  chair
man  of  the  special  committee  on  admitting  mem
bers  of  the  cabinet  to  the  floor  of  the  house  of
representatives.  He  was  nominated  for  the  vice-
presidency  on  the  ticket  with  George  B.  McC'lellan
for  president  in  1864.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Philadelphia  loyalist  convention  in  1866,  an  un
successful  candidate  for  governor  of  Ohio  in  1869,
and  in  the  same  year  became  president  of  the  Ken
tucky  railroad  company.  He  was  elected  U.  S.
senator  in  1878,  and  during  his  senatorial  service
he  was  chairman  of  the  committee  on  civil-service
reform,  and  as  such,  on  26  June,  1882,  introduced
a  resolution  that  instructed  the  committee  "  to  in
quire  whether  any  attempt  is  being  made  to  levy
and  collect  assessments  for  political  partisan  pur
poses  from  any  employes  of  the  government."  In
1846  he  married  Alice,  daughter  of  Francis  Scott
Key.  At  the  expiration  of  his  term,  in  1885.  he  was
appointed  by  President  Cleveland  U.  S.  minister
to  Germany. — Edmund's  great  nephew.  William
Nelson,  soldier,  b.  in  Richmond,  Va..  26  Dec.,  1809  ;
d.  in  Lexington,  Va.,  15  Jan..  1883,  was  gradu
ated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1830.  served
as  assistant  professor  of  mathematics  there  in
1831-'2,  and  the  next  year  resigned  to  become  pro
fessor  of  mathematics  in  Bristol  college,  Tenn.
He  was  ordained  deacon  in  the  Protestant  Episco
pal  church  in  1837,  priest  in  1838,  and  the  next
year  established  the  Episcopal  high-school  in  Alex
andria,  Va..  and  became  its  principal.  In  1853  he
accepted  the  charge  of  the  church  in  Lexington.
He  joined  the  Confederate  army  as  captain  of  ar
tillery  in  1861.  was  made  colonel  the  same  year,
and  shortly  afterward  appointed  chief  of  artillery
to  the  Army  of  the  Shenandoah.  He  was  com
missioned  brigadier-general  in  March,  1862,  and,
with  three  exceptions,  participated  in  every  battle
that  was  fought  by  the  Army  of  Xorthern  Virginia
from  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run  to  Appomattox,
where,  with  Gen.  John  B.  Gordon  and  Gen.  James
Longstreet,  he  was  appointed  to  negotiate  the
terms  of  surrender.  He  then  returned  to  his  charge
in  Lexington,  which  he  had  continued  to  hold
during  the  civil  war,  and  so  remained  until  his
death.  He  was  largely  instrumental  in  building  the
Lee  memorial  church  in  that  town.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Alexandria  theological
seminary  in  1868.  Dr.  Pendleton  published  ''  Sci
ence  a  "Witness  for  the  Bible "  (London,  1860).
His  only  son,  Alexander  S.,  served  on  Gen.  "  Stone
wall"  Jackson's  staff  until  his  death,  and  subse
quently  as  adjutant-general  to  Gen.  Jubal  A.  Early
and  Gen.  Richard  S.  Ewell.  He  was  killed  at
Fisher's  Hill.  Va..  22  Sept..  1864.

PENDLETON,  Edmund  Monroe,  chemist,  b.
in  Eatonton,  Ga..  19  March,  1815;  d.  in  Atlanta,
Ga.,  26  Jan..  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Medi
cal  college  of  the  state  of  South  Carolina  in  1837,
and  then  practised  his  profession  in  Warrenton
and  Sparta.  Ga.,  for  many  years.  On  the  organi
zation  of  Oglethorpe  medical  college.  Savannah,  he
was  elected  professor  of  surgery,  but  declined  the
appointment  on  account  of  his  health.  He  then
turned  his  attention  to  agriculture,  was  the  origi
nator  of  the  Pendleton  formulas  for  fertilizers,
which  have  long  been  successfully  used,  and  was
the  first  to  employ  animal  matter  and  cotton-seed
meal  in  the  manufacture  of  fertilizers.  Dr.  Pendle-


710


PEXDLETON


PENINGTON


ton  was  the  first  to  develop  the  fact  that  phos
phoric  acid  and  nitrogen  are  the  two  plant-constitu
ents  that  are  first  exhausted  from  soils  by  cereals
and  cotton-culture.  In  1872-7  he  held  the  chair
of  agriculture  and  horticulture  in  the  University  of
Georgia.  In  the  latter  year  failing  health  forced
him  to  retire,  and  he  moved  to  Atlanta.  Ga.,
where  with  his  son,  William  M.  Pendleton,  he
founded  the  Pendleton  guano  company,  of  which
he  was  elected  chemical  director,  a  place  that  he
held  until  his  death.  He  contributed  to  various
periodicals  in  both  prose  and  verse,  and  his  "  Sci
entific  Agriculture  *  (New  York,  1874)  was  exten
sively  used  as  a  text-book  in  colleges  and  other
institutions  of  learning.

PEN7DLETON,  James  Madison,  clergyman,  b.
in  Spottsylvania  county,  Va.,  20  Nov.,  1811.  He
received  his  classical  education  at  Christian  county
seminary,  Hopkinsville,  Ky.  On  his  ordination  to
the  ministry  lie  became,  in  1837,  pastor  of  the  Bap
tist  church  at  Bowling  Green,  where  he  continued
for  twenty  years.  In  1857  he  was  elected  professor
of  theology  in  Union  university.  Murfreesborough,
Tenn.  Previous  to  the  civil  war  he  had  been  known
as  an  opponent  of  slavery,  and  in  1802  he  removed
to  the  north.  After  a  short  residence  in  Ohio,  he
was  called  in  18(35  to  the  pastorate  of  the  Baptist
church  in  Upland,  Pa.,  where  he  remained  till  188:1
Denison  university,  Ohio,  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  18(55.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Three  Reasons
why  I  am  a  Baptist''  (Cincinnati,  1853),  which  has
gone  through  many  editions  and  has  been  trans
lated  into  Welsh;  "Sermons"  (Nashville,  Tenn.,
1859);  "Church  Manual"  (Philadelphia,  18(58) ;
"Christian  Doctrines"  (1878);  "Distinctive  Prin
ciples  of  Baptists"  (1881);  "Brief  Notes  on  the
New  Testament,"  with  Rev.  George  W.  Clark,  D.  D.
(1884);  and  "Atonement  of  Christ"  (1885).

PENHALLOAV,  Samuel,  historian,  b.  in  St.
Mabon,  Cornwall,  England,  2  July,  1005;  d.  in
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  2  Dec.,  1726.  His  ancestors
had  possessed  a  landed  estate  in  Cornwall.  In
1083  he  was  placed  in  the  academy  of  Rev.  Charles
Morton  (q.  r.)  at  Newington  Green.  When  the  ec
clesiastical  authorities  prohibited  Mr.  Morton  from
teaching  the  doctrines  of  the  dissenters,  the  latter
decided  to  remove  to  New  England,  and,  with  the
consent  of  his  parents,  young  Penhallow  accom
panied  his  instructor,  arriving  in  July,  1086.  Be
fore  leaving  England,  Penhallow  received  offers
from  the  Society  for  propagating  the  gospel  among
the  Indians  to  make  himself  acquainted  with  the
Indian  language  for  three  years,  for  which  they
in  turn  would  pay  him  twenty  pounds  sterling  per
year.  After  that  they  would  pay  him  sixty  pounds
a  year  during  life  if  he  would  preach  to  them
'•at  times."  Political  troubles  discouraged  Pen
hallow  from  entering  the  ministry,  and  he  removed
to  Portsmouth,  where  he  married  Mary,  daughter
of  President  John  Cutt.  Mr.  Penhallow  engaged
in  trade,  and  early  accumulated  a  large  estate.  His
influence  in  the  town  was  great,  and  he  took  an
active  part  in  the  management  of  its  affairs.  He
was  appointed  successively  magistrate,  member  of
the  council,  recorder  of  deeds,  justice  of  the  su
perior  court  of  judicature,  and  finally,  in  1717,  its
chief  justice,  which  office  he  held  until  his  death.
His  "Narrative  of  the  Indian  Wars  of  New  Eng
land  from  1703  to  1726"  was  published  in  1725-'0,
and  has  been  reprinted  by  the  New  Hampshire  his
torical  society  in  their  first  volume  of  collections.

PENICK,  Charles  Clifton,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Charlotte  county,  Va.,  9  Dec.,  1843.  In  1860  he
was  at  a  military  school  in  Danville,  Va..  and  soon
afterward  he  went  to  Hampden  Sidney  college.  At


the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  joined  the  Con
federate  army  and  served  in  a  Virginia  regiment  as
quartermaster  until  Lee's  surrender  in  April,  1805.
He  then  entered  the  Theological  seminary  of  Vir
ginia  at  Alexandria,  and  was  graduated  in  180!).
He  was  ordained  deacon  in  the  chapel  of  the  semi
nary,  26  June,  1869,  by  Bishop  Johns,  and  priest
in  the  same  place,  24"  June,  1870,  by  the  same
bishop.  While  in  deacon's  orders  he  served  in
Bristol,  Va.,  and  on  being  made  priest  became
rector  of  St.  George's  church,  Mount  Savage,  Md.,
in  1870.  Three  years  later  he  accepted  the  rector
ship  of  the  Church  of  the  Messiah,  Baltimore,  which
post  he  held  until  1877.  Having  been  appointed
missionary  bishop  of  Cape  Palmas  and  parts  adja
cent  in  western  Africa,  he  was  consecrated  in  St.
Paul's  church,  Alexandria,  Va.,  13  Feb.,  1877.  He
received  the  degree  of  I).  D.  from  Kenyon  college,
Ohio,  in  1877.  After  six  years'  arduous  service  in
Africa  he  sent  in  his  resignation,  winch  was  ac
cepted  by  the  house  of  bishops  in  1883.  Bishop
Penick  soon  afterward  accepted  the  rectorship  of
St.  Andrew's  church,  Louisville,  Ky.,  which  post
he  still  holds  (1888).  He  has  published  a  volume
entitled  "vMore  than  a  Prophet"  (New  York,  1880).

PENIERES,  Jean  Ausrustin  de.  French  states
man,  b.  in  Tulle  in  1702;  d.  in  Mobile,  Ala.,  in  Oc
tober,  1820.  He  .served  for  several  years  as  an  offi
cer  in  the  body-guards  of  Louis  XVI.,  but,  having
been  elected  to  the  legislative  assembly,  and  after
ward  to  the  convention,  by  the  city  of  Tulle,  he
became  a  formidable  opponent  to  the  king.  He
always  took  his  seat  among  the  Jacobins,  and  in
January,  1793,  voted,  after  a  passionate  speech,  for
the  death  of  Louis  XVI.  without  delay  or  appeal
to  the  people.  In  the  following  February  he  made
a  motion  for  the  expulsion  of  Marat  from  the  con
vention,  which  was  lost  by  an  overwhelming  ma
jority,  but  Penieres  was  saved  from  the  resentment
of  the  revolutionist  by  his  friends,  who  pleaded  his
insanity.  He  continued  to  denounce  the  terrorists,
and  contributed  to  the  success  of  the  reaction  of
27  and  28  July.  1794.  He  was  elected  to  the  coun
cil  of  five  hundred  in  1790,  was  a  member  of  the
Tribunat  from  1799  till  1802,  and  a  deputy  to  the
Corps  Legislatif  in  1807-'!!,  and  during  the  hun
dred  days.  After  the  second  restoration  of  Louis
XVIII.,  in  1815,  he  came  to  the  United  States,  and
founded  in  Mobile,  Ala,,  an  academy  for  young
men  and  a  college  for  ladies,  which  became  fash
ionable.  He  also  afforded  help  to  Baron  Lalle-
mand  (q.  r.)  and  other  French  exiles  in  the  foun
dation  of  the  Champ  d'asile  in  Texas,  and  became
interested  in  the  operations  of  the  corsair  Lafitte
(q.  r.),  to  whom  he  furnished  the  means  to  carry  on
his  operations  after  his  expulsion  from  Grande
Terre  in  1817.  In  the  following  year  he  obtained  a
grant  of  land  in  Indian  territory,  and  established
there  a  colony  of  French  exiles,  which  prospered
at  the  outset,  but  declined  after  his  death,  and  was
finally  abandoned.  He  also  acquired  vast  tracts  of
land  in  Missouri.  He  married  for  his  second  wife
a  lady  of  New  Orleans,  and  their  descendants  con
tested  in  the  state  courts  for  many  years  for  land
that  is  included  to-day  in  the  limits  of  the  city  of
St.  Louis.  His  notes  and  manuscripts  found  their
way  into  the  Paris  library,  and  Henri  Gamier  found
among  them  the  materials  for  a  "  Histoire  de  etab-
lissements  fondes  dans  I'Amerique  du  Nord,  en
Louisiane  et  au  Texas,  par  les  exiles  de  la  grande
armee  "  (2  vols..  Paris,  1832).

PENINUTON,  Edward,  author,  b.  in  Amer-
sham,  Bucks  co.,  England,  3  Sept.,  1007;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa,,  11  Nov.,  1711.  He  was  the  son
of  Isaac  Penington  (1617-'79),  who  was  distin-


PEXIXGTOX


PEXX


711


guished  as  a  Quaker  minister  and  an  author,  and
a  grandson  of  Sir  Isaac  Penington,  who  was  lord
mayor  of  London  in  1643,  member  of  parliament,
lieutenant  of  the  tower,  and  one  of  the  commis
sioners  of  the  high  court  of  justice  for  the  trial  of
Charles  I.  Edward  received  a  liberal  education,
and  in  1698  accompanied  William  Penn,  his  half-
brother  by  marriage,  to  Pennsylvania,  where  he
became  in  1700  surveyor-general  of  the  province.
He  published  "  The  Discoverer  Discovered  "  (1695) ;
"Rabshakeh  Rebuked"  (16*95);  and  "Some  Brief
Observations  upon  George  Keith's  Earnest  Ex
postulation  "  (1696). — His  grandson.  Edward,  mer
chant,  b.  in  Philadelphia.  4  Dec.,  1726;  d.  there,
30  Sept.,  1796,  was  the  son  of  Isaac  Penington.  who
was  for  several  years  sheriff  of  Bucks  county,  Pa.
The  son  was  educated  in  the  best  Quaker  schools,
and  afterward  was  a  merchant  in  Philadelphia.
In  1748  he  became  a  member  of  the  "Colony  on
the  Schuylkill,"  in  1761,  and  for  some  years  there
after,  he  was  one  of  the  judges  of  the  court  of
common  pleas,  and  in  1762,  under  an  act  of  the
assembly,  he  became  one  of  the  trustees  in  whom
was  vested  the  State-House  (now  Independence
Hall)  and  other  public  buildings,  "  for  the  use  of
the  freemen  of  the  province  and  their  representa
tives."  In  1768  he  was  elected  to  membership  in
the  American  philosophical  society,  and,  through
the  action  of  the  institution  in  1770",  a  "  Society  for
the  cultivation  of  silk"  was  formed,  of  which  he
became  treasurer.  When  Paul  Revere  brought  to
Philadelphia  the  news  of  the  passage  by  parliament
of  the  Boston  port  bill  Penington  was  among
those  who,  in  May,  1774.  assembled  at  the  "  Coffee-
House  "  and  formed  a  committee  of  correspondence,
and  in  the  month  of  July  of  that  year  he  was  a
member  of  the  Provincial  convention.  Notwith
standing  these  sentiments,  when  the  war  for  inde
pendence  began  his  Quaker  principles  led  him  to
join  the  "  non-resistants."  and  he  came  to  be
classed  among  the  disaffected,  and,  on  the  approach
of  the  British  in  1777,  he  was  arrested  and  sent  to
Virginia.  He  was  a  manager  of  Pennsylvania  hos
pital  in  1773-'9.  In  1790  he  was  elected  a  city
councilman,  and  the  year  before  his  death  he  was
appointed  by  the  legislature  one  of  the  commis
sioners  to  distribute  money  among  the  French
refugees.  As  the  attorney  for  Ann  Penn.  in  1767,
he  offered  Pennsbury  Manor  for  sale,  and  pub
lished  a  description  of  the  same,  setting  forth  her
title  to,  and  giving  some  historical  incidents  con
cerning  it.  He  wrote  a  "  Poetical  Proclamation,"
a  satire  on  the  committee  of  inspection  in  Phila
delphia. — The  second  Edward's  son,  John,  physi
cian,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  29  Sept.,  1768;  d.  there,
20  Sept.,  1793,  was  graduated  as  a  physician  in
Philadelphia  in  1790.  afterward  studied  for  two
years  at  London,  Edinburgh,  and  Paris,  and  began
practice  in  Philadelphia  in  1792.  During  the  yel
low-fever  epidemic  of  the  next  year  he  remained
at  his  post  and  soon  fell  a  victim  to  the  disease.
He  was  a  member  of  the  American  philosophical
society,  and  the  author  of  '•  Chemical  and  Eco
nomical  Essays  to  Illustrate  the  Connection  be
tween  Chemistry  and  the  Arts"  (1790)  and  "In
augural  Dissertation  on  the  Phenomena,  Causes,
and  Effects  of  Fermentation  "  (17901 — The  second
Edward's  grandson,  John,  author,  b.  on  his  fa
ther's  estate  of  Mulberry  Hill,  Monmouth  co..  X.  J..
1  Aug..  1799 :  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  18  March.
1867.  entered  Princeton,  and  afterward  studied  law
with  John  Sergeant  at  Philadelphia,  but  never  en
gaged  in  its  practice.  Subsequently  he  became  a
clerk  in  the  Bank  of  the  United  States,  where  he
was  thus  engaged  at  the  time  of  the  failure  of  this


institution.  He  owned  an  extensive  private  library,
with  which,  and  with  other  books,  he  established
in  1841  a  book-store  for  the  sale  of  rare  English,
French,  and  other  foreign  works,  and  he  was  for
many  years  the  most  noted  importer  of  foreign
books  in  Philadelphia.  He  was  a  fine  scholar  and
an  accomplished  linguist,  for  many  years  a  mem
ber,  and  at  one  time  an  officer,  of  the  Historical
society  of  Pennsylvania,  and  from  1839  until  his
death  a  member  of  the  American  philosophical
society.  In  1845  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  In  addition  to  criti
cal  articles,  he  published  "  An  Examination  of
Beauchamp  Plantagenet's  Description  of  the  Prov
ince  of  Xew  Albion  "  (Philadelphia,  1840);  "  Scraps,
Osteologic  and  Archaeological "  (1841) ;  and  he
edited  "  Description  of  Xew  York,  by  Daniel  Dan-
ton,  London,  1670 :  Reprinted  by  the  Historical  So
ciety  of  Pennsylvania"  (Philadelphia.  1845). — His
daughter,  Meta  Roberts,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  4
Dec.,  1837;  d.  in  Xew  York  city  in  December,
1885,  married  Dr.  Horatio  Paine.  She  translated
';  Women  of  the  French  Revolution, "  from  the
French  of  Michelet  (Philadelphia,  1855).— The  sec
ond  John's  brother.  Henry,  lawyer,  b.  in  Phila
delphia.  19  Sept.,  1807;  d.  there",  11  Nov.,  1858;
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Phila
delphia  in  1828.  He  edited  and  published,  with
numerous  additions,  Henry  James  Holthouse's
"  Xew  Law  Dictionary"  (Philadelphia,  1847).

PENN,  John,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of  In
dependence,  b.  in  Caroline  county,  Va.,  17  May,
1741  ;  d.  in  Xorth  Carolina  in  September,  1788.
He  was  the  only  child  of  Moses  Penn,  and  Cather
ine,  his  wife,  who  was  a  daughter  of  John  Tay
lor,  of  the  same  state  and  county.  Owing  to  a
singular  neg
lect  on  the
part  of  his
parents,  who
could  well  af
ford  to  pay  the
expense  of  his
tuition,  at  the
age  of  eigh
teen,  when  his
fat  her  died,  he
had  only  been
instructed  for
a  few  years
at  a  country
school,  and

was  largely  self-educated.  He  studied  law  with  his
relative.  Edmund  Pendleton,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1762.  and  displayed  great  ability  and  eloquence
in  practice.  In  1774  he  removed  to  Greenville
county,  X.  C.,  his  nearest  relatives  having  removed
there  a  short  time  before,  soon  became  distinguished
in  his  profession,  and  on  8  Sept..  1775.  was  chosen
to  the  Continental  congress  to  supply  a  vacancy,
taking  his  seat  on"  12  Oct.  He  signed  the  Declara
tion  of  Independence  in  1776,  and  was  re-elected  in
1777  and  in  1779.  When  Lord  Cornwallis  invaded
Xorth  Carolina.  Mr.  Penn  was  placed  in  charge  of
the  public  affairs  of  that  state,  given  almost  dicta
torial  powers,  and  he  discharged  the  duties  of  his
trust  with  credit.  In  March,  1784,  he  was  ap
pointed  receiver  of  taxes  for  Xorth  Carolina,  which
office  he  resigned  in  the  following  April.  His
reason  for  so  doing  was  principally  owing  to  the
fact  that  the  state,  while  eagerly  maintaining  the
cause  of  independence  by  resolutions  and  declara
tion,  refused  to  furnish  the  means  by  which  it
could  be  secured.  Mr.  Penn  afterward  resumed
his  station  of  a  private  citizen,  and,  being  pos-


712


PENN


PENN


sessed  of  sufficient  property,  was  employed  in  dis
charging  his  private  duties  with  benevolence  during
the  remainder  of  his  life.  His  residence,  which  is
shown  in  the  picture,  was  destroyed  before  1861.

PENN,  William,  founder  of  Pennsylvania,  b.
in  London.  England.  14  Oct.,  1644;  d.  in  Rus-
combe,  Berkshire,  30  July,  1718.  He  was  descended
from  an  ancient  family  that  had  lived  in  Bucking
hamshire  for  many  generations.  A  branch  settled
in  Wiltshire,  near  Mintyre,  and  from  this  was  de
scended  Admiral  William  Penn,  the  father  of  the
founder,  who  was  born  in  Bristol  in  1(521.  He
joined  a  vessel  early  in  life  under  his  father's  com
mand,  and  became  a  captain  before  he  was  twenty
years  of  age.  In  1G43  he  married  Margaret  Jasper,
daughter  of  a  rich  merchant  of  Rotterdam,  and
then  settled  in  London.  After  a  year  of  fashion
able  life  he  returned  to  active  service,  and  was
given  command  of  the  "  Fellowship."  With  unusual
rapidity  he  attained  the  ranks  of  rear-admiral  and
vice-admiral  of  Ireland,  and  in  1052  he  was  vice-
admiral  of  England.  He  served  as  general  in  the
first  Dutch  war,  and  in  1(564  he  was  chosen  great
captain-commander  under  the  Duke  of  York,  after
ward  James  II.,  and  was  knighted.  He  died  at  his
home  in  Wanstead,  Essex,  on  16  Sept.,  1(570.  (See
"  Memorials  of  the  Professional  Life  of  Admiral  Sir
William  Penn."  by  Granville  Penn,  London,  1833.)
His  son,  William,  was  born  in  London  just  prior  to
the  admiral's  departure  for  the  Irish  seas ;  indeed,
he  had  already  started  down  the  Thames  when  the
news  of  his  son's  birth  reached  him,  and  he  hastily
left  his  vessel  and  returned  home.  The  family  re
sided  in  Essex  during  the  father's  absence,  and
from  his  mother  the  boy  acquired  his  strong  relig
ious  faith.  He  was  sent  to  a  free  grammar-school
in  Chigwell,  thence  in  1656  to  a  private  school  on
Tower  street,  London,  and  during  the  residence  of
the  family  in  Ireland  he  studied  under  a  private
tutor.  Three  years  later  he  went  to  Christ  church
college,  Oxford,  where  among  his  companions  were
Robert  Spencer  and  John  Locke.  Pie  soon  ac
quired  reputation  as  a  hard  student,  a  skilful  oars
man,  and  an  adventurous  sportsman.  His  reading
at  this  time  was  solid  and  extensive,  and  his  ac
quisition  of  knowledge  was  assisted  by  an  excep
tional  memory.  He  had  an  excellent  knowledge
of  history  and  theology,  had  read  the  chief  writers
of  Greece  and  Italy  in  their  native  tongues,  and
possessed  a  thorough  knowledge  of  French,  Ger
man,^  Dutch,  and  Italian.  After  the  restoration  of
the  Stuarts,  Thomas  Loe,  a  follower  of  George  Fox
(q.  v.\  began  to  preach  in  Oxford  against  the  threat
ened  restoration  of  what  he  considered  popish
usages,  such  as  the  wearing  of  gowns,  and  soon
numbered  William  Penn  among  his  followers.
Penn's  absence  from  service  was  noticed,  and  with
others  he  was  brought  up  before  the  college  au
thorities  and  fined.  This  roused  the  young  non
conformists  to  open  rebellion.  They  paraded  the
streets,  refused  to  wear  the  gown,  and  tore  away
the  vestment  from  those  that  did  so.  In  all  of
these  actions  Penn  was  conspicuous,  and  he  was
expelled  from  the  university.  His  father,  seriously
offended,  at  first  showed  great  severity,  but  soon
relented,  and  sent  Penn  to  France,  where  he  was
presented  to  Louis  XIV.,  and  became  a  frequent
and  welcome  guest  at  court,  He  mingled  with  the
fashionable  world,  and  bid  fair  to  forget  his  Quaker
fancies.  In  order  to  complete  his  education  he
placed  himself  under  the  tuition  of  Moses  Amy-
rault,  one  of  the  ablest  scholars  of  France  and 'a
member  of  the  Reformed  church.  He  remained  at
Saumur.  and  then  travelled  through  France  and
Italy  with  Lord  Robert  Spencer,  also  meeting  Al


gernon  Sidney,  to  whom  he  became  greatly  at
tached.  In  1644  he  was  recalled  to  England  by
his  father,  and  taken  to  court,  where  he  impressed
the  king  by  his  behavior,  and  became  a  general
favorite.  His  name  was  entered  as  a  law-student
at  Lincoln's  Inn,  and  for  a  time  he  also  served  on
his  father's  staff,  and  was  sent  with  despatches
from  the  fleet  to  the  king.  In  1605  the  plague
appeared  in  London,  and  the  fear  of  death  revived
the  religious  fervor  of  the  young  law-student.

He  was  sent  to  Ireland  to  superintend  two  es
tates  that  belonged  to  the  family  in  the  County
Cork,  and  arrived  in  Dublin  in  the  autumn  of  1605
with  letters  to  the  Duke  of  Ormond,  who  was  then
viceroy.  He  was  warmly  received  and  gave  him
self  up  entirely  to  pleasure.  During  the  insurrec
tion  of  soldiers  at  Carrickfergus  he  served  with
credit  as  aide  to  Lord  Arran,  who  was  charged
with  the  subjection  of  the  mutineers,  and  he  be
came  so  interested  that  he  caused  his  portrait  to
be  painted  in  armor  in  memory  of  the  experience.
The  vignette  shows  him  in  this  costume  and  is
of  value,  being  the  only  known  likeness  of  him
that  was  painted  during  his  lifetime.  He  now  de
sired  to  join  the  army,  and  it  was  proposed  to  his
father  that  he  should  have  command  of  a  company
of  foot;  but  this  the  admiral  refused.  Penn  then
turned  his  attention  to  the  family  interests,  and
secured  possession  of  Shangarry  castle  and  estate
for  his  father.  While  managing  the  newly  ac
quired  property,  he  heard  by  accident  that  his  old
Oxford  acquaintance,  Thomas  Loe,  was  about  to
preach  in  Cork.  Curiosity  led  him  to  the  place  of
worship,  and  after  listening  to  the  sermon,  unable
to  withstand  its  influence,  he  accepted  the  tenets
of  Quakerism.  He  then  attended  the  meetings
with  regularity,  and  on  3  Sept.,  1607,  was  made
prisoner  with  the  entire  congregation  and  taken
before  the  mayor  of  Cork  on  a  charge  of  riot.  The
magistrate  offered  to  release  him,  provided  he
would  promise  to  keep  the  peace ;  but  he  refused,
and  was  sent  to  jail.  He  wrote  to  the  lord-presi
dent  of  Munster,  giving  an  account  of  his  arrest
and  detention,  and  an  order  was  issued  for  his  im
mediate  discharge.  Thereafter  he  identified  him
self  completely  with  the  Quakers  in  everything
except  dress,  but  it  was  not  until  the  following
year  (1668)  that  he  felt  himself  called  to  the  min
istry.  His  father  was  advised  of  his  conduct,  and
at  once  recalled  him  to  England.  After  remon
strating  with  his  son,  the  admiral  expressed  his
willingness  to  tolerate  everything,  provided  that
he  would  uncover  himself  in  the  presence  of  his
father,  the  king,  and  the  Duke  of  York.  Asking
time  for  the  consideration  of  this  proposition,  Penn
retired  to  his  room,  and,  after  an  hour  of  prayer
and  meditation,  returned  to  his  father  with  the
declaration  that  such  a  course  would  be  impossi
ble.  The  admiral,  indignant  at  the  persistent  ob
stinacy  of  his  son,  turned  him  out  of  the  house,
but  friends  cared  for  him.  while  his  mother  inter
ceded  in  his  behalf  and  kept  him  supplied  with
money.  A  few  months  later  he  was  permitted  to
return  home,  but  his  father  refused  to  see  him.

Meanwhile  he  preached  and  wrote  in  favor  of  his
belief,  publishing  "  Truth  Exalted,  in  a  short  but
sure  Testimony  against  all  those  religious  Faiths
and  Worships  that  have  been  formed  and  followed
in  the  darkness  of  Apostasy;  and  for  that  Glorious
Light  which  is  now  risen  and  shines  forth  in  the
Life  and  Doctrine  of  the  despised  Quakers  as  the
alone  good  old  way  of  Life  and  Salvation.  Pre
sented  to  Princes,  Priests,  and  People,  that  they
may  repent,  believe,  and  obey.  By  William  Penn,
whom  Divine  Love  constrains  in  an  holy  contempt


PENN


PENN


713


to  trample  on  Egypt's  glory,  not  fearing  the  King's
wrath,  having  beheld  the  Majesty  of  Him  who  is
invisible"  (16(58).  This  was  followed  by  a  number
of  tracts  on  similar  topics,  which  with  his  other  writ
ings  were  collected  and  published  by  Joseph  Besse  (2
vols.,  London,  1726).  At  this  time  he  also  obtained
a  promise  from  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  that  the
latter  would  bring  a  bill  into  parliament  to  do  justice

to  the  Quakers ;
but  the  commons
refused  to  consider
the  measure.  Perm
then  became  in
volved  in  a  contro
versy  with  Thomas
Vincent,  a  Presby
terian  clergyman,
who  had  openly  re
viled  the  Quakers
from  his  pulpit.
Vincent,  satisfied
with  having  dis-
closedhisside  of  the
argument,  failed  to
call  a  second  meet
ing,  in  consequence
of  which  Penn  is
sued  "  The  Sandy
Foundation  Shaken,"  an  attack  upon  "those  gen
erally  believed  and  applauded  doctrines  of  one
God  subsisting  in  three  distinct  and  separate  per
sons  :  of  the  impossibility  of  God's  pardoning  sin
ners  without  a  plenary  satisfaction ;  and  of  the
justification  of  impure  persons  by  an  imputative
righteousness."  This  work  caused  great  excite
ment  by  its  bold  opposition  to  the  doctrine  of
the  Trinity.  Through  the  influence  of  the  bishop
of  London  and  other  high  dignitaries  of  the
church  he  was  imprisoned  in  the  Tower  for
more  than  eight  months.  During  this  time  he
wrote  his  principal  and  most  popular  theological
work.  "  No  Cross,  no  Crown  ;  a  Discourse  showing
the  Nature  and  Discipline  of  the  Holy  Cross  of
Christ"  (1688),  which  was  soon  followed  by  his
"  Inriocency  with  her  Open  Face,"  a  brief  and  vig
orous  reply  to  several  answers  to  his  li  Sandy
Foundation  Shaken."  These  works  increased  the
public  interest  in  him.  and  his  release  was  ordered
through  the  influence  of  the  Duke  of  York.  He
then  went  to  Ireland  on  business,  and  while  he
was  there  he  succeeded  in  effecting  the  release  of
imprisoned  Quakers  through  his  influence  with  old
friends  at  court.  On  his  return  he  became  recon
ciled  with  his  father,  and  thereafter  lived  on  good
terms  with  him.  Early  in  1670  Penn  again  fell
into  trouble  by  preaching  in  the  street  in  violation
of  the  Conventicle  act.  He  was  promptly  arrested
with  Capt.  William  Mead  and  taken  before  the
lord-mayor,  who  sent  them  to  the  Old  Bailey.  In
the  remarkable  trial  that  followed,  the  jury,  who
were  kept  for  two  days  and  nights  without  food,
fire,  or  water,  brought  in  a  verdict  of  not  guilty,
for  which  each  juryman  was  fined  forty  marks
and  sent  to  Newgate,  while  Penn  and  Mead  were
also  fined  and  imprisoned  for  contempt  in  wearing
their  hats  in  presence  of  the  court.  They  appealed
to  the  court  of  common  pleas,  where  the  decision
of  the  lower  court  was  reversed,  and  the  great
principle  of  English  law  was  established,  that  it  is
the  right  of  the  jury  to  judge  of  the  evidence  inde
pendently  of  the  dictation  or  direction  of  the  court.
On  being  liberated.  Penn  at  once  returned  to  the
bedside  of  his  father,  who  died  in  the  course  of  a
few  days,  bequeathing  to  his  son  a  property  of
£1,500  a  year.  Penn  was  again  arrested  in  March,


1671.  for  preaching  in  a  meeting-house  in  London,
and  committed  to  the  Tower.  He  was  tried  under
the  Conventicle  act,  but  acquitted  for  want  of  tes
timony,  and  on  his  refusing  to  take  the  oath  of
allegiance,  owing  to  conscientious  scruples  about
swearing,  was  sentenced  to  Newgate  for  six  months.
He  spent  his  time  there  in  writing  "  The  Great  Case
of  Liberty  of  Conscience,"  "  Truth  rescued  from
Imposture,"  "A  Postscript  to  'Truth  Exalted,'"
and  "  An  Apology  for  the  Quakers."

At  the  expiration  of  his  imprisonment  he  spent
a  short  time  in  Holland  and  Germany,  where  he
was  active  in  making  converts,  but  lie  soon  re
turned  to  England,  and  early  in  the  spring  of  1672
he  married  Gulielma  Maria,  a  daughter  of  Sir
William  Springett.  At  first  he  resided  in  Rick-
mansworth,  in  Hertfordshire,  and  then  he  settled
in  Dorminghurst,  in  Sussex.  During  the  ensuing
few  years  he  devoted  much  time  to  itinerant  preach
ing,  and  published  about  twenty-six  controver
sial  works,  some  of  which  displayed  great  ability,
and  two  political  volumes,  a  "  Treatise  on  Oaths  "
(1672)  and  "  England's  Present  Interest  Con
sidered"  (1672).  He  also  had  a  controversy  with
Thomas  Hicks,  a  Baptist  preacher,  in  London,  and
published  his  "Reason  against  Railing  and  Truth
against  Fiction,"  and  "  The  Counterfeit  Christian
Detected."  In  1674  a  dispute  arose  between  John
Fenwick,  agent  and  trustee  of  Edward  Byllinge,
concerning  the  proprietary  rights  in  the  Quaker
colonies  of  New  Jersey.  The  matter  was  referred
to  William  Penn  for  arbitration,  and  he  decided  in
favor  of  Byllinge,  who,  becoming  involved  and  un
able  to  meet  the  demands  that  were  made  upon
him,  surrendered  his  property  to  his  creditors.
The  latter  appointed  two  trustees,  and  he  himself
selected  Penn  as  a  third  to  care  for  his  interests.
Penn  showed  great  zeal  in  the  work  of  colonization,
and  soon  several  vessels  laden  with  emigrants  were
on  their  way  to  the  New  World.  He  then  turned
his  attention  to  the  congregations  on  the  continent,
and  visited  Holland  and  various  parts  of  Germany,
where  he  advocated  colonization.  On  his  return  to
England  he  continued  to  send  emigrants  to  this
country,  and  several  additional  ship-loads  of  settlers
left  England,  making  a  total  of  more  than  800
families.  His  acquaintance  with  Algernon  Sidney,
formed  many  years  earlier  on  the  continent,  was
now  renewed,  and  Sidney  became  a  frequent  guest
at  Dorminghurst.  In  the  elections  in  which  Sidney
was  a  candidate  for  Guildford  and  Bramber,  respect
ively,  Penn  was  one  of  his  most  active  supporters.
Although  he  was  elected  on  both  occasions,  Sidney
was  not  permitted  to  take  his  seat,  and  Penn,  in
dignant  at  the  treatment  of  his  friend,  and  in  con
sequence  of  other  incidents,  proposed  to  the  king's
council  to  receive  a  certain  amount  of  territory  on
the  Atlantic  seaboard  and  in  the  interior  of  the
country  in  lieu  of  money  that  was  due  his  father,
aggregating  about  £16,000.  After  numerous  de
lays  and  various  modifications  of  the  original  peti
tion,  on  24  Feb.,  1681,  Charles  II.  signed  a  charter
that  constituted  Penn  absolute  proprietor  of  the
territory  in  question  in  consideration  of  two  beaver-
skins  to  be  given  annually  to  the  king.  The  name
of  New  Wales  was  proposed  by  Penn  for  the  prov
ince  ;  but  this  being  objected  to,  he  suggested  Syl-
vania.  to  which  the  king  prefixed  Penn,  in  honor  of
the  great  admiral.  Direct  appeal  to  the  king  and
a  proffer  of  twenty  guineas  to  his  secretary  to  have
the  name  changed  was  unsuccessful.

A  liberal  scheme  of  government  and  laws  was
drawn  up  by  Penn,  aided  by  Algernon  Sidney.
Organizations  for  emigration  were  established  in
England  and  on  the  continent,  and  negotiations


714


PENN


PENN


were  entered  into  with  Penn  for  the  sale  of  lands.
In  1082  he  sent  out  Capt.  William  Markharn  with
instructions  to  take  possession  of  the  province,  to
scare li  out  a  convenient  spot  of  ground  on  which
to  erect  a  governor's  mansion,  and  to  cultivate  a
friendly  feeling  with  the  Indians.  In  September,

1083,  he  himself  set  out  from  London  on  the  "  Wel
come,"  and  he  reached  Newcastle  on  the  Delaware
late  in  October,  taking  formal  possession  of  the
territory  on  the  day  after  his  arrival. The  province
was  divided  into  counties,  which  were  subdivided
into  building-lots,  and  the  land  was  put  up  for  sale
at  fourpence  an  acre. He  then  selected,  but  not
without  some  dissension,  as  a  site  for  his  capital
the  neck  of  land  that  lies  at  the  junction  of  Dela
ware  and  Schuylkill  rivers,  which  he  purchased
from  the  Swedes,  and  to  which  he  gave  the  name
of  Philadelphia. Penn's  landing  was  made  at  Dock
creek,  where  the  "Blue  Anchor"  tavern  was  built,
beyond  which  the  first  ten  houses,  known  as  "  Hudd's
Long  Row,"  were  erected. This  place  at  once  grew
with  wonderful  rapidity,  and  within  a  year  a  hun
dred  houses  had  been  built. Meanwhile,  during  Oc
tober,  10N2,  his  famous  treaty  with  the  Indians  was
made. On  the  banks  of  the  Delaware,  at  Shacka-
inaxon  (afterward  Kensington,  and  now  a  part  of
the  city),  stood  a  great  elm,  where  in  earlier  times
the  Indians  had  assembled  on  important  occasions,
and  the  name  of  the  place  signified,  in  the  Indian
language, the "locality of kings." Here  repre
sentatives  of  the  Delawares,  Mingoes,  and other
Susquehanna  tribes  made  with  the  (Quakers  a  treaty

of  peace  and  friend
ship  which,  according
to  Voltaire,  "  was
never  sworn  to  and
never  broken."  The
influence  of  Penn  was
so  great  among  the
Indians  that  to  be  a
follower  of  his  was
at  all  times  a  pass
port  to  their  protec
tion  and  hospitality.
George  Bancroft  says
that  ''while  every
other  colony  in  the
New  World  was  visit
ed  in  turn  by  the

horrors  of  Indian  warfare,  no  drop  of  Quaker  blood
was  ever  shed  by  a  red  man  in  Pennsylvania."  Penn
then  devoted  himself  to  his  duties  as  governor,  and
made  treaties  with  other  Indian  tribes,  and  as  long
as  any  of  the  aborigines  remained  in  Pennsylvania
or  its  neighborhood  their  traditions  bore  testimony
to  the  justice  and  benevolence  of  "Mignon,"  as
the  Delawares  called  him.  or  of  "  Onas,"  as  he  was
styled  by  the  Iroquois.  He  then  visited  New  York
and  New  Jersey,  and  after  the  meeting  of  the  gen
eral  assembly  of  the  province  at  Newcastle  in  May,

1084,  he  intrusted  the  government  to  a  council,
and  in  August  sailed  for  England,  leaving  a  pros
perous  colony  of  7,000  persons. In  his  farewell  he
writes :  "  And  thou.  Philadelphia,  the  virgin  settle
ment  of  this  province, named  before  thou  wast
born,  what  love,  what  care,  what  service,  and  what
travail  hath  there  been  to  bring  thee  forth  and  pre
serve thee  from  such  as  would  abuse  and  defile
thee ! My  soul  prays  to  God  for  thee.  that  thou
mayest  stand  in  the  day  of  trial,  that  thy  children
may  be  blessed  of  the  Lord,  and  thy  people  saved
by  his  power." On  his  return  to  England  he  first
sought  to  have  the  boundary-line  between  Mary
land and Pennsylvania  properly adjusted, but
Charles  II.  was  then  very  near  his  end,  and  definite


action  could  not  be  procured.  Penn's  patron  and
the  friend  of  his  father,  the  Duke  of  York,  suc
ceeded  to  the  throne  as  James  II.,  on  0  Feb.,  10iS5,
and  soon  after  his  accession  set  at  liberty  about
1,200  Quakers  that  had  been  imprisoned  for  their
religious  opinions.  Shortly  afterward  the  boundarv
difficulty  was  considered,  and  the  disputed  territory
was  divided  into  two  equal  parts,  one  of  which  was
transferred  to  Lord  Baltimore,  and  the  other  re
turned  to  the  crown.  Penn  took  up  his  residence
at  Kensington,  and  thereafter,  until  the  king  went
into  exile,  he  was  at  court  almost  daily.  His  chief
object  was  to  persuade  the  king  to  introduce  into
parliament  a  general  act  that  should  permit  per
fect  freedom  of  opinion  in  every  part  of  his  domin
ions.  His  influence  with  James  was  well  known,
and  every  man  with  a  real 'grievance  found  in  him
a  counsellor  and  friend.  Through  his  efforts  a
pardon  was  granted  to  John  Locke,  who  was  then
residing  at  the  Hague;  but  Locke  refused  to  accept
it,  claiming  that  he  had  done  no  wrong.  Penn's
success  with  the  king  being  reported,  it  natural
ly  made  enemies  for  him,  and  it  was  circulated
that  he  had  matriculated  at  a  Jesuit  seminary,  had
taken  holy  orders  in  Home,  and  officiated  regularly
at  mass  in  the  private  chapel  at  Whitehall.  Among
other  attacks  on  his  character  are  those  that  were
revived  by  Lord  Macaulay  in  his  "History  of  Eng
land."  Macaulay  has  accused  him  of  acting  as  an
agent  of  the  rapacious  maids  of  honor  of  the  royal
i  court  to  extort  money  for  pardon  from  the  rela
tives  of  some  young  girls  at  Taunton  who  were  im
plicated  in  Moiunouth's  rebellion,  and  also  accused
him  of  an  attempt  to  persuade  Dr.  John  Hough,
president  of  Magdalen  college,  Oxford,  to  accede
to  the  wishes  of  King  James  in  a  matter  where
compliance  would  have  involved  a  violation  of  his
official  oath  by  holding  out  to  him  the  bait  of  a
bishopric.  Neither  of  these  charges  can  be  sustained
by  any  direct  evidence,  and,  moreover,  abundant
material  exists  tending  to  prove  their  falsity.  (See
the  preface  to  Hepworth  Dixon's  "  William  Penn.  an
Historical  Biography  founded  on  Family  and  State
Papers,"  London,  1856.)

Penn  was  sent  by  James  to  visit  William  of
Orange,  whom  he  endeavored  to  convert  to  his
views  of  universal  toleration,  and,  after  visiting  in
Holland,  he  travelled  through  Rhincland,  where  he
circulated  reports  of  the  success  of  his  colony.  In
April,  1087,  the  king  issued  a  proclamation  declar
ing  liberty  of  conscience  to  all,  and  removing  tests
and  penalties,  which  was  largely  the  result,  of
Penn's  influence.  Penn  was  the  only  one  of
James's  court  that  remained  in  London  after  his
flight,  and  he  was  called  before  the  lords  of  coun
cil,  who,  finding  nothing  against  him,  save  that  he
was  a  friend  of  James,  required  of  him  bonds  for
his  appearance  on  the  first  day  of  the  following
term,  when  he  was  declared  free  of  every  charge-
that  had  been  made  against  him.  Subsequently  a
letter  from  the  exiled  James,  requesting  him  to
come  to  France,  was  intercepted,  and  he  was  again
brought  before  the  council  in  presence  of  King
William.  After  a  long  examination,  in  which
Penn  declared  his  friendship  for  James  though  he
did  not  approve  of  the  latter's  policy,  and  said  he
could  not  prevent  the  exile  from  writing  to  him,
he  was  discharged.  Later,  on  several  occasions,  he
was  arrested  on  the  charge  of  being  implicated  in
various  plots,  but  invariably  was  discharged  for
lack  of  evidence.  In  1(592  tie  was  deprived  of  his
government,  and  his  province  was  annexed  to  the
colony  of  New  York.  On  23  Feb.,  1094,  his  wife
I  died,  and  he  bore  testimony  to  her  virtuous  life
|  and  Christian  death  in  "  An  Account  of  the  Blessed


PEXX


PEXX


715


End  of  my  Dear  Wife.  Gulielma  Maria  Perm."
In  January,  1090,  he  married  Hannah  Callowhill,
of  Bristol,  a  Quaker  lady,  with  whom  he  had  long
been  acquainted.  Meanwhile,  in  August,  1094.  an
order  in  council  was  made  restoring  to  him  his
government.  He  then  sent  out  William  Markham
as  his  deputy;  but  the  arbitrary  behavior  of  the
latter  made  trouble,  so  that  Penn,  on  9  Sept..  1099.
with  his  wife  and  daughter  Letitia,  sailed-  on  the
"Canterbury"  for  Pennsylvania.  On  their  arrival


at  Philadelphia,  the  governor  and  his  family  went
to  lodge  at  Edward  Shippen's,  where  they  remained
about  a  month.  Penn  then  went  to  reside  in
what  is  known  as  the  Slate-roof  house,  on  Second
street,  between  Chestnut  and  Walnut,  at  tho  south
east  corner  of  Xorris's  alley,  shown  in  the  accom
panying  illustration.  Here  was  born,  about  two
months  after  they  landed,  his  son  John,  the  only
one  of  his  children  that  was  a  native  of  this  coun
try,  who  was  therefore  called  "  the  American."

Difficulties  that  had  existed  prior  to  his  arrival
regarding  the  government  of  the  province  now
disappeared,  and  peace  and  order  soon  prevailed
throughout  the  colony.  He  gave  his  attention  to
various  reforms,  and  especially  to  the  amelioration
of  the  condition  of  the  Indians  and  negroes.  In
1701  a  treaty  was  made  with  the  Potomac  Indians,
and  also  one  with  the  Five  Xations,  establishing
commercial  transactions  between  the  natives  and
the  colonists  through  authorized  representatives.
Information  that  a  bill  had  been  introduced  in  the
house  of  lords  converting  all  of  the  proprietary  gov
ernments  into  crown  colonies  led  to  his  return  to
England,  but  on  his  arrival  the  project  that  caused
his  leaving  the  colony  had  been  dropped.  Soon
afterward  he  sent  his  son  William  to  Philadelphia
to  represent  him.  but  the  latter  so  disgraced  his
father  by  his  notorious  conduct  that  he  was  sent
home.  Other  troubles  followed,  including  a  false
claim  against  him  by  his  steward,  rather  than  pay
which  he  allowed  himself  to  be  committed  to  the
Fleet  prison  in  1708.  Later  he  became  so  reduced
that  he  proposed  to  sell  the  colony  to  Queen  Anne
for  £20.000.  and,  failing  in  this,  he  endeavored  to
secure  the  promise  of  a  salary  of  £000  annually  as
governor.  His  health,  seriously  injured  by  his
confinement  in  the  Fleet,  now  grew  worse,  and,
finding  that  the  country  air  of  Berkshire  agreed
best  with  him,  he  settled  in  Ruscombe.  Early  in
1712  he  was  stricken  with  paralysis,  and  other
shocks  followed  that  so  affected  him  that  much  of
the  time  he  was  deprived  of  his  memory  and  of  the
power  of  motion.  In  this  condition  he  lingered  for
six  years,  sustained  and  aided  by  his  wife,  who
managed  his  business  affairs  for  him.  He  was
buried  in  Jordan's  burying-ground.  in  Bucking
hamshire,  by  the  side  of  his  first  wife  and  Springett,
his  first-born  and  favorite  son.  An  effort  was  made


several  years  ago  to  have  the  remains  of  William
Penn  brought  to  Philadelphia,  to  rest  there  beneath
some  imposing  monument. The  little  graveyard  in
Buckinghamshire  was  discovered,  but  "  no  'monu
mental  marble,  or  even  simple  headstone,  marks
the  spot  where  the  founder  of  Pennsylvania  found
at  last  that  rest  and  freedom  from  the  persecution
he  had  experienced  in  his  lifetime." In  the  original
plan  of  Philadelphia.  Penn  placed  a  square  of  ten
acres  at  the  intersection  of  Broad  and  High  (now
Market)  streets,  but  in  the  course  of  time  the  park
was  absorbed  for  building  purposes,  until  only  Penn
square  remained,  on  which  the  Philadelphia  public
buildings  have  long  been  in  process  of  construc
tion. These  buildings  are  to  be  completed  in  1892,
i  and  on  the  summit  of  the  dome  there  is  to  be
placed  a  colossal  bronze  statue  of  Penn.  thirty-six
feet  high. It  was  designed  by  Alexander  Caulder,
i  and  will  weigh  thirty  tons."  The figure is  in  a
;  speaking  attitude,  and  the  left  hand  is  represented
|  as  holding  the  original  charter  of  the  city  of  Phila
delphia. As  the  statue  is  intended  to  personate
him  in  his  relation  to  the  city  rather  than  to  the
state,  this  was  deemed  the  most  appropriate  sym-
;  bol. In  1720  appeared  "  A  Collection  of  the  Works
'  of  William  Penn,  to  which  is  prefixed  a  Journal  of
i  his  Life,  with  many  Original  Letters  and  Papers
j  not  before  Published"  (2  vols.,  London),  and  in
',  1771  there  were  published  "Select  Works  of  Will
iam  Penn,  to  which  is  prefixed  a  Journal  of  his
Life";  also,  in  1782,  his  "Select  Works  with  a
;  Life "  were  issued  in  five  volumes,  and  again  in
|  1825  in  three  volumes. See  "Vie  de  Guillaume
Penn,"  by  Jean  Marsillac  (Paris,  1791;  translated
into  German  by  Carl  J.  Friedrich,  Strasburg,  1793) ;
Thomas  Clarkson's  "  Memoirs  of  the  Public  and
Private  Life  of  William  Penn"  (London,  1813);
Mason  L.  Weems's  "  Life  of  William  Penn  "  (Phila
delphia,  1822) ;  the  "  Life  "  by  Joseph  Barker  (Lon
don,  1852) ;  and  George  E.  Ellis,  in  Sparks's  "  Amer
ican  Biography  "  (2d  series,  vol.  xii.,  Boston,  1847) ;
Samuel  M.  Janney,  "  Life  and  Select  Correspond-
j  ence  of  William  Penn  "  (Philadelphia.  1852):  Will-
J  iam  Hepworth  Dixon's  "  William  Penn.  an  Histori
cal  Biography  founded  on  Family  and  State  Pa
pers"  (new  ed..  London.  1850):  ''inquiry  into  the
;  Evidence  of  the  Charges  brought  by  Lord  Macau-
!  lay  against  William  Penn.''  by  James  Paget  (Edin-
i  burgh,  1858);  and  "  William 'Penn."  by  Robert  J.
•  Burdette  (Xew  York.  1882). For  a  full  account  of
I  William  Penn's  writings  and  of  those  which  relate
j  to  him,  see  Joseph  Smith's  "  Catalogue  of  Friends'
Books." vol. ii.,  pp.  282-320. — His second wife,
Hannah,  d.  in  1733,  was  the  daughter  of  Thomas
'  Callowhill.  a  Bristol  merchant. She  accompanied
!  her  husband  to  Pennsylvania  in  1(599.  and  lived  in
great  style,  both  in  Philadelphia  and  in  Pennsbury
Manor,  a  beautiful  estate  situated  in  Bucks  county,
on  the  river  Delaware. After  Penn's  death,  during
the  minority  of  her  children,  as  sole  executrix,  she
assumed  the  management  of  the  colonial  affairs,
performing  this  difficult  task  with  rare  tact  and
business  capacity. Her  deputy in Pennsylvania
from  1718  till  1727  was  Sir  William  Keith  (q.  i:). —
The  founder  of  Pennsylvania  had  several  children
that died in  his lifetime. — His eldest surviving
son,  William,  b.  about  1076;  d.  in  Liege  in  1720,
came  to  the  colony  with  Lieut.-Gov.  Evans,  arriving
2  Feb.,  1704,  and  was  made  a  member  of  the  pro
vincial  council  on  the  8th. As  such  he  joined  in
a  declaration  that  a  clause  in  his  father's  instruc
tions suspending  the operation of laws passed
by  the  lieutenant-governor  until  the  proprietary's
pleasure  be  known  was  illegal  and  void. He  raised
a  militia  company,  but,  being  presented  before  the


716


PENN


PENN


corporation  of  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  the  chief
men  in  which  were  unfriendly  to  his  father,  for  dis
order  at  a  tavern,  he  took  offence  and  returned  to
England.  He  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for
parliament.  On  his  mother's  side  he  was  related
to  the  wife  of  Lord  Fairfax,  and  engaged  with  him
and  others  in  a  project  to  recover  sunken  treasure.
By  various  means  he  added  to  his  father's  financial
embarrassment,  and  he  was  obliged  to  sell  the
manor  of  Williamstadt,  which  had  been  laid  out  for
him  at  the  founding  of  the  colony.  The  estate  of
Shanagarry,  County  Cork,  Ireland,  which  had
descended  from  Admiral  Penn,  and  certain  other

Eroperty,  being  deemed  a  handsome  provision  for
im,  all  but  40,000  acres  of  the  American  estate
were  left  to  the  founder's  children  by  his  second
wife  after  payment  of  his  debts,  the  powers  of  gov
ernment  being  devised  to  the  Earl  of  Oxford  and
E.irl  Powlett  to  sell ;  but  the  heir-at-law  contested
this,  and  issued  a  fresh  commission  to  the  lieuten
ant-governor,  in  which  he  declared  himself  a  mem
ber  of  the  Church  of  England.  By  advice  of  the
assembly,  the  commission  was  not  proclaimed.  Sub
sequently  an  order  from  the  regents  of  Great  Brit
ain  was  obtained  continuing  the  lieutenant-gover
nor  in  office.  This  William  Penn  left  three  children.
— His  eldest  son,  SPIUNGETT,  b.  in  England;  d.  in
Dublin,  Ireland.  8  Feb.,  1731,  succeeded  to  his
father's  claims,  and  was  by  many  persons  considered
the  rightful  governor-in-chief.  Sir  William  Keith,
the  lieutenant-governor,  caused  a  large  tract  of
land  on  the  frontier  to  be  laid  out  for  him,  and
called  Springettsbury  Manor.  In  1725,  with  the
widow  and  executrix  of  the  founder,  he  nominated
Patrick  Gordon  as  Keith's  successor,  and  obtained
confirmation  of  the  appointment  by  the  crown.
The  will  of  the  founder  was  established  by  decree
of  the  court  of  exchequer  in  1727,  and  a  compro
mise  between  the  two  branches  of  the  family  was
in  process  of  adjustment  at  his  death. — Springett's
brother  and  heir,  William,  b.  in  1703 ;  d.  in  Shana
garry,  Ireland,  G  Feb.,  1746,  executed  for  £5,500  a
release  to  John,  Thomas,  and  Richard  Penn,  dated
23  Sept.,  1731.  He  returned  to  the  Society  of
Friends  on  marrying  Christiana,  daughter  of  Alex
ander  Forbes,  a  merchant  in  London,  on  7  Dec.,
1733.  After  her  death  he  married  Ann  Vaux,  13
Dec.,  1736,  by  whom  he  had  an  only  son,  who  died
without  issue,  whereupon  Christiana  Gulielma,
wife  of  Peter  Gaskell  and  daughter  of  William  and
Christiana  Penn,  became  the  heiress  at  common
law  of  the  founder. — William  the  founders  eldest
son  by  his  second  wife,  John,  called  "  the  Ameri
can,"  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  29  Feb.,  1700;  d.  in
England  in  October,  1746,  by  his  mother's  appoint
ment  received  half  of  the  proprietaryship,  and  was
confirmed  in  the  enjoyment  of  it  by  the  paying  of
the  mortgage,  by  the  annulling  of  the  agreement
to  sell  the  powers  of  government,  by  compromise
with  the  elder  branch  of  the  family,  by  the  estab
lishment  of  a  provisional  boundary-line  with  Mary
land,  and  by  Indian  treaties  that  opened  all  the
region  required  for  settlements.  John  Penn  came
to  Pennsylvania  in  September,  1734,  but  returned
to  England  the  following  year.  During  his  stay  he
attended  the  meetings  of  the  provincial  council,
lie  appears  to  have  been  the  only  descendant  of
William  Penn  in  the  male  line  that  remained  a
Quaker.  He  died  without  issue,  leaving  his  rights
in  the  province  and  lower  counties  to  his  brother
Thomas,  b.  in  England  in  1702;  d.  there,  21
March,  1775.  Thomas  had  originally  only  one  sixth
of  the  proprietaryship,  but  it  was  increased  to  a
fourth  by  the  death  of  a  younger  brother  in  in
fancy.  To  manage  the  estate  he  came  to  the  colony


in  1732  with  power  of  attorney  from  John  and
Richard,  and  on  his  arrival  took  a  seat  in  the  coun
cil.  He  remained  until  August,  1741.  Subse
quently  there  was  a  long  struggle  between  the
proprietaries  and  the  assembly  of  Pennsylvania,
chiefly  as  to  the  taxation  of  the  Penn  estates.  In
1704  the  assembly  petitioned  the  king  to  assume
the  government,  but  the  crown  let  the  powers  re
main  with  the  proprietaries.  Mason  and  Dixon's
line,  run  in  1767  and  confirmed  in  1709,  ended  the
boundary  dispute  with  Maryland,  and  the  treaty  of
Fort  Stanwix  in  1708  extinguished  the  Indian
claim  to  the  whole  region  of  the  Alleghanies  from
New  York  to  Virginia,  so  that  Thomas  Penn,  with
his  colleague  holding  a  fourth  interest,  was  the
feudal  lord  of  more  than  25,000,000  acres,  nearly
a  quarter  of  a  million  people,  and  the  largest  town
in  the  American  colonies.  When  he  was  about
fifty  years  old  he  married  Lady  Juliana,  daughter
of  the  first  Earl  of  Pomfret. — Thomas's  son,  John,
b.  in  England,  23  Feb.,  1760  ;  d.  in  Stoke  Pogis,  21
June,  1834,  succeeded  to  his  father's  interests,  but,
with  his  cousin,  lost  the  proprietaryship  and  gov
ernorship  by  the  American  Revolution.  Penn  was
a  graduate  of  Cambridge,  and  for  some  time  gov
ernor  of  the  island  of  Portland,  where  he  built
Pennsylvania  castle.  He  was  a  member  of  parlia
ment  in  1802.  He  published  a  tragedy,  some
pamphlets,  and  a  volume  of  poems,  and  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Cambridge  in  1811. —
His  brother,  Granvillc,  b.  9  Dec.,  1761  ;  d.  in
Stoke  Pogis,  28  Sept.,  1844,  was  for  some  time
clerk  in  the  war  department,  and  reputed  to  be
the  most  learned  layman  in  England.  He  was
the  author  of  various  works,  among  them  a  "  Life
of  Admiral  Sir  William  Penn,"  his  great-grand
father,  lie  visited  Pennsylvania.  He  left  several
sons,  all  of  whom  died  without  issue,  so  that  the
pension  paid  by  the  British  government  descended
to  the  family  "of  his  sister,  Sophia  Margaret,  who
married  William  Stuart,  archbishop  of  Armagh. —
William  the  founder's  third  son  by  his  second  wife,
Richard,  b.  about  1710 ;  d.  in  England  in  1771,  was
also  a  proprietary  and  titular  governor  of  Penn
sylvania  and  the  counties  of  New  Castle,  Kent,  and
Sussex  on  Delaware  river.  He  married  Hannah,
daughter  of  John  Lardner,  and  had  two  sons.  The
eldest,  John,  lieutenant-governor  of  Pennsylvania,
b.  in  London,  14  July,  1729 ;  d.  in  Bucks  county,
Pa.,  9  Feb.,  1795,  married  clandestinely  while  he
was  at  school,  but  was  separated  from  his  wife  by
his  uncle,  Thomas  Penn,  and  went  to  the  continent,
finishing  his  education  at  the  university  in  Geneva.
He  was  then  sent  to  Pennsylvania,  and  on  6  Feb.,
1753,  became  a  member  of  the  provincial  council,
with  the  rank  of  first  member  thereof,  and  succes
sion  to  its  presidency  in  case  of  a  vacancy  in  the
office  of  lieutenant-governor.  He  was  one  of  the
commissioners  to  the  congress  at  Albany  in  175-i.
He  left  the  colony  after  Braddock's  defeat,  but  sev
en  years  afterward  returned  as  lieutenant-govern
or,  arriving  on  30  Oct.,  1763.  The  first  year  of  his
term  witnessed  a  state  of  affairs  that  threatened
the  existence  of  civil  government.  The  assembly,
controlled  by  the  Quakers,  failed  to  satisfy  the
Scotch-Irish  on  the  frontier,  who  saw  large  sums
of  money  lavished  in  presents  to  Indians  while
they  lay  destitute  from  an  Indian  war.  In  Decem
ber^  1763,  the  more  desperate  of  the  young  men
about  Paxton  banded  together,  destroyed  a  peace
able  Indian  village  at  Conestoga,  and  scalped  all
whom  they  found  at  home.  The  remainder  of  the
tribe  were  placed  by  the  authorities  in  the  Lancas
ter  work-house  for  protection,  while  a  proclamation
was  issued  for  the  arrest  of  the  murderers ;  but  a


PENN


PENNINGTON


717


few  days  later  a  troop  of  horsemen  broke  into  the
building  and  massacred  its  inmates.  Penn  issued
a  proclamation  offering  a  reward  for  the  capture
of  the  murderers ;  but  this  had  no  effect.  A  bat
talion  of  regular  soldiers  was  ordered  to  Lancaster,
and,  by  the  united  efforts  of  all  citizens,  a  bold  front
was  presented  when  the  '•  Paxton  boys"  appeared
at  Germantown  on  their  way  to  murder  the  Bethle
hem  Indians,  who  had  been  housed  in  the  barracks
in  the  Northern  Liberties.  This  outbreak  had
barely  subsided  before  the  young  governor  was
embroiled  with  the  assembly  on  an  offshoot  of  the
old  quarrel  as  to  the  taxation  of  proprietary  lands.
This  brought  about  the  petition  to  change  the
government  from  proprietary  to  royal.  Upon  the
repeal  of  the  stamp-act  he  congratulated  the  assem
bly,  and  gave  a  fete  at  "  Lansdowne,"  his  country-
seat,  now  within  Fairmount  park.  He  declined
to  be  patron  of  the  Philosophical  society  because
it  had  chosen  Benjamin  Franklin  for  its  president.
The  happiest  event  of  Penn's  administration  was
the  treaty  with  the  Indians  at  Fort  Stanwix  in
17G8.  On  the  death  of  his  father  he  embarked  for
England  on  4  May,  1771,  leaving  the  government
to  the  council ;  but  in  August,  1773.  he  returned  to
Pennsylvania  as  governor  in  his  own  right  and  by
deputation  from  his  uncle.  In  respect  to  the
Revolutionary  contest,  he  attempted  to  steer  a
middle  course.  He  was  opposed  to  taxation  with
out  representation,  but  his  first  overt  act  might
have  caused  the  ministry  to  replace  the  proprie
tary  by  a  royal  government.  In  February,  1775,
he  besought  the  assembly  to  send  a  petition  from
their  own  body  seeking  redress  of  grievances.
On  30  June  of"  that  year  the  assembly,  without
troubling  Penn  for  his  consent,  provided  for  arm
ing  the  province,  and  appointed  a  committee  of
safety,  which  thenceforth  was  supreme  in  Pennsyl
vania  ;  but  Penn's  council  continued  to  meet  until
the  following  September.  Within  a  month  after
the  Declaration  of  Independence  a  constitutional
convention  met,  and  vested  the  government  of
Pennsylvania  in  a  supreme  executive  council,
choosing  its  own  president  and  the  officers  of  state.
Penn  offered  no  other  resistance  than  refusal  to
recognize  the  new  authority.  Nevertheless,  when
Howe's  army  was  expected  in  Philadelphia,  it  was
thought  inexpedient  to  leave  such  important  in
struments  in  British  hands  as  a  regularly  commis
sioned  governor  and  chief  justice :  so  Chew  and
himself  were  arrested,  12  Aug..  1777,  on  the  recom
mendation  of  congress,  but  they  were  released  on
15  May,  1778.  On  28  June,  1779,  the  legislature  of
Pennsylvania  transferred  to  the  state  the  property
in  the  soil,  restricted  the  possessions  of  the  Penns
to  such  manors,  or  tenths,  as  had  been  set  apart  for
them  prior  to  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  and
also  their  purchases  from  private  parties,  and  abol
ished  quit-rents  except  within  the  manors.  It
voted  in  remuneration  for  this  the  sum  of  £130,000
to  the  heirs  and  devisees  of  Thomas  and  Richard
Penn,  to  be  paid  three  years  after  the  establish
ment  of  peace.  In  addition,  the  British  govern
ment  created  an  annuity  of  £4.000,  which  has  only
recently  been  commuted.  John  Penn's  branch  of
the  family  was  entitled  to  a  fourth  of  these  sums,
and  the  "estates  in  Philadelphia  and  elsewhere
were  considerable ;  so  that  he  was  enabled  to  live
comfortably  the  rest  of  his  life  at  "  Lansdowne."
or  at  his  city  residence.  He  was  buried  under  the
floor  of  Christ  church,  Philadelphia,  but  his  remains
were  afterward  removed  to  England. — Another  son
of  the  founder  by  his  second  wife,  Richard,  lieu
tenant-governor  of  Pennsylvania,  b.  in  England  in
1735 ;  d.  in  Richmond,  Surrey,  England,  27  May,


1  1811,  spent  some  time  at  St.  John's  college,  Cam-
|  bridge,  and  was  intended  for  the  legal  profession,
,  but  relinquished  that  study. He  accompanied  his
j  brother  to  Pennsylvania  in  1763,  and  was  qualified
|  as  a  councillor  on  12  Jan.,  1764. After  an  absence
of  two  years  in  England  he  was  appointed  by  his
j  uncle  and  brother  lieutenant-governor  of  Pennsyl-
j  vania,  and  arriving  the  second  time  in  Philadelphia
i  on  16  Oct.,  1771,  made  himself  the  most  popular  of
his  family. All  his  dealings  with  the  provincial
;  assembly  were  very  friendly. Armor,  in  his  "  Lives
|  of  the  Governors,"  says :  "  He  was  especially  atten-
|  tive  to  the  commercial  interests  of  the  colony,  and
;  during  his  administration  a  degree  of  unexampled
prosperity  prevailed." He  had  a  dispute  with  his
brother  concerning  his  father's  will,  and  for  some
l  time  after  the  arrival  of  John,  by  whom  he  was
superseded  in  the  governorship  in  August,  1713.
Richard  did  not  meet  him,  but  the  two  were  finally
reconciled. Richard  Penn's  feelings  were  enlisted
!  against  the  oppressive  acts  of  the  British  govern
ment. Both  Penns longed for  concessions,  but
Richard's  situation being more independent,  he
could  afford  to  be  more  demonstrative. He  enter
tained  the  members  of  the  Continental  congress  at
his  house,  George  Washington being  among  his
guests. He  left Philadelphia in  the summer  of
1775,  carrying  with him the second  petition of
congress  to the  king. On 7  Nov.,  1775.  its  con
sideration  being  the  order  of  the  day  in  the  house
of  lords,  the  Duke of  Richmond, observing Mr.
Penn  below  the  bar,  moved  that  he  be  examined,
to  authenticate  it. Accordingly,  after  some  discus
sion,  he  was  sworn  on  the  10th,  and  testified  to  the
ability  and  willingness  of  his  colony  to  resist  the
home  government. He  was  member  of  the  British
parliament  from  1796  to 1806.  but  became very
poor. He  visited  Philadelphia in  1808. By  his
wife,  Mary  Masters,  a  Pennsylvania  heiress,  he  had
several  children, who died without issue. — The
eldest,  William,  b.  23  June,  1776;  d.  in  Nelson
Square.  Southwark.  England,  17  Sept..  1845,  entered
St.  John's  college.  Cambridge,  but  left  the  univer
sity  without  taking  a  degree,  and  devoted  himself
to  literature,  but  became  very  intemperate. He
came  to  Pennsylvania  in  1808,  spending  some  time
in  Philadelphia  and  in  the  interior  of  the  state,
and  marrying  there. After  his  return  to  England
j  he  was  for  a  long  time  imprisoned  for  debt. — His
i  brother,  Richard,  d.  in  Richmond,  England,  21
j  April,  1863,  was  for  many  years  employed  in  the
British colonial department,  and  was author  of
"  Maxims  and  Hints  on  Angling,  Chess,  Shooting,
and  other  Matters,  also  Miseries  of  Fishing." He
was  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  society.

PENNINGTON,  William  Sanford,  jurist,  b.
in  Newark,  N.  J..  in  1757;  d.  there,  17  Sept.,
1826.  He  served  as  a  major  in  the  2d  New  Jersey
artillery  in  the  war  of  the  Revolution.  He  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1802,  was  a  member  of  the
legislature,  and  appointed  associate  justice  of  the
supreme  court  of  New  Jersey,  28  Feb.,  1804,
and  he  was  judge  of  the  U.  S"  district  court  in
!8l5-'26.  He  was  governor  of  New  Jersey  in
1813-'15.  and  was  also  chancellor  of  that  state.  He
published  "  New  Jersey  Supreme  Court  Reports"
(1803-' 16).— His  son  William,  statesman,  and  gov
ernor  of  New  Jersey,  b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  4  May,
1796:  d.  there,  16  "Feb..  1862,  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1813.  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began
practice  in  Newark.  He  was  governor  of  New  Jer
sey  in  1837-'43,  and  at  the  same  time  was  ex-officio
chancellor  of  that  state.  During  his  administration
the  Broad  Seal  War  occurred,  a  controversy  which
grew  out  of  the  congressional  election  of  1838,


718


PENNINGTON


PENNOCK


when  six  members  were  to  be  chosen  fiy  a  general
ticket  in  New  Jersey.  In  two  of  the  counties  the
clerks  had  rejected  'some  of  the  township  returns
for  real  or  alleged  irregularities,  and  thus  five  of
the  Whig  candidates  received  majorities  which
they  would  not  have
obtained  had  all  the
votes  been  counted.
The  sixth,  having  run
ahead  of  his  ticket,  was
elected  beyond  dispute.
The  governor  and  his
council,  in  accordance
with  the  law  then  in
force,  canvassed  the
votes,  and  to  the  six
persons  who  had  re
ceived  the  highest  num
ber,  issued  commissions
under  the  great  seal  of
the  state.  Congress,  on
convening,  found  that
the  five  votes  from  New
Jersey  must  decide  the
speakership.  and  this
gave  rise  to  a  stormy
debate,  which  lasted  several  days,  and  finally  ended
in  the  choice  of  John  Quincy  Adams  as  temporary
chairman.  He  decided  that  all  members  holding
commissions  could  vote;  but  the  decision,  being
appealed  from,  was  reversed  and  a  resolution
adopted  that  only  the  names  of  members  holding
uncontested  seats  should  be  called.  On  the  twelfth
day  of  the  session  Robert  M.  T.  Hunter  was
chosen  speaker,  and  on  28  Feb.  the  five  Democratic
members  were  admitted  to  their  seats.  The  sub
ject  was  referred  to  a  committee,  which  reported
that  the  sitting  members  were  elected.  It  was  gen
erally  admitted  that  the  governor  had  no  option
but  to  fill  the  commissions  as  he  did.  He  was
clerk  of  the  U.  S.  district  court  in  1815-'26,  and
afterward  declined  appointments  as  governor  of
Minnesota  territory,  and  as  one  of  the  judges  to
settle  claims  under  the  Mexican  treaty.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  served  in  1859-
'61,  and  was  chosen  speaker  in  February,  1860,  after
a  contest  that  lasted  over  eight  weeks. — Another
son.  Aaron  S.,  b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  17  Jan.,  1800;
d.  in  Paterson,  N.  J.,  25  Aug.,  1869,  attained  repu
tation  as  a  chancery  lawyer,  and  was  state  senator
and  prosecutor  of  the  pleas  for  Passaic  county,  and
acting  governor  of  the  Society  for  establishing  use
ful  manufactures. — William  Sanford's  brother,
Samuel,  editor,  b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  8  March,
1765 ;  d.  there.  6  March,  1835,  became  in  1799  editor
and  one  of  the  proprietors  of  the  "  Sentinel  of  Free
dom  "  in  Newark,  N.  J.  Between  1810  and  1825
he  was  elected  eleven  times  a  member  of  the  legis
lature,  and  was  once  speaker  of  the  house.  In  1827
he  was  a  member  of  the  state  council. — Samuel's
second  son,  Samuel  Hayes,  physician,  b.  in  New
ark,  N.  J.,  16  Oct.,  1806,  was  graduated  at  Prince
ton  in  1825,  and  has  been  since  1856  a  trustee  of
that  institution.  In  1876  he  was  made  president
of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the  theological  seminary
in  the  same  place.  He  is  the  author  of  many  con
tributions  to  medical  science  as  well  as  of  numerous
addresses  and  papers  on  the  subject  of  education
and  kindred  topics.— Another  son,  Alexander
Ciimmings  Macwliorter,  lawyer,  b.  in  Newark,
N.  J.,  2  July,  1810 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  25  Jan.,
1867,  entered  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  but  after
the  expiration  of  two  years  he  resigned  his  cadet-
ship,  studied  law,  and 'practised  in"  Newark,  N.  J.
In  1837-'8  he  was  a  member  of  the  general  assembly


of  New  Jersey.  In  1852  he  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  Whig,  serving  two  terms.  For  many  years  he
was  brigadier-general  of  New  Jersey  militia.

PENNOCK,  Alexander  Moselj,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  1  Nov.,  1813  ;  d.  in  Portsmouth,
N.  H.,  20  Sept.,  1876.  He  was  appointed  to  the
navy  from  Tennessee  on  1  April,  1828,  served  on
the  frigate  "  Gut-mere,"  in  the  Pacific  squadron,  in
1829-'30,  and  on  the  sloop  "  Natchez,"  in  the  Bra
zil  squadron,  in  1834.  He  was  promoted  lieutenant,
25  March,  1839,  was  light-house  inspector  in
1853-'6,  and  on  15  Dec.,  1855,  was  commissioned
commander.  He  was  on  special  duty  connected
with  the  steam  frigate  "  Niagara  "  in  1857,  com
manded  the  steamer  "Southern  Star,"  of  the  Bra
zil  squadron,  and  in  the  Paraguay  expedition  in
1859-'60,  and  was  again  detailed  as  light-house  in
spector  in  1861.  In  the  last-named  year  Com
mander  Pennock  was  ordered  to  duty  as  fleet  cap
tain  of  the  Mississippi  squadron,  where  he  remained
till  the  autumn  of  1864.  gaining  a  reputation  for
executive  ability  of  a  high  order.  He  was  com
missioned  captain,  2  Jan.,  1863,  in  1866-'7  was  on
duty  at  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard,  and  in  1868  was
appointed  to  the  frigate  "  Franklin,"  then  Farm-
gut's  flag-shin,  of  the  European  squadron.  He  was
commissioned  commodore,  6  May,  1868,  and  in  1869
was  in  charge  of  the  European  squadron.  He  was
promoted  to  rear-admiral  in  1872.

PENNOCK,  Barclay,  author,  b.  in  East  Marl-
borough,  Chester  co.,  Pa.,  26  Jan.,  1821 :  d.  there,
9  March,  1859.  He  received  a  classical  education,
then  went  to  Europe  and  spent  two  years  in  the
study  of  the  language  and  literature  of  Germany,
France,  and  Italy.  While  abroad  he  was  one  of
the  travelling  party  that  was  led  by  Bayard  Taylor,
the  story  of  which  tour  is  told  in  the  hitter's
••  Views  Afoot."  In  1851  he  made  a  second  trip
to  Europe,  where  he  passed  several  years,  much  of
his  time  being  spent  in  Norway  and  Sweden  study
ing  the  language  of  those  countries.  On  his  re
turn  to  the  United  States  he  engaged  in  literary
pursuits,  and  translated  Keyser's  "  Religion  of  the
Northmen,"  with  additions  (New  York,  1857).  At
his  death  he  left  ready  for  the  press  two  other
translations,  one  a  romance  of  Iceland  about  the
time  of  the  introduction  of  Christianity  there,  and
a  volume  of  Scandinavian  folk-lore.

PENNOCK,  Casper  Wistar,  physician,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  2  July,  1799;  d.  in  Ilowellsville,
Chester  co.,  Pa.,  16  April,  1867.  He  became  a
farmer,  and  opened  an  evening-school  for  negroes
in  his  neighborhood,  teaching  it  himself  after  the
labors  of  the  day.  He  then  entered  on  the  study
of  medicine  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
and  after  graduation  in  1828  spent  some  time,  in
the  almshouse  hospital,  and  then  went  to  Paris,
where  he  remained  for  two  years.  In  1835  he  be
came  an  attending  physician  at  the  Philadelphia
hospital,  where  he  and  Dr.  William  W.  Gerhard,
his  colleague,  studied  the  symptoms  and  pathologi
cal  anatomy  of  typhus  fever.  The  results  of  their
joint,  study,  which  were  published  by  Dr.  Gerhard,
have  been  of  great  value.  He  also  entered  on  a
course  of  investigation  on  the  play  of  the  heart  in
animals,  but  soon  afterward  he  was  prostrated  by
disease,  and  for  more  than  twenty  years  before  his
death  labored  under  an  unusual  form  of  paralysis.
In  accordance  with  directions  that  he  had  given
some  years  before  his  death,  a  post-mortem  was
held  by  several  eminent  physicians,  and  a  report  of
the  case,  the  first  of  the  kind  that  had  been  noted
in  this  country,  by  Dr.  J.  C.  Morris,  was  published
in  the  "  Transactions  of  the  College  of  Physicians
of  Philadelphia"  (4  Dec.,  1867),  and  afterward


PENNY


PENROSE


719


translated  into  French  as  "  Le  cas  dn  Docteur  W.
Pennock,  ou  contribution  a  1'histoire  de  la  sclerose
en  plaques  disseminees"  (Paris,  1868).  Dr.  Pen-
nock  published,  with  Dr.  William  W.  Gerhard.  "  Ob
servations  on  the  Cholera  of  Paris  "  (Philadelphia.
1832).  and  edited  the  treatise  of  Bouillaud  on
the  diseases  of  the  heart  (1837)  and  Dr.  James
Hope's  "Treatise  on  Disease  of  the  Heart  and  the
Great  Vessels"  (1846).

PENNY,  Yirsdnia,  author,  b.  in  Louisville,
Ky.,  18  Jan.,  1820.  She  was  graduated  at  Steuben-
ville,  Ohio,  female  seminary  in  1843.  taught  for
nine  years  in  that  state,  Illinois,  and  Missouri,  and
subsequently  devoted  herself  to  enlarging  the  in
dustrial  sphere  of  women.  She  has  written  much
on  the  condition  of  the  working  classes.  Her  pub
lications  include  •'  The  Employments  of  Women  "
(Boston.  18(53) :  "  Five  Hundred  Occupations  Adapt
ed  to  Women  "  (Philadelphia,  1868) ;  and  "  Think
and  Act  *'  (1873).

PENNVBACKER,  Isaac  Samuals,  senator,  b.
in  Shenandoah  county,  Va.,  12  Sept.,  1807:  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C.,  12  January,  1847.  He  was  edu;
cated  at  Washington  college,  Va.,  studied  law  at
the  Winchester  law-school,  settled  in  Harrisonburg,
Va.,  and  attained  to  eminence  in  his  profession.
He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1836,
served  one  term,  and  in  1839  became  district  judge.
He  declined  the  office  of  U.  S.  attorney  general,
which  was  offered  him  by  President  Van  Buren,
and  subsequently  that  of  justice  of  the  supreme
court  of  Virginia,  and  the  nomination  of  the  Demo
cratic  party  for  governor.  He  was  chosen  U.  S.
senator  in  1845.  but  died  before  the  expiration  cf
his  term  of  service.

PENNYPACKER,  Elijah  Funk,  reformer,  b.
in  Chester  county,  Pa.,  20  Nov.,  1804;  d.  in  Phce-
nixville,  Pa.,  4  Jan..  1888.  He  was  educated  in
the  private  schools  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  taught
there,  and  subsequently  engaged  in  land  surveying
in  Phoenixville.  Pa.  He  then  became  interested  in
real  estate,  was  in  the  legislature  in  1831-'5.  chair
man  of  its  committee  on  banks,  and  a  principal
mover  in  the  establishment  of  public  schools.  In
1838-'8  he  was  a  canal  commissioner.  He  joined
the  Society  of  Friends  about  1841,  and  thenceforth
for  many  years  devoted  himself  to  the  abolition
movement,  becoming  president  of  the  local  anti-
slavery  society,  and  of  the  Chester  county,  and
Pennsylvania  state  societies.  He  was  an  active
manager  of  the  "  Underground  railroad,"  and  his
house  was  one  of  its  stations.  With  John  Edgar
Thompson  he  made  the  preliminary  surveys  of
the  Pennsylvania  railroad.  He  aided  the  suffer
ing  poor  in  Ireland  in  the  famine  of  1848.  and  sub
sequently  identified  himself  with  the  Prohibition
party,  becoming  their  candidate  for  state  treasurer
in  1875.  He  was  an  organizer  of  the  Pennsylvania
mutual  fire  insurance  company  in  1869,  and  was
its  vice-president  till  1879.  when  he  became  presi
dent,  holding  office  till  January,  1887,  when  he  re
signed.  John  G.  Whittier  says  of  him :  "  In  mind,
body,  and  brave  championship  of  the  cause  of
freedom  he  was  one  of  the  most  remarkable  men
1  ever  knew.'' — His  nephew.  Galusha,  soldier,  b.
in  Valley  Forge,  Pa.,  1  June,  1844,  received  an
academical  education,  and  at  seventeen  years  of
age  entered  the  National  army  as  a  private.  He
was  appointed  captain  in  the  97th  Pennsylvania
volunteers  in  August.  1861,  and  major  in  October,
served  in  the  Department  of  the  South,  and  was
engaged  in  the  operations  in  Florida,  and  against
Charleston,  S.  C.  He  was  wounded  three  times  at
Drury's  bluff  in  May,  1864,  was  commissioned
colonel  in  August,  and  in  September  was  at  the


'  siege  of  Petersburg. He  commanded  a  brigade  in
'  the  10th  corps,  and  was  wounded  at  Fort  Harrison,
;  and  again  at  Darbytown  road. He  led  his  brigade
in  the  final  attack  on  Fort  Fisher,  and  received
j  severe  wounds,  which  confined  him  to  the  hospital
I  until  1866. He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  15  Jan..  1865.  for  gallant  service  at  the
capture  of  Fort  Fisher,  was  given  that  full  rank.  18
Feb.,  1865,  brevetted  major-general  of  volunteers.
13  March,  1865,  "  for  gallant  and  meritorious  ser
vice  during  the  civil  war,"  and  received  the  same
brevets  in  the  regular  army  on  2  March,  1867. He
became  colonel  of  the  34th  U.  S.  infantry  in  1866,
and  in  1883  was  retired  by  reason  of  wounds  re
ceived  in  action.

PENNYPACKER,  Samnel  Whitaker,  law
yer,  b.  in  Phcenixville.  Pa.,  9  April,  1843,  was  edu
cated  in  his  native  town  and  at  the  West  Phila
delphia  institute,  served  as  a  private  in  the  26th
'•emergency"  regiment  in  1863.  subsequently  read
law.  in  which  he  was  graduated  at  the  University
i  of  Pennsylvania  in  1866.  and  in  1868  became  presi
dent  of  the  Philadelphia  law  academy.  He  is  a
member  of  the  American  Philosophical  society,  of
several  foreign  societies,  is  a  vice-president  of  the
Pennsylvania  historical  society,  and  a  trustee  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  His  collection  of
more  than  2.000  volumes  and  manuscripts,  mainly
composed  of  early  Pennsylvania  imprints,  is  re
markable  for  its  fulness  in  material  relating  to  the
German  colonists  of  that  state,  and  for  the  number
of  works  it  contains  that  were  printed  by  Benja
min  Franklin.  He  has  compiled  four  volumes  of
"  Reports  of  the  Supreme  Court,"  a  "  Supplemen
tary  Index  to  the  English  Common  Law  Reports."
with  Samuel  S.  Hollingsworth  and  E.  Greenough
Platt  ^Philadelphia,  1879),  and  has  aided  in  the
preparation  of  nineteen  volumes  of  the  weekly  notes
of  cases  in  the  "  Pennsylvania  Law  Reporter!"  lie
has  also  taken  much  interest  in  historical  research,
and  has  published  "  Annals  of  Phcenixville  and  itc
Vicinity"  (Philadelphia,  1878);  "The  Pennypackcr
Reunion  "(1878);  and  "  Historical  and  Biographi-
cal  Sketches,"  a  collection  of  fugitive  papers,  many
of  which  have  been  translated  into  Dutch  and
into  German  (1883).

PENROSE.  Charles  Binsrhnm.  lawyer,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  6  Oct.,  1798;  d.  in  Harrisburg.  Pa.,
6  April,  1857.  His  father,  Clement  Biddle  Pen-
rose,  was  one  of  the  three  commissioners  for  the
territory  ceded  by  France  to  the  United  States.
The  son  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1821,  and  practised  at  Carlisle.  Pa.  He  was  elected
as  a  Whig  to  the  state  senate  in  1833.  and  was  the
speaker  of  the  body  at  the  time  of  the  "  buckshot
war."  In  1841  President  Harrison  appointed  him
solicitor  of  the  treasury,  which  post  he  held  until
the  close  of  Tyler's  administration.  Resuming  the
practice  of  the  law.  he  subsequently  removed  to
Philadelphia,  was  elected  as  a  reform  candidate  to
the  state  senate  in  1856,  and  at  the  time  of  his
death  was  serving  in  this  office.  He  was  one  of  the
editors  of  Penrose  and  Watt's  '•  Reports  of  Cases
in  the  Supreme  Court  of  Pennsylvania  (1832-'3). —
His  son,  Richard  Alexander  Fnllerton,  phy
sician,  b.  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  24  March,  1827.  was
graduated  at  Dickinson  college  in  1846  and  at  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl
vania  in  1849.  He  was  instrumental  in  having  the
wards  of  the  Philadelphia  hospital  opened  to  medi-
'  cal  instructions,  and  was  elected  consulting  sur
geon  to  the  institution,  where  he  began  clinical
lectures  on  diseases  of  women  and  children.  He
was  for  many  years  a  successful  private  teacher  in
|  medicine,  and  in  1863  he  became  professor  of  ob-


720


PENTECOST


PEPPER


stetrics  and  of  the  diseases  of  women  and  children
in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  which  post  he
still  holds.  He  is  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Chil
dren's  hospital  of  Philadelphia,  the  American  gynae
cological  society,  and  the  Gynacean  hospital,  and
is  a  member  of  many  learned  societies.  In  1872
he  received  from  Dickinson  college  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  Dr.  Penrose  has  contributed  to  various
medical  journals. — Richard  Alexander  Fullerton's
son.  Boies,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1  Nov.,
1800,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1881,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  Philadelphia  bar  in
1883.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1885,
serving  in  the  state  senate  in  I88(i.  With  Edward
P.  Allison,  he  wrote  "Philadelphia:  a  History  of
Municipal  Development "  (Philadelphia.  1887);  and
several  chapters  on  municipal  subjects  for  the
••  American  and  English  Encyclopaedia  of  Law."

PEXTECOST,  (ieorge  Frederick,  evangelist,
b.  in  Albion,  111.,  23  Sept.,  1843.  He  was  appren
ticed  to  a  printer  at  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  was
subsequently  private  secretary  to  the  governor  of
Kansas  territory,  and  clerk  of  the  U.  S.  district
court.  lie  then  studied  law,  and  entered  George
town  college,  Ky.,  but  left  to  join  the  National
army,  and  in  1861-'2  served  in  the  8th  Kentucky
cavalry,  resigning  with  the  rank  of  captain.  He
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1804,  and  was  pastor  of
Baptist  churches  in  Indiana,  Kentucky,  and  Xew
York  till  1877,  when  he  became  an  evangelist,  in
which  work  he  has  since  continued,  with  the  ex
ception  of  a  few  years  pastorate  of  a  Congrega
tional  church  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  He  has  been
abroad  three  times  on  missions,  and  is  a  successful
revivalist.  Lafayette  college  gave  him  the  degree
of  D.  D.  in  1884.  He  has  published  tracts  and
pamphlets,  has  edited  "Words  and  W capons  for
Christian  Workers,"  a  monthly,  since  1885,  and  is
the  author  of  '•  In  the  Volume  of  the  Book  "  (New
York,  187!));  "Angel  in  Marble"  (Boston,  1884);
and  "  Out  of  Egypt"  (New  York.  1887).

PEON  Y  CONTRERAS,  Jos6  (pay-own'),  Mexi
can  poet,  b.  in  Merida,  Yucatan,  13  Jan.,  1843.  He
studied  in  the  university  of  his  native  city,  and  was
graduated  in  medicine  in  1802.  During  his  studies
he  had  begun  to  cultivate  poetry,  and  some  of  his
best  lyrical  compositions  date  from  that  time.  In
1800  he  published  his  first  epic  romance,  "  La  Cruz
de  Paredon."  the  subject  of  which  is  an  ancient
tradition  of  Yucatan.  At  the  same  time  he  tried
dramatic  composition,  and  three  of  his  comedies
were  represented  successfully.  In  1863  he  went  to
Mexico,  and  obtained  a  post  as  assistant  in  the
Hospital  of  Jesus.  He  completed  his  studies  in  the
University  of  Mexico,  and  in  1867  obtained  the
place  of  director  of  the  lunatic  asylum  of  San
Hipolito.  which  he  still  (1888)  holds.  "Dr.  Peon  has
been  deputy  to  congress  several  times,  and  senator
for  Yucatan.  Of  his  lyrical  compositions  the  most
noteworthy  is  "  Ecos  "  (Merida,  1860),  and  of  the
epic,  besides  the  above-mentioned,  the  romances  of
"  Petkanche  "  and  "A  las  Ruinas  de  Uxmal  "  (1860),
and  "  La  Ruina  de  Atzcapotzalco,"  "  Moteuczoina."
and  other  historical  romances  (Mexico,  1865).  His
dramas  include  "  Maria  la  Loca,"  "  La  Hija  del
Rev,"  and  "  Un  Amor  de  Ilernan  Cortes."

PEPPER,  George  Dana  Boardman,  clergy
man,  b.  in  Ware,  Mass.,  5  Feb..  1833.  He  was
graduated  at  Amherst  in  1857  and  at  Newton  theo
logical  seminary  in  1860,  and  became  pastor  of  the
Baptist  church  in  Waterville,  Me.  In  1865  he  ac
cepted  the  chair  of  ecclesiastical  history  in  Newton
theological  seminary,  which  after  some  years  he
surrendered  for  the  professorship  of  Christian
theology  in  Crozer  theological  seminary,  Upland,


Pa.  Since  1882  he  has  been  president  of  Colby  uni
versity,  Me.,  and  professor  of  intellectual  philoso
phy.  '  Colby  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  I),  in  1807,
and  Amherst  in  1882,  and  he  received  that  of
LL.  D.  from  Lewisburg  in  1882.  He  has  published
various  pamphlets  and  contributions  to  periodi
cals,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Outlines  of  Theology."
for  the  use  of  his  classes  (printed  privately,  Phila
delphia.  1873).

PEPPER,  William,  physician,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  21  Jan.,  1810 ;  d.  there,  15  Oct.,  1804.
He  was  graduated  with  first  honors  at  Princeton
in  1829.  began  the  study  of  medicine  under  Dr.
Thomas  T.  Hewson,  and  received  his  degree  in  1832
at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  He  subse
quently  spent  two  years  in  study  in  Paris,  and  the
friendships  that  he'formed  with  some  of  the  ablest
men  of  the  French  school  were  strong  and  lasting.
On  his  return  to  Philadelphia  in  the  latter  part  of
1834  he  entered  upon  the  practice  of  his  profession
and  rose  rapidly  in  reputation  until  for  several
years  before  his  death  he  was  recognized  as  the
chief  consultant  in  the  community.  He  was  phy
sician  to  Wills  hospital  and  to  the  Pennsylvania
hospital.  With  the  latter  he  was  connected  for
twenty-six  years,  until  the  close  of  1858,  and  dur
ing  this  long  term  of  service  took  an  active  share
in  clinical  teaching.  In  1800  he  was  elected  pro
fessor  of  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine  in
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  but  he  was  forced
by  ill-health  to  resign  in  1864.  His  clinical  and
didactic  lectures  were  models  of  clear,  forcible,
and  practical  teaching,  and  he  was  especially  re
nowned  for  his  diagnostic  skill  and  for  his  judi
cious  and  successful  treatment  of  disease.  He  was
a  member  of  various  learned  societies  and  a  fellow
of  the  College  of  physicians.  His  engrossing  prac
tice  prevented  him  from  contributing  largely  to
medical  literature.  His  most  important  memoirs
in  journals  are  on  "  Chronic  Hydrocephalus  "
(1850);  "Scrofulous  Inflammation  of  the  Lungs
and  Pulmonary  Condensation"  (1852);  "Treat
ment  of  Intermittent  Fever  by  Quiniodine  ";  and
"The  Use  of  the  Spirometer  in  Diseases  of  the
Lungs"  (1862). — His  eldest  son,  George,  physician,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1  April,  1841  :  d.  there,  14
Sept.,  1872.  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1862,  and  in  medicine  in  1865.
He  enlisted  on  15  Sept.,  1862,  as  a  private  in  the
6th  Pennsylvania  cavalry,  was  promoted  to  a  lieu
tenancy,  and  saw  much  active  service,  but  was  dis
abled  in  1863.  and  on  22  May  received  an  honorable
discharge.  He  was  chiefly  instrumental  in  found
ing  the  Philadelphia  obstetrical  society,  and  served
as  its  secretary  until  illness  compelled  him  to  re
sign.  He  was  a  member  of  many  professional
bodies,  and  rapidly  acquired  practice  in  the  branches
to  which  he  devoted  himself.  His  artistic  talent,
his  mechanical  ingenuity,  his  retentive  memory,
his  industry  and  devotion  to  his  profession,  gave
assurance  of  a  career  of  unusual  brilliancy.  His
contributions  to  the  proceedings  of  the  societies  of
which  he  was  a  member  were  numerous.  Among
the  more  important  are  that  on  "Adipose  Deposits
in  the  Omentum  and  Abdominal  Walls  as  a  Source
of  Error  in  Diagnosis"  and  that  on  "  The  Mechani
cal  Treatment  of  Uterine  Displacements." — An
other  son,  William,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  21  Aug.,  1843,  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1862,  and  in  medicine  in  1804.
He  has  been  connected  with  various  hospitals,  and
was  chiefly  instrumental  in  the  establishment  of
the  University  hospital,  securing  the  gift  for  a  site
from  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  and  serving  as  chair
man  of  the  finance  and  building  committees.  In


PEPPERRELL


PEPPERRELL


721


the  University  of  Pennsylvania  he  was  lecturer
on  morbid  anatomy  in  1868-'70,  and  on  clinical
medicine  in  1870-'6,  and  professor  of  the  latter
branch  from  1876  till  1887.  when  he  was  elected  to
the  chair  of  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine  to
succeed  Dr.  Alfred  Stille.  In  January,  1881,  he
was  unanimously  elected  provost  of  the  University,
and  at  the  same  time  the  dignity  and  powers  of
the  office  were  materially  increased.  During  no
equal  period  of  this  institution's  history  have  its
interests  been  more  rapidly  advanced  than  since
his  assumption  of  this  office.  He  founded  the
'•  Philadelphia  Medical  Times,"  and  was  its  editor
in  1870-'!,  and  was  medical  director  of  the  Centen
nial  international  exposition,  and  for  his  services
in  connection  therewith  he  received  from  the  king
of  Sweden  the  decoration  of  knight  commander  of
the  order  of  St.  Olaf.  He  was  largely  instrumental
in  founding  the  Pennsylvania  museum  and  school
of  industrial  art,  and  was  for  several  years  a  mem
ber  of  its  board  of  managers.  He  is  a  fellow  of  the
College  of  physicians,  a  member  of  the  American
philosophical  society,  of  the  Pathological  society
of  Philadelphia,  of  which  he  was  president  in
1873-'6.  of  the  Academy  of  natural  sciences,  in
which  he  has  been  director  of  the  biological  sec
tion,  of  the  American  climatological  association,
of  which  he  was  president  in  1886,  and  of  many
other  learned  bodies.  In  1882  he  %vas  a  member  of
the  assay  commission  of  the  U.  S.  mint.  In  1881
he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Lafayette
college.  Dr.  Pepper  has  also  been  president  of  the
first  sanitary  convention  of  Pennsylvania  and  of  the
Foulke  and  Long  institute  for  orphan  girls.  His
most  important  literary  work  has  been  the  editing
of  the  "  System  of  Medicine  by  American  Au
thors  "  (5  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1885-'6).  This  secured
an  immediate  success,  and  is  recognized  as  the
chief  American  authority  on  medical  questions.
He  published,  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  John  F.
Meigs,  successive  editions  of  their  work  on  "  Dis
eases  of  Children  "  (1870).  Among  his  contribu
tions  to  journals  or  the  transactions  of  societies
are  •'  Trephining  in  Cerebral  Disease "  (1871) :
"  Local  Treatment  of  Pulmonary  Cavities  "  (1874) ;
"  Catarrhal  Irritation  "  (1881) :  "'Report  on  Mineral
Springs  of  America  "  (1880) ;  "  Epilepsy  "  (1883) ;
and  "  Phthisis  in  Pennsylvania "  (1886").  Other
publications  of  less  technical  character  have  been
"  Sanitary  Relations  of  Hospitals  "  (1875) :  "  Higher
Medical  Education:  the  True  Interest  of  the  Pub
lic  and  the  Profession "  (1877) :  '•  Report  of  the
Medical  Department  of  the  Centennial  Exposition  "
(1877) ;  his  inaugural  address  and  annual  reports
as  provost ;  and  public  addresses  on  "  Force  vs.
Work  "  (Baltimore,  1884)  and  "  Benjamin  Frank
lin  "  (Lancaster.  1887).

PEPPERRELL,  Sir  William,  soldier,  b.  in
Kittery,  Me..  27  June,  1696:  d.  there,  6  July,  1759.
His  father,  who  was  a  native  of  Devon,  England,
was  left  an  orphan  at  an  early  age  and  apprenticed
to  the  captain  of  a  fishing  schooner  that  sailed  to
the  Banks  of  Newfoundland.  At  the  age  of  twenty-
two  he  settled  on  the  Isles  of  Shoals,  where  he  was
engaged  in  the  fishing-trade,  and  about  1680  he  re
moved  to  Kittery.  Me.,  where  he  married,  and  where
his  only  son  was  born.  William's  boyhood  was
spent  in  Kittery,  and  at  an  early  age  he  was  taken
by  his  father  into  partnership.  At  this  time  the
firm  was  the  most  important  mercantile  house  in
Xew  England,  and  had  a  large  agency  in  settling  the
pecuniary  affairs  of  the  province  with  the  mother
country.  This  branch  of  the  business  was  con
ducted  by  young  Pepperrell.  In  this  way  he  made
the  acquaintance  of  all  the  public  men  in  Boston,
VOL.  iv. — 46


which  greatly  favored  his  political  and  military
advancement,  and  at  the  same  time  he  cultivated
the  courtly  manners  and  dignified  address  for
which  he  was  afterward  distinguished.  At  the  age
of  twenty-one  he  was  appointed  captain  of  a  com
pany  of  cavalry,  soon
afterward  he  was  made
major  and  lieutenant-
colonel,  and  at  the  age
of  thirty  colonel,  which
gave  him  the  command
of  all  the  militia  of
Maine.  In  1726  he  was
elected  representative
from  Kittery  to  the
Massachusetts  legisla
ture,  and  in  1727  he  was
appointed  a  member  of
the  council.  Though
not  bred  a  lawyer,  he
had  acquired  public  con
fidence  to  such  a  degree
that  in  1730  he  was  ap
pointed  by  Gov.  Belcher
chief  justice  of  the  court
of  common  pleas,  which  office  he  held  till  his  death.
In  colonial  days,  whenever  England  was  at  war  with
France,  New  England  was  at  war  with  Canada,  and
when  hostilities  began  in  Europe  in  1745  great
preparations  were  also  made  in  the  colonies.  In
these  preparations  no  man  was  more  forward  than
William  Pepperrell.  His  influence  in  procuring
volunteers  was  unequalled,  and  he  advanced  £5.000
from  his  private  fortune  for  necessary  supplies.
He  was  chosen  commander  of  the  little  army  of
4.000  men  that  was  intended  to  reduce  Louisburg,
on  the  island  of  Cape  Breton,  the  strongest  fortress
on  the  coast  of  America.  Com.  Warren  had  com
mand  of  the  small  squadron  of  English  men-of-war
that  was  sent  to  the  aid  of  the  provincials.  On  the
last  day  of  April,  1745,  the  first  troops  were  landed
at  Louisburg,  to  the  great  surprise  of  the  garri
son.  In  vain  the  French  garrison,  hastily  gathered
together,  endeavored  to  prevent  the  landing  of  the
English  forces.  They  were  driven  back  into  the
town.  Meanwhile  their  comrades,  who  were  sta
tioned  at  the  battery  at  the  northern  side  of  the
bay,  seeing  a  small  body  of  soldiers  approaching,
supposed  the  whole  army  must  be  upon  them,  and
abandoned  their  guns,  which  were  taken  possession
of  by  Col.  William  Vaughan  and  his  company.  In
the  morning,  when  the  French  discovered  their
mistake,  a  hundred  men  were  sent  to  retake  it,  but
they  were  held  at  bay  until  re-enforcements  arrived.
Pepperrell  at  once  laid  siege  to  the  town.  The
fleet  aided  him  with  cannon  and  gunners,  his  bat
teries  gradually  approached  within  600  feet  of  the
walls,  a  breach  was  effected,  and  all  was  in  readi
ness  for  an  assault,  when,  on  the  forty-ninth  day  of
the  siege,  after  9,000  cannon-balls  and  600  shells
had  been  thrown  into  the  place,  Louisburg  sur
rendered,  and  Pepperrell  marched  in  at  the  head  of
his  army,  on  17  June,  1745.  When  the  news  reached
the  colonies  the  enthusiasm  was  immense.  Every
town  was  blazing  with  fireworks  and  illuminations.
In  the  mother  country  the  victory  of  the  provin
cials  was  hailed  with  universal  applause,  and  the
general  was  created  a  baronet,  being  the  first  na
tive  of  this  country  on  whom  such  an  honor  was
conferred.  He  remained  at  Louisburg  till  1746,
when  he  returned  to  Boston.  Thence  he  journeyed
homeward,  and  was  met  at  a  distance  of  many
miles  by  a  troop  of  horse  and  entertained  at  Salem
at  a  banquet  at  which  all  the  noted  men  of  the
colony  were  present.  A  short  time  after  the  peace


722


PEPPERRELL


PER ALT A


he  retired  from  business  the  richest  man  in  the
colonies.  He  is  said  to  have  been  worth  £200,000
sterling,  from  which  he  contributed  liberally  to  the
expense  of  the  Louisburg  expedition.  His  estates
were  so  large  that  he  could  travel  more  than  thirty
miles  on  his  own  territory.  His  style  of  living  was
baronial.  He  entertained  hospitably  in  his  house
at  Kittery,  which  was  elegantly  furnished.  (See
illustration.)  He  had  a  retinue  of  servants,  kept  a
coach-and-six,  and  had  a  barge  on  the  river  which
was  manned  by  a  black  crew  in  showy  uniform.
He  dressed  in  the  fashion  of  the  period  in  a  suit  of
scarlet  cloth  richly  trimmed  with  gold  lace,  and
wore  a  large  powdered  wig.  He  was  always  gen
erous,  and  particularly  so  in  his  donations  to  the
Congregational  church  at  Kittery,  of  which  he  was
for  many  years  a  devout  member.  In  1749  Sir  Will
iam  made  a  visit  to  London,  where  he  was  cordially
received,  and  marks  of  distinguished  favor  were
paid  to  him  by  George  II.  and  the  Prince  of  Wales.
After  his  return,  in  1751,  a  great  sorrow  fell  on  him
in  the  loss  of  his  only  son,  Andrew,  a  graduate  of
Harvard,  who  died  at  the  age  of  twenty-four.  His
only  remaining  child,  Elizabeth,  married  Col.  Na
thaniel  Sparhawk,  who  carried  on  the  business  after
his  father-in-law  retired.  The  baronet  was  often
employed  in  negotiations  with  the  Indians,  and
during  the  French  war  of  1735  was  active  in  rais
ing  and  equipping  troops  for  the  service.  In  that
year  he  was  commissioned  major-general  in  the
British  army,  and  commanded  the  forces  that  were


charged  with  the  protection  of  the  frontier  of
Maine  and  New  Hampshire.  He  was  acting  gov
ernor  of  Massachusetts  in  1756-'8,  and  in  the  year
of  his  death  he  was  made  a  lieutenant-general.
The  greater  names  of  Washington  and  the  Revo
lutionary  generals  have  eclipsed  that  of  Pepperrell,
but  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  he  did  more
than  any  other  man  to  prepare  the  army  that  was
afterward  to  achieve  American  independence.
Three  portraits  are  known  to  have  been  painted  of
Sir  William  Pepperrell.  Of  these,  one  was  de
stroyed  by  fire  in  New  York  in  1883,  of  which  the
artist  was  unknown.  The  Essex  institute,  of  Sa
lem,  Mass.,  possesses  a  full-length  painting.  The
third  and  most  valuable,  supposed  to  have  been
painted  by  Smybert,  is  now  owned  by  a  descendant,
of  New  York,  and  is  represented  in  the  accompany
ing  illustration.  It  is  in  full  court  costume,  aiid
was  taken  shortly  after  he  was  created  baronet.  Sir
William  published  an  account  of  a  "  Conference
with  the  Penobscot  Tribe"  (Boston,  1753).  See
his  life  by  Usher  Parsons  (Boston,  1855),  and  a
sketch  by  Everett  P.  Wheeler  in  the  New  York
"  Genealogical  and  Biographical  Record  "  for  July,
1887. — His  grandson,  Sir  William,  b.  in  Kittery,
Me.,  30  Nov.,  1746;  d.  in  London,  England,  in
December,  1816,  the  second  son  of  his  daughter,
Mrs.  Sparhawk,  was  his  grandfather's  residuary
legatee,  and  inherited  a  large  estate.  He  dropped


the  name  of  Sparhawk  by  act  of  legislature  on
coming  of  age,  and  by  a  subsequent  act  assumed
his  grandfather's  title.  He  was  graduated  at  Har
vard  in  1760,  and  became  a  member  of  the  council
of  Massachusetts.  Subsequently  he  embraced  the
royal  cause,  went  to  England  in  1775,  and  in  1778
was  proscribed  and  banished,  and  his  estates  were
confiscated.  He  kept  open  house  for  his  fellow-
exiles,  was  allowed  a  stipend  by  the  British  gov
ernment,  and  in  1779  became  president  of  an  asso
ciation  of  loyalists  in  London,  which  drew  up  an
address  to  the  king,  assuring  him  of  the  fealty  of
the  majority  of  his  American  subjects,  and  organ
ized  a  similar  board  of  loyalists  in  New  York.  Sir
William  also  extended  aid  to  many  American  pa
triots  that  were  held  captive  in  England.  He  was
of  irreproachable  private  life,  and  one  of  the
founders  of  the  British  and  foreign  Bible  society.
His  only  son,  William,  died  in  1809,  and  the  baro
netcy  thus  became  extinct.

PERALTA,  tiaston  de  (pay-ral'-tah),  Marquis
de  Palces,  viceroy  of  Mexico,  b.  in  Navarre  about
1520:  d.  in  Valladolid  about  1580.  He  was  de
scended  from  the  ancient  royal  family  of  Navarre.
After  the  death  of  the  second  viceroy,  Luis  de
Velasco.  in  1564,  the  audiencia  was  governing  New
Spain  when  the  so-called  conspiracy  of  the  Man  mis
del  Valle  began.  As  the  audiencia  was  proceeding
illegally  and  condemned  many  of  the  conspirators
to  death  without  sufficient  proofs,  King  Philip  II.
appointed  Peralta  viceroy,  and  hurried  his  depart
ure  to  arrange  the  difficulties  in  Mexico.  The
viceroy  arrived  in  Vera  Cruz,  17  Sept.,  1566,  and,
being  of  kind  and  just  desposition,  dispatched  a
messenger  at  once  to  suspend  the  execution  of  Luis
Cortes.  He  entered  Mexico  on  19  Oct.,  and  after
hearing  much  testimony  was  convinced  that  the
judges  of  the  audiencia  had  acted  with  undue  haste.
He  therefore  sent  to  Spain  the  principal  persons
that  were  under  sentence  to  be  judged  there.  One
of  his  first  measures  for  the  benefit  of  the  country
was  the  establishment  of  a  hospital ;  but  he  had  in
curred  the  hatred  of  the  supreme  judges,  and,  sup
pressing  the  viceroy's  despatches  for  Spain,  they
accused  him  of  partiality  toward  the  Marquis  del
Valle,  and  even  of  an  intention  to  usurp  the  crown
of  New  Spain.  The  king  at  once  despatched  the
judges  Munoz  and  Carrillo  as  visitors  to  Mexico,
with  an  order  to  Peralta  to  deliver  the  government
to  Munoz  and  appear  at  court  to  justify  his  con
duct.  Toward  the  end  of  1567  Peralta  gave  up  the
executive  to  the  commissioners,  and  went  to  San
Juan  de  Ulua  to  arrange  his  affairs.  Munoz  im
mediately  began  such  a  series  of  cruelties  that,  in
consequence  of  universal  complaints,  the  king
ordered  him  to  deliver  the  government  to  the  audi
encia  within  thirteen  hours  after  the  receipt  of  the
order,  and  return  to  Spain.  Peralta  and  Munoz
sailed  on  the  same  vessel  in  May,  1568,  and  the
latter  was  badly  received,  and  died  soon  afterward,
while  Peralta  fully  justified  his  conduct  and  was
appointed  lord  constable  of  Navarre.

PERALTA,  Manuel  Maria  de  (pay-ral'-tah),
Costa  Rican  diplomatist,  b.  in  Cartago,  Costa  Rica,
4  July,  1847.  He  received  an  academic  education,
studied  law,  served  in  the  Costa  Rican  legations  in
London  and  Paris,  and  in  1875  became  minister  to
the  United  States.  While  in  Washington  he  was
empowered  to  sign  a  treaty  by  which  the  neutrality
of  the  Nicaragua  canal  and  its  control  by  a  board
of  directors  were  stipulated,  in  January,  1877.  In
1878-'87  he  served  in  Europe,  except  in  1884-'6,
when  he  was  again  minister  to  this  country.  In
October,  1887,  Mr.  Peralta  returned  to  Washing
ton  as  special  counsel  for  the  republic  of  Costa


PEBALTA-BARN  UEVO


PERCIVAL


723


Rica. He  has  been  engaged  in  negotiations  with
the  U.  S.  government  regarding  the  interoceanic  '
canal  and  the  boundary  question  between  Costa  j
Rica  and  Nicaragua,  which,  in  1887.  was  submitted  >
to  President  Cleveland. He  was  delegate  to  the  !
international  canal  congress  at  Paris  in  1879,  and
in 1881 was vice-president of the congress of  ,
Americanists  at  Madrid. In  addition  to  verses  and  \
essays  in  periodicals,  he  has  published  "  La  repu-  [
blique  de  Costa  Rica  "  (Geneva,  1871) :  "  Costa  Rica :  j
its  Climate,  Constitution,  and  Resources  "  (London,  |
1873) ;  '•  El  Rio  San  Juan  de  Nicaragua  "  (Madrid,
188*2) ;  "  Costa  Rica,  Nicaragua  y  Panama  en  el  Siglo
XVI."  (1883) ;  "  Costa  Rica  y  Colombia  de  1573  a  i
1881 "  (1886) ;  and  "  El  Canal  interoceanico  de  Nica-  j
ragua  y  Costa  Rica  en  1620  y  en  1887  "  (Brussels,
1887).

PERALTA-BABNUEYO,  Pedro  (pay-ral-tah),
Peruvian  author,  b.  in  Lima  in  1663 ;  d.  there  in
1743.  He  studied  in  the  University  of  San  Marcos,
where  he  was  graduated  as  doctor  of  laws,  became
professor  of  mathematics,  and  in  1715-'17  was  rec
tor  of  that  institution.  From  1718  till  1743  he
held  the  office  of  cosmographer,  publishing  the
'•  Conocimientos  de  los  Tiempos."  which  had  been
begun  in  1680  by  his  predecessor,  Juan  Ramon
Koenig  (q.  i:).  He  was  also  chief  engineer  of  Peru,
and  comptroller  of  the  audiencia  of  Lima  and
other  tribunals.  When  the  ancient  wall  of  Callao
was  destroyed  by  the  earthquake  of  20  Oct.,  1687,
Peralta  furnished  the  plans  on  which  it  was  rebuilt.
He  spoke  six  languages  fluently,  and  was  even  able
to  write  poetry  in  them.  Among  his  works  are
"  Defensa  politica  y  militar  de  Lima  "  (Lima,  1708) ;
"Geometria  especulativa  y  aritmetica"  (1714);
'•  Nuevo  sistema  astrologico  demostrativo"  (1717);
"Tratado  fisico-medico-teologico "  (1718);  "Tra-
tado  fisico-matematico  "  (1719) ;  "  Lima  triunfante  "
(1720);  "Templo  de  la  Fama"  (1721);  "  Jubilos  de
Lima"  (1723) ;  ';  La  Gloria  de  Luis  el  Grande"
(1725);  "  Historia  de  Espafia  vindicada"  (1730);
"  Lima  fundada  6  Conquista  del  Peru  "  (1732) :  and
"Obras  poeticas.  liricas  y  comicas"  (2  vols.,  1736).

PERCE,  Elbert,  author,  b.  in  New  York  city,
17  Aug.,  1831 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  18  Jan.,
1869.  He  devoted  himself  to  literary  pursuits  in
New  York  and  to  inventing.  The  most  valuable
of  his  devices  is  a  terrestrial  magnetic  globe,  which
bears  his  name.  He  translated  several  novels  from
the  Swedish,  and  published  '•  Gulliver  Joe  "  (New
York,  1851) ;  "  Old  Carl,  the  Cooper,  and  his  Won
derful  Book  "(1854);  "The  Last  of  His  Name"
(1854) ;  and  "  The  Battle  Roll,  and  Encyclopaedia
of  Battles  and  Sieges  "  (1857-'8).

PERCEVAL,  John,  Earl  of  Egmont,  colonist,
b.  in  County  Cork,  Ireland,  in  1680 ;  d.  there,  1
May,  1748.  He  succeeded  to  a  baronetcy  in  1691.
subsequently  became  a  privy  councillor  of  Ireland,
and.  after  sitting  several  years  in  the  Irish  house
of  commons,  was  elevated  to  the  peerage  of  that
kingdom  in  April,  1715,  as  Baron  Perceval  of  Bur
ton,  County  Cork.  In  1722  he  was  created  Vis
count  Perceval  of  Kantruk.  He  obtained  a  charter
to  colonize  the  province  of  Georgia  in  America  in
1732,  was  nominated  its  president,  and  was  made
Earl  of  Egmont  the  next  year.  He  published  a
large  number  of  pamphlets  on  Georgia,  among
which  is  a  tract  entitled  "  A  Brief  Account  of  the
Causes  that  have  Retarded  the  Progress  of  the
Colony  of  Georgia  in  America"  (London.  1743).

PERCHE.  Napoleon  Joseph,  archbishop,  b.  in
Angers,  France,  10  Jan.,  1805 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,
La.,  27  Dec.,  1883.  He  gave  evidence  of  remarka
ble  precocity  in  his  childhood,  and  at  eighteen  years
of  age  was  appointed  a  professor  of  philosophy.


The  treatises  on  that  subject  written  at  this  period
are  said  to  be  masterpieces  of  pure  Latinity.  About
two  years  later  he  entered  the  Seminary  of  Beau-
preau,  and  on  the  completion  of  his  theological
studies  was  ordained  priest,  19  Sept.,  1829.  After
holding  several  pastorates  he  asked  permission  in
1836  to  accompany  Bishop  Flaget  to  Kentucky,
and  arrived  in  the  United  States  in  the  following
year.  His  life  during  the  next  four  years  was  that
of  a  pioneer.  He  built  a  church  in  Portland,  Ky.,
and  went  to  Louisiana  in  1841  to  collect  money  to
free  it  from  debt.  The  people  of  New  Orleans  were
so  impressed  by  his  eloquence  that  Archbishop
Blanc  asked  him  to  return  to  that  city,  and  he  was
appointed  almoner  to  the  Ursuline  convent  there.
His  preaching  gave  him  great  influence,  and  the
young  Creole  poet,  Adrian  Roquette  (q.  v.),  was  so
moved  by  it  that  he  became  a  priest.  There  was  a
schism  in  New  Orleans  at  the  time,  owing  to  an
attempt  to  force  the  archbishop  to  appoint  certain
priests.  The  Abbe  Pert-he,  in  order  to  support  the
archbishop,  established  "  Le  propagateur  Catho-
lique."  Although  it  was  stated  at  the  head  of  its
columns  that  it  was  "  published  by  a  society  of
literary  men,"  it  was  for  several  years  edited  by  the
abbe  without  aid  of  any  kind.  Peace  was  restored
by  its  influence,  and  it  is  still  the  chief  organ  of
the  French  population  of  the  south.  He  also
founded  a  Roman  Catholic  society  for  mutual  sup
port.  He  was  nominated  coadjutor  to  Archbishop
Odin  in  1870,  and  consecrated  bishop  of  Abdera  in

fartibus,  on  1  May,  in  the  cathedral  of  St.  Louis,
le  succeeded  to  the  archbishopric  on  25  May.
The  same  difficulties  that  he  had  struggled  with  as
a  priest  encountered  him  on  his  accession  to  the
episcopate.  Questions  as  to  the  management  of
church  property  and  cemeteries  led  to  frequent
litigation,  but  A'rchbishop  Perche  finally  triumphed
without  exciting  the  ill-will  of  his  opponents,  and
after  a  time  the  wardens  of  the  cathedral  consented
to  invest  its  ownership  and  that  of  other  ecclesias
tical  property  in  him  and  his  successors.  He  estab
lished  a  community  of  Carmelite  nuns  in  his  arch
diocese.  During  his  administration  twenty  new
churches  and  chapels  were  built,  and  the  number
of  priests  was  largely  increased.  Thibodeaux  college
and  St.  Mary's  commercial  college  were  founded,
four  academies  for  girls  and  thirteen  parochial
schools  were  opened,  and  an  asylum  for  aged  colored
women  was  established  and  placed  under  the  care
of  the  Little  Sisters  of  the  Poor.  Archbishop  Perche
was  styled  by  Pope  Leo  XIII.  the  "  Bossuet  of  the
American  church."

PERCHERON,  Etienne,  French  missionary.
b.  in  Dreux  in  1613  :  d.  in  Lorette,  Canada,  in
1675.  He  became  a  Jesuit,  and  was  a  missionary  to
the  Neutral  Indians  in  Canada  from  1639  till  1655,
when  he  was  attached  to  the  missions  of  the  Onon-
dagas.  He  was  also  one  of  the  founders  of  the
mission  of  Notre  Dame  de  Foye  near  Quebec  in
1658,  and  of  the  Lorette  mission  in  1670,  and  re
mained  in  the  latter  place  till  his  death.  His  pa
pers,  preserved  in  the  navy  department  in  Paris,  in-,
elude  a  series  of  instructions  in  theOnondaga  dialect,
and  "  Memoire  d'un  serviteur  de  Jesus  Christ  et  ses
tribulations  parmi  les  sauvages  dans  les  etablisse-
ments  de  la  foi  de  la  Nouvelle  France  du  Nord."

PERCIVAL,  James  Gates,  poet,  b.  in  Ken
sington.  Conn.,  15  Sept.,  1795;  d.  in  Hazel  Green,
Wis.,  2  May,  1856.  He  was  a  morbid  and  sensitive
child,  preferring  books  to  sports  or  companions,
and  inclined  to  melancholy.  When  he  was  five
years  old  and  had  begun  to"  spell,  but  not  to  read,
a  book  on  elementary  astronomy  was  brought  to
his  home  one  Saturday  from  the  district  school  to


724


PERCY


be  returned  the  next  Monday.  James  spelled  out
the  first  sentence,  which  so  excited  his  interest
that  by  dint  of  hard  study  he  mastered  its  contents
before  its  return.  At  fourteen  years  of  age  he  com
posed  an  heroic  poem.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in

1815  at  the  head
of  his  class,  his
tragedy  of  "  Za-
rnor,"  which  was
subsequently  in
cluded  in  his  first
published  book,
forming  part  of
the  commence
ment  exercises.
After  teaching  for
a  short  time  in
Philadelphia  he
studied  medicine
and  botany,  was
licensed  to  prac
tise,  and  made  sev
eral  unsuccessful
attempts  to  estab
lish  himself,  first  in  his  native  town  and  after
ward  in  Charleston,  S.  C.  But  his  interest  was
concentrated  in  literary  work,  and  in  the  compo
sition  of  his  poems  of  "Prometheus"  and  "Clio,"
botli  of  which  gained  him  reputation,  and  were
published  in  Charleston  in  1822.  He  was  appointed
assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army,  and  professor
of  chemistry  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1824;  but  the  duties  proved  too  laborious,  and  he
resigned  in  a  few  months  to  become  a  surgeon  in
the  recruiting  service  in  Boston,  Mass.  While  in
that  city  he  contributed  to  the  '•  U.  S.  Literary
Magazine,"  edited,  among  other  works,  Vicesimus
Knox's  "Elegant  Extracts"  (Boston,  1826),  and
published  a  collection  of  his  poems  (2  vols.,  New
York.  1826).  He  removed  to  New  Haven,  Conn.,
in  1827,  where  he  published  the  third  part  of  his
tragedy  "  Clio,"  translated  with  notes  Malte  Brim's
"  Geography  "  (3  vols..  Boston,  1834).  and  assisted  in
preparing  the  scientific  words  in  the  first  quarto
edition  of  Noah  Webster's  "  Dictionary  of  the  Eng
lish  Language."  He  had  a  strong  taste  for  natural
history,  and  at  this  time  he  began  to  interest  him
self  particularly  in  the  study  of  geology,  on  his
own  account  making  an  examination  of  the  ranges
of  trap  rock  in  Connecticut  in  1834.  The  follow
ing  year,  with  Prof.  Charles  U.  Shepard,  he  was
appointed  to  make  a  geological  and  mineralogical
survey  of  the  state.  To  this  work  he  bent  all  his
energies,  making  a  plan  of  the  country  and  travers
ing  the  state.  After  many  difficulties,  much  delay,
and  the  consequent  dissatisfaction  of  the  legisla
ture,  he  rendered  his  "  Report  of  the  Geology  of
the  State  of  Connecticut "  (New  Haven,  1842),  con
taining  an  enormous  accumulation  of  material.
Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  closeness  and
brevity  of  its  descriptions  make  this  work  one  of
the  driest  that  was  ever  issued,  it  is  a  monument
to  the  knowledge  and  industry  of  its  author.  He
accomplished  an  extended  topographical  survey  of
the  state,  and  a  thorough  examination  of  its  trap
ridges,  and  their  relation  to  those  of  the  associated
sandstone,  and  brought  out  as  its  result  a  system
of  general  truths  in  regard  to  fractures  of  the
earth's  surface.  He  contributed  metrical  versions
of  German,  Slavonic,  and  other  lyrics  to  the  New
Haven  journals  in  1841-'4.  and  composed  and  pub
lished  his  "  Dream  of  a  Day  "  (New  Haven,  1843).
He  was  engaged  by  the  American  mining  company
to  survey  their  lead  region  in  Wisconsin  in  1853,
and  in  the  following  year  was  appointed  geologist


of  that  state.  His  first  report  was  published  in
1855,  and  he  was  preparing  another  at  the  time  of
his  death.  Dr.  Percival  was  a  man  of  great  learn
ing,  and  is  described  by  an  eminent  scholar  as
"  having  taken  all  knowledge  for  his  province."
He  read  ten  languages  with  fluency,  was  a  philolo
gist,  geologist,  botanist,  musician,  and  poet.  His
habits  were  eccentric,  and  by  nature  he  was  retir
ing  and  inclined  to  melancholy.  Although  he  was
without  vices,  the  shiftless  management  of  his
pecuniary  affairs  brought  him  into  many  difficul
ties,  but  he  left  a  library  of  more  than  10,000  vol
umes  of  learned,  scientific,  and  miscellaneous  works
which  was  sold  by  his  executors  for  $20,000.  Will
iam  Cullen  Bryant  said  of  his  poetry:  "While
he  was  one  of  the  most  learned  of  poets,  he  was
also  one  of  the  most  spontaneous  in  the  manifesta
tions  of  genius.  He  wrote  with  a  sort  of  natural
fluency  which  approached  nearer  to  improvisation
than  the  manner  of  most  of  our  poets."  A  com
plete  collection  of  his  poetical  works,  including
those  already  named,  and  some  posthumous  verses,
was  published,  with  a  biographical  sketch  by  Eras-
tus  North  (2  vols..  Boston.  1859).  See  his  "Life
and  Letters."  by  Julius  H.  Ward  (18(50).

PERCIVAL,  John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Barnsta-
ble,  Mass.,  3  April,  1779;  d.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,  17
Sept.,  1862.  He  left  the  merchant  service  in  1809,
and  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  sailing-master.  He
became  lieutenant  in  1814,  and  during  the  war  with
England  was  in  several  important  engagements  in
that  year,  displaying  courage  in  the  capture  of  the
British  tender  "  Eagle"  off  New  York,  and  in  the
engagements  between  the  "Peacock"  and  the
"  Epervier."  He  became  master  in  1831  and  cap
tain  in  1841,  and  made  his  last  cruise  in  the  "Con
stitution  "  in  1843-'7,  retiring  in  1848.  His  rough
and  eccentric  manners  won  him  the  soubriquet  in
the  navy  of  "  Mad  Jack,"  but  his  professional  skill
was  of  a  high  order,  and,  although  a  strict  disci
plinarian,  he  was  a  popular  commander.

PERCY,  (wcorgii,  governor  of  Virginia,  b.  in
Syon  House,  Northumberland  county,  England,  4
Sept.,  1586;  d.  in  England  in  March,  1632.  He
was  the  eighth  son  of  Henry  Percy,  eighth  Earl  of
Northumberland.  He
entered  the  army  early
in  life,  and,  after  serv
ing  in  the  Nether
lands,  came  to  Virginia
about  1600.  and  in  1610
succeeded  Capt.  John
Smith  as  governor  of
the  colony.  He  was
possessed  of  soldierly
qualities  and  adminis
trative  ability.  His
portrait,  a  copy  of
which  is  in  the  collec
tion  of  the  Virginia
historical  society,  rep
resents  him  with  a  mu-
tilated  hand,  which  it
is  said  was  the  result

of  a  wound  from  the  Virginia  savages.  He  pub
lished  "  Observations  gathered  out  of  a  Discourse
of  the  Plantations  of  the  Southerne  Colonie  in
Virginia  by  the  English"  (London,  1606);  also  in
cluded  in  Samuel  Purchas's  "  Pilgrimes,  1685-?90"
(1725).  This  narrative  gives  in  minute  detail  the
incidents  of  the  first,  voyage,  and  of  the  move
ments  of  the  colonists  after  their  arrival  at  Cape
Henry  until  their  landing  at  Jamestown.

PERCY,  Husfh,  Duke  of  Northumberland,  b.  in
England,  25  Aug.,  1742;  d.  there,  10  July,  1817.


PERCY


PEREIRA


725


He  entered  the  army  at  an  early  age,  and  saw  his
first  active  service  under  Prince  Ferdinand  in  Ger
many.  Although  he  did  not  approve  of  the  war
with  the  American  colonies,  he  offered  his  services
to  the  crown,  and  served  in  this  country  in  1775-' 6
with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.  He  led  the
first  brigade  of  Dutch  fusileers  to  re-enforce  the
expedition  that  was  sent  by  Gen.  Gage  to  Lexing
ton  on  19  April,  1775,  and  prevented  the  destruc
tion  of  Col.  Francis  Smith's  command,  but  he  per
mitted  his  troops  to  plunder  the  houses  by  the
wayside  in  their  retreat,  and  wantonly  to  murder
several  citizens,  afterward  officially  lending  him
self  to  the  falsehood  that  the  Americans  "scalped
and  cut  off  the  ears  of  the  wounded  who  fell  into
their  hands  at  Lexington."  He  pleaded  illness
before  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill,  and  did  not  ac
company  his  regiment  to  the  field.  Percy  was
ordered  to  make  an  attack  with  2,400  men  on  Dor
chester  in  November,  1775,  but,  perceiving  the  im
practicability  of  the  plan,  halted  his  command  just
before  the  expected  action.  In  November.  1770,  he
contributed  to  the  reduction  of  Fort  Washington,
and  led  the  column  that  was  the  first  to  enter  the
American  lines.  He  succeeded  to  the  barony  of
Percy  in  1776,  returned  to  England,  and  became
Duke  of  Northumberland  in  1786.

PERCY,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bedworth.
Warwickshire,  England,  15  Sept..  1744;  d.  in  Lon
don,  13  July,  1819.  He  was  educated  at  Oxford,
and  admitted  to  holy  orders  in  1767.  He  was  for  a
time  assistant  chaplain  at  the  Lock  hospital,  and
in  1772  was  appointed  by  the  somewhat  celebrated
Lady  Huntington  one  of  her  chaplains,  officiating
in  Northampton  and  Tottenham  court  chapel.
The  same  year  Lady  Huntington  sent  him  to  this
•country  to  take  charge  of  Bethesda  college,  near
Savannah,  Ga.  In  1773  he  went  to  Charleston,  S.  C.,
and  preached  frequently  in  Baptist  and  Independ
ent  places  of  worship.  At  the  beginning  of  the
Revolution  he  took  the  popular  side,  delivered  a
Fourth-of-July  address,  and  officiated  in  St.  Mi
chael's  church  from  1777  till  1780.  The  next  year
he  returned  to  England  and  resumed  work  in  the
Lady  Huntington  connection.  In  1793  he  was  ap
pointed  minister  of  Westminster  chapel,  and  in
1798  minister  of  Queen's  square  chapel.  In  1804
he  went  back  to  Charleston,  and  was  assistant  in
.St.  Philip's  and  St.  Michael's  churches  in  1805-'10.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  College
•of  South  Carolina  in  1807.  He  was  rector  of  a  new
church  in  Charleston  in  1810-'16,  and  of  St.  Paul's
church.  Radcliffeborough  in  1816-'19.  He  returned
again  to  England  in  1819,  and  died  after  a  few
days'  illness.  Dr.  Percy's  publications  were  "An
Apology  for  the  Episcopal  Church,  in  a  Series  of
Letters  on  the  Nature,  Ground,  and  Foundation  of
Episcopacy " ;  •'  The  Clergyman's  and  People's
Remembrancer,''  in  two  parts ;  "  An  Essay  on  the
Ministerial  Character  " ;  and  "  A  Delineation  of  the
True  Christian  Character"  (Charleston,  S.  C.).

PEREIRA,  Antonio  (pay-ri'-e-rah),  Brazilian
missionary,  b.  in  Maranhao  in  1641 ;  d.  in  Parana,
28  Sept.,  1702.  He  entered  the  Jesuit  order  in  his
youth,  and  became  well  known  as  a  preacher  and
theologian.  Desiring  to  undertake  missionary
works,  he  studied  the  language  of  the  Indians,  and
wrote  a  grammar  and  a  "  Vocabulary  of  the  Brazil
ian  Language."  which  are  yet  of  great  value.  He
then  endeavored  to  convert  the  tribesof  the  province
of  Parana,  where  he  labored  for  many  years  with
success,  but  died  by  the  poisoned  arrow  of  a  savage.

PEREIRA.  Francisco  <le  Lemos  <le  Faria,
Brazilian  scientist,  b.  on  the  Marapicu  plantation.
5  April,  1735;  d.  in  Lisbon,  16  April,  1822.  He


|  completed  his  studies  in  the  University  of  Coimbra,
where  in  1754  he  was  graduated  as  doctor  of  divin
ity,  and  later  he  was  appointed  professor  and  rector
of  the  college  of  the  military  corporations.  On  his
return  he  solicited  the  place'of  dean  of  Rio  Janeiro,
but  failed,  and  was  appointed  by  the  Marquis  of
Pombal  judge  of  the  military  corporations  in  1761,
and  associate  judge  of  the  court  of  appeals  in  1762.
He  became  afterward  judge  in  the  tribunal  of  the
Inquisition  at  Lisbon,  vicar  of  Coimbra,  and  coad
jutor  of  the  bishop.  On  14  May.  1770.  he  was  ap
pointed  rector  of  the  university  there,  and  member
of  the  board  that  was  charged  with  reorganizing  it.
During  his  administration  fine  buildings  were
erected,  including  a  museum  of  natural  history,
laboratories  of  experimental  physics  and  anatomy,
a  dispensary,  a  printing-office,  and  an  astronomical
observatory.  He  also  began  a  botanical  garden,
and  was  appointed  privy  councillor  of  the  king,
rector  of  the  reorganized  university,  and  bishop  of
Zenopolis.  Shortly  afterward  he  was  made  bishop
of  Coimbra.  and  received  the  title  of  Count  of
Arganil.  When  the  country  was  invaded  by  the
French,  Marshal  Tunot  sent  a  deputation  of  Portu
guese  scientific  men  to  the  emperor,  of  which  Pere
ira  was  obliged  to  form  a  part,  and  he  was  flatter
ingly  received  by  Napoleon  in  Bayonne.

PEREIRA,  Jose  Clemente, 'Brazilian  states
man,  b.  in  Castello  Mendo,  Portugal,  17  Feb..
1787;  d.  in  Rio  Janeiro.  10  March,  1854.  He  was
graduated  in  law  at  the  University  of  Coimbra.  and
during  the  French  invasion  served  in  the  Anglo-
Lusitanian  army  under  Wellington.  In  1815  he
went  to  Brazil  and  was  appointed  "  Tuiz  de  fora  "
of  the  town  of  Nictheroy.  He  was  elected  to  the
senate,  and  presided  over  that  body  when  the
Portuguese  garrison  of  Rio  Janeiro  rebelled,  5  June.
1821.  He  prevailed  on  the  prince-regent  to  swear
to  the  constitution  that  had  been  adopted  by  the
Portuguese  cortes,  and  to  dismiss  the  ministry  of
Count  dos  Arcos,  but  when  they  demanded  that  a
junta  of  nine  deputies  should  be  named  to  super
vise  the  acts  of  the  regent,  Pereira.  firmly  resisted
and  obtained  the  abandonment  of  this  measure.  In
December,  1821,  he  proposed  in  the  chamber  that
the  prince  should  be  requested  to  remain  in  Brazil,
and  on  9  Jan..  1822.  at  the  head  of  an  immense
crowd,  he  presented  the  famous  petition  to  the
prince  to  disobey  the  decree  of  the  cortes  that  he
should  leave  for  Portugal.  After  the  declaration
of  Ypiranga.  Pereira  convoked  the  people  of  the
capital,  and  on  12  Oct.,  1822,  the  independence  of
Brazil  was  declared,  and  Pedro  I.  proclaimed  em
peror.  Immediately  afterward  Pereira  was  accused
of  being  a  demagogue  and  anarchist,  and  after  a
rapid  trial  was  exiled.  He  returned  to  his  adopted

i  country  on  17  Feb.,  1824.  and  was  elected  intend-

:  ant-general,  and  afterward  deputy  for  Rio  Janeiro.
He  entered  the  cabinet,  supplied  Rio  Janeiro  with

I  drinking-water  by  erecting  fountains  in  different
points,  improved  the  orphan  asylum,  and  built  at

|  the  Praia  Vermeils  a  lunatic  asylum  known  as  the
Hospicio  de  D.  Pedro  II.

PEREIRA,  Jose  Saturnino  da  Costa,  Bra
zilian  engineer,  b.  in  Sacramento,  22  Nov..  1773;
d.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  9  Jan..  1852.  He  was  graduated
at  Coimbra.  returned  to  Rio  Janeiro,  and  when  the
Academy  of  mathematical,  physical,  and  natural
sciences  was  founded,  4  Dec.,  1814.  was  appointed
a  professor,  and  also  wrote  several  text-books.  His
brother.  Hypolito  Jose  da  Costa  Pereira  Furtada
de  Mendon?a.  published  in  England  the  "  Correio
Braziliense  "  after  1807.  and  kept  Pereira  secretly

;  informed  of  the  political  designs  of  the  Brazilian

i  government,  probably  with  the  connivance  of  the


726


PEREIRA


PEREZ


prince  regent,  afterward  King  John  VI.  When
the  independence  of  Brazil  was  proclaimed  and
the  constiution  had  been  framed,  Pereira  entered
the  senate  in  1828  for  the  province  of  Mat  to  Grosso,
and  on  16  May,  1887,  he  became  minister  of  war
under  the  regent  Diogo  Antonio  Feijo.  He  pub
lished  "  Tratado  elementario  sobre  mecanisraos,"
translated  from  the  French  of  Fournier,  with  ad
ditions,  •'  Investiga^aos  tocando  os  mais  voluini
nosos  dos  corpos  de  igual  superflcie,"  '•  Diccionario
topographico  do  Emperio  do  Brazil,"  "  Historia
geral  dos  animates,"  "  Elementos  de  Geodesia,"
"  Elementos  dos  mecanicos,"  and  '•  Applicacao  de
Algebra  a  Geometria  ou  geometria  analytica,"  ac
cording  to  the  system  of  Lacroix.  These  were  all
published  in  Rio  Janeiro  between  1845  and  1850.

PEREIRA,  Nuno  Marques,  Brazilian  theolo
gian,  b.  in  Cayru,  Bahia,  in  1052;  d.  in  Lisbon  in
1718.  He  entered  the  church,  became  famous  as  a
theologian,  and  wrote  "  Extracto  narrative  de  um
peregrino  em  America"  (Lisbon,  1718),  in  which
there  are  many  curious  and  interesting  notices
about  his  native  country.  The  work  is  very  rare.

PEREIRA  DA  SlLYA,  Joao  Manoel,  Bra
zilian  author,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro  in  1818.  He  re
ceived  his  early  education  in  Brazil,  but  finished
his  studies  in  Paris,  was  graduated  in  law,  and
travelled  through  Europe.  In  1841  he  returned
to  Rio  Janeiro,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  prac
tised  his  profession  with  success.  In  1844  he  was
elected  to  congress  by  the  Liberal  party,  but  dis
appointed  his  friends  by  taking  his  seat  among  the
Conservatives,  and  has  been  since  a  supporter  of
the  government.  He  has  attained  a  wide  reputa
tion  as  a  man  of  letters,  and  his  "  Historia  da  fun-
daciio  do  imperio  Brazileiro,"  published  simulta
neously  in  Portuguese  and  French,  is  a  standard
work  (6  vols.,  Rio  Janeiro  and  Paris,  1804-'8).  His
other  works  include  "  La  litterature  Portuguaise,
son  passe,  son  etat  actuel"  (Paris,  1868);  "Plutar-
cho  Brazileiro "  (2  vols.,  Rio  Janeiro,  1866) ;  and
"  Obras  politicas  e  literarias "  (1868).  He  has  in
preparation  a  general  history  of  the  conquest  and
civilization  of  Brazil.

PEREIRE.  Jacob  Emile,  French  banker,  b.  in
Bordeaux,  8  Dec.,  1800;  d.  in  Paris,  6  Jan.,  1875.
He  was  of  Hebrew  descent.  In  1885  he  organized
a  company  for  the  construction  of  the  Paris  and
Saint  Germain  railroad,  which  yielded  him  an
enormous  fortune.  During  the  whole  of  Napoleon
III.'s  reign  he  engaged  in  gigantic  speculations,
founded  the  Credit  mobilier,  and  in  1855  the  mari
time  company  that  was  named  afterward  the  Com-
pagnie  generate  transatlantique,  which  was  the
first  French  steamship  company  whose  vessels  ran
regularly  between  New  York  and  Havre.  In  asso
ciation  with  his  brother  Isaac  he  devoted  much
time  to  building  up  trade  between  France  and
America.  Under  their  influence  lines  were  estab
lished  to  the  West  Indies,  Mexico,  and  South
America.  A  steamship,  named  for  them  the  Pe-
reire,  was  then  the  fastest  on  the  Atlantic,  and  in
1867  made  a  trip  from  New  York  to  Havre  in  eight
days  and  sixteen  hours.  Emile  Pereire  was  elected
to  the  corps  legislatif  in  1868,  and  his  brother  Isaac
in  1868  and  1869.  When  the  Credit  mobilier  be
came  bankrupt,  he  voluntarily  contributed  $  16,-
000,000  to  help  that  institution.  A  boulevard  in
Paris  is  named  Pereire.  When  the  brothers  died,
their, fortune  was  estimated  at  $60,000.000.

PERE/,  Jose  Joaquin,  Chilian  statesman,  b.
in  Santiago  in  1801.  He  studied  in  the  university
of  his  native  city,  and  soon  after  graduation  was
appointed  secretary  of  legation  at  Washington,
and  then  at  Paris,  where  from  1829  till  1881  he


was  minister  plenipotentiary.  Soon  afterward  he
was  sent  to  London  to  negotiate  a  loan,  and  in
1886  he  was  minister  at  Buenos  Ayres.  On  his
return  he  was  elected  to  congress  entered  the
cabinet  of  Gen.  Bulnes  in  1845  as  secretary  of  the
treasury,  and  in  1849  took  the  portfolio  of'  foreign
relations.  In  1852  he  was  again  a  member  of  con
gress,  and  later  he  became  president  of  the  cham
ber  of  deputies,  and  was  elected  to  the  senate.  He
was  then  appointed  councillor  of  state,  and  in
1861  he  was  elected  president  of  the  republic,  form
ing  a  coalition  of  the  moderate  wings  of  both  par
ties,  which  produced  the  happiest  results.  In  1868
he  opened  the  railroads  from  Santiago  to  Valpa
raiso  and  to  Curico,  initiated  many  other  lines,  and
spread  telegraphic  communication  throughout  the
country.  The  war  with  Spain  in  1864-'6  led  to
no  consequences  of  note  except  an  offensive  and
defensive  alliance  with  Peru.  In  1866  he  was  re-
elected  for  five  years,  and  began  a  successful  war
against  the  Araucanians.  During  Errazuriz's  ad
ministration,  which  lasted  from  1871  till  1876,  Perez
was  elected  senator  and  councillor  of  state.  In  1876
he  became  president  of  the  senate,  but  he  has  lived
in  retirement  for  several  years.

FERE/,  Jose"  Joaquin,  West  Indian  author,  b.
in  the  city  of  Santo  Domingo  in  1845.  He  began
to  write  for  the  press  when  very  young,  and  entered
the  service  of  the  government,  in  which  he  lias
filled  several  offices.  He  has  been  a  member  of
the  Dominican  congress  and  secretary  of  the  lega
tion  to  Ilayti.  Perez  has  published  many  poems
that  have  made  his  name  familiar  throughout
Spanish  America,  has  written  a  drama  entitled
"  Anacaona,"  and  is  also  the  author  of  "  Fantasias
indigenas,"  a  series  of  narratives  concerning  the
legends  and  traditions  of  the  aborigines  of  Ilayti,
which  has  been  highly  praised  (1882).

PERE/,  Juan  Pio  (pay'-reth),  Mexican  anti
quarian,  b.  in  Merida,  Yucatan,  11  March,  1798;
d.  there,  6  March,  1859.  After  he  had  acquired  his
primary  education  he  studied  at  the  Seminary  of
Ildefonso,  in  his  native  city,  then  entered  public
life,  and  served  his  country  in  various  employments.
He  collected  many  antiquities  and  much  infor
mation  about  the  history  of  Yucatan,  and  published
"Cronologia  Antigua  Yucateca  "  (Merida,  1847).
This  work  has  been  published  in  Spanish  in  the
"Registro  Yucateco"  (Madrid),  in  English  iu  the
work  of  John  L.  Stephens  on  Yucatan  (1848),  and
in  French  in  those  of  Brasseur  de  Bourbourg.  He
studied  the  Yucatec  or  Maya  language,  and  formed
a  "  Diccionario  Maya."  of  which  Mr.  Stephens
brought  a  copy  to  the  United  States.  This  re
mained  in  manuscript  at  his  death,  but  was  after
ward  published  (Merida,  1877).  There  remain  in
manuscript  another  important  work,  "  Gramatica
de  hiylengua  Maya."  and  many  pamphlets.

PERE/,  Pedro  Ildefonso,  Mexican  poet,  b.  in
Merida,  Yucatan,  28  Jan.,  1826 :  d.  there,  21  Feb.,
1869.  After  he  had  acquired  a  primary  education
he  abandoned  his  studies  on  account  of  poverty,
and  accepted  an  employment  in  the  public  admin
istration,  where  he  gave  his  spare  time  to  literature
and  poetry.  He  became  an  enthusiastic  admirer
of  the  Spanish  poet  Zorrilla,  and  soon  began  to
imitate  him.  His  first  works  were  known  only  by
the  friends  of  the  poet,  but  some  years  afterward
they  were  published  in  the  "  Registro  Yucateco."
In  1849  Perez  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
Academy  of  sciences  and  literature,  before  which
he  read  his  work  "  Los  Martires  de  la  Indepen-
dencia,"  which  was  published  in  the  "  Mosaico,"  a
literary  paper.  In  1856  he  contributed  to  the  for
mation  of  another  literary  paper,  "  Pensamiento,"


PEREZ


PERKINS


in  which  he  published  several  of  his  best  works.
He  also  wrote  "  La  Ida  del  Sol,"  "  A  Ticul,"  "  A
Tunkas,"  "  El  Prisina  de  la  Vida,"  "  El  Contra-
bandista,"  a  tragedy,  and  other  compositions,  which
were  published  in  1848  in  the  satirical  paper  "  Don
Bullebulle."  He  was  a  member  of  the  government
council  and  comptroller  of  the  treasury  of  his  na
tive  state  when  he  died.  A  collection  of  his  works
has  been  published  (Merida,  1885).

PEREZ,  Santiago  (pay'-reth),  Colombian  states
man,  b.  in  Cipaquira  in  1830.  He  studied  in  Bogota
in  the  colleges  of  Espiritu  Santo  and  Nuestra
Senora  del  Rosario,  and  was  graduated  as  LL.  D.
in  1851,  and  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  had  begun
to  cultivate  poetry  in  college,  and  scarcely  had
entered  the  practice  of  his  profession  when  he  issued
a  volume  of  verses,  and  one  of  his  dramas  was  rep
resented  in  the  theatre  of  Bogota.  In  1853  he  was
appointed  member  of  a  commission  under  Gen.
Codazzi,  to  form  a  map  of  the  republic,  and  visited
the  states  of  Antioquia  and  Cauca,  publishing  his
observations  on  his  return.  He  soon  began  to  take
an  active  part  in  politics,  and  in  1856  was  an  editor
of  the  journal  "  El  Tiempo."  In  1857  he  founded
a  college  in  Bogota,  where  many  men  that  are  now
eminent  in  Colombia  received  their  education.
After  the  triumph  of  the  Liberal  party,  Perez  was
elected  to  congress  in  18(33,  but  in  1864  he  was
called  by  President  Manuel  Murillo  Toro  (q.  v.)  to
the  cabinet  as  secretary  of  the  interior  and  foreign
relations.  When  the  Liberal  party  split  into  two
factions,  and  Perez's  political  opponent,  Gen.  Mos-
quera,  was  elected  president  in  1866,  Perez,  with
Felipe  Zapata  and  Toinas  Cuenca,  founded  "  El
Mensajero,"  which  represented  the  radical  opposi
tion,  and  contributed  powerfully  to  the  fall  and
impeachment  of  Mosquera  in  1867.  In  the  begin
ning  of  1868  Perez  was  elected  to  the  senate,  but
in  April  he  was  called  by  Gen.  Santos  Gutierrez
to  his  former  seat  in  the  cabinet.  From  1870  till
1872  he  was  minister  to  the  United  States ;  from
1872  to  the  end  of  1873  he  was  general  director  of
public  instruction.  In  the  elections  of  the  latter
year  he  was  chosen  to  the  chief  executive  of  the
nation  for  the  term  from  1  April,  1874,  till  1876.
At  the  expiration  of  his  term  he  was  appointed
rector  of  the  National  university,  but  he  was  sent
soon  again  to  the  United  States  as  minister.  Since
1878  he  has  not  occupied  any  public  office,  but  has
given  himself  to  educational  work  and  literary  and
scientific  studies.  He  is  considered  one  of  the  best
writers  in  South  America,  and  is  esteemed  even  by
his  political  adversaries  on  account  of  his  spotless
character  and  kindly  disposition.  He  is  the  author
of  "  Coleccion  de  Poesias  "  (Bogota,  1851) ;  "  Jacobo
Molay,"  a  drama,  which  was  represented  in  Bogota
(1851);  "  Apuntamientos  de  Viaje  por  las  Provin-
cias  del  Sur"  (1854);  "Leonor,"  a  legend  (1855);
"  Elcastillo  de  Berkley,"  a  drama,  represented  in
Bogota  (1856);  "Compendio  de  Gramatica  Castel-
lana"  (1858);  and  "  Romances  Nacionales,"  a  col
lection  of  war  anecdotes  (1860).

PEREZ  DE  I  RDIMNEA,  Jose  Maria,  Bo
livian  soldier,  b.  in  La  Paz  in  1782;  d.  there  in
1865.  He  studied  in  the  seminaries  of  La  Paz  and
Chuquisaca,  and  when  upper  Peru  was  invaded  in
1810  by  the  Argentine  army  he  entered  the  service
with  the  patriots.  Afterward  he  served  under  San
Martin,  and  was  about  to  follow  the  latter  to  Peru
in  1820  when  he  was  appointed  by  the  province  of
Cuyo  commander-in-chief  to  resist  an  invasion.
He  was  commissioned  by  San  Martin  to  raise  an
auxiliary  army  in  Cuyo,  to  operate  against  upper
Peru,  but  when  he  at  last  entered  the  latter  prov
ince  the  battle  of  Ayacucho  had  already  decided


the  cause  of  independence.  During  the  invasion
by  the  Peruvian  army  in  1828  he  was  president  of
the  cabinet  and  general-in-chief,  but  he  afterward
retired  into  private  life.  In  1838  Gen.  Santa  Cruz
called  him  again  into  service  during  the  Chilian  in
vasion,  and  he  was  chief  of  cavalry  in  the  battle  of
Yungai,  20  Jan.,  1839.  He  was  'minister  of  war
and  president  of  the  council  in  1841-'7,  and  from
1855  till  1857  minister  of  the  interior.

PEREZ  DE  ZAMBRANA,  Luisa,  Cuban  au
thor,  b.  in  El  Cobre,  near  Santiago,  in  1837.  When
she  was  only  fourteen  years  old  she  began  to  pub
lish  poems.  The  first  collection  was  issued  at
Santiago  in  1856.  She  married  in  1858  Dr.  Zam-
brana,  a  distinguished  physician  of  Havana,  where
she  published  a  new  volume  of  poems,  which  in
creased  her  reputation  (I860).  Her  prose  works
include  the  novels  "Angelica  y  Estrella"  and  "La
hija  del  Verdugo."  Several  of  Luisa  Perez's
poems  have  been  translated  into  French  and  Ital
ian,  and  Spanish  critics  have  praised  her  produc
tions.  Her  poetry  is  simple,  but  full  of  feeling.

PERHAM,  Sidney,  governor  of  Maine,  b.  in
Woodstock,  Me.,  27  March,  1819.  He  was  educated
in  the  public  schools,  and  subsequently  was  a
teacher  and  farmer.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state
board  of  agriculture  in  1852-'3,  speaker  of  the
legislature  in  1854,  a  presidential  elector  in  1856,
and  clerk  of  the  supreme  judicial  court  of  Oxford
county  in  1859-'63.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as
a  Republican,  and  served  in  1863-'9.  He  was
governor  of  Maine  in  1871-'4.

PERIMCHIEF,  Octavius,  clergyman,  b.  in
Warwick  parish,  Bermuda,  W.  I.,  2  Oct.,  1829 ;  d.
in  Bridgeport,  Pa.,  29  April,  1877.  He  came  to
New  York  in  1847,  became  a  clerk,  and  after
ward  entered  Trinity  college.  After  teaching  a
year  in  Racine  he  returned  to  New  York  in  1855,
studied  in  the  General  theological  seminary,  and
after  his  ordination  in  1857  wrent  as  a  missionary
to  Quendaro,  Mo.,  where  his  health  was  impaired
for  life.  He  afterward  held  various  pastorates.
Mr.  Perinchief  wrote  a  work  on  "  Education  "  for
the  government  of  Japan  (1872).  He  had  a  repu
tation  for  eloquence,  and  his  sermons  have  been
edited  by  Charles  Lanman  (Washington.  1869-'70).
See  his  "  Life,"  by  Charles  Lanman  (1879).

PERIT,  Pelatiah,  merchant,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  23  June,  1785 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  8
March,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1802,
taught  for  a  year,  and  in  1809  settled  in  business
in  New  York.  He  became  a  partner  in  a  firm  of
shipping-merchants  in  1817,  in  which  he  continued
till  1863.  He  was  president  of  the  chamber  of
commerce  in  1853-'63,  and  took  an  active  part  in
the  monetary  affairs  of  that  city.  In  June,  1857,
in  the  contest  between  the  two  city  police  forces
(see  MATSELL,  GEORGE  W.),  he  was  chosen  a  com
missioner  of  police,  and  rendered  important  ser
vice  in  restoring  the  public  security.  Throughout
his  career  he  was  a  supporter  of  benevolent  and
educational  institutions,  and  during  the  cholera
epidemic  of  1832  he  nursed  the  sick  and  gave
large  sums  to  the  sufferers.

PERKINS,  Charles  Callalian,  author,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  1  March,  1823 ;  d.  in  Windsor,  Vt.,
25  Aug.,  1886.  His  early  years  were  spent  in  Bos
ton,  and  he  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1843.  He
then  went  to  Europe,  residing  first  in  Rome,  and
later  in  Paris,  where  he  studied  painting  under  Ary
Scheffer.  He  also  devoted  much  attention  to  music,
continuing  his  studies  in  that  direction  on  his  re
turn  to  Europe  in  1851.  During  a  later  visit  in
1865  he  studied  etching,  and  subsequently  etched
the  illustrations  for  his  works  on  the  Tuscan  and


728


PERKINS


PERKINS


Italian  sculptors,  being  one  of  the  earliest  to  prac
tise  the  art  in  the  United  States.  In  1807  he  was
made  a  member  of  the  Legion  of  honor,  and  in
1868  he  became  a  corresponding  member  of  the
French  institute.  He  accomplished  much  toward
the  advancement  of  his  favorite  arts  in  this  coun
try,  through  his  writings  and  lectures,  and  in  the
many  offices  that  he  filled.  He  was  president  of
the  Boston  art  club  in  1869-'79,  a  founder  and
honorary  director  of  the  Boston  museum  of  fine
arts,  a  member  of  the  school  board  of  Boston  in
1870-'83,  one  of  the  projectors  of  the  Boston  music
hall,  and  president  of  the  Handel  and  Haydn  soci
ety  in  1875-'86,  whose  performances  he  also  occasion
ally  conducted.  In  1883  he  began  to  publish  a
history  of  this  society,  and  finished  vol.  i,  part  1-2
(Boston,  1883-'6).  It  was  continued  after  his  death
by  John  S.  Dwight.  Mr.  Perkins  met  his  death  by
being  thrown  from  a  carriage,  while  driving  with
William  M.  Evarts.  He  was  widely  known  as  an
able  art-critic  and  writer  on  art-topics,  and  was  the
author  of  "  Tuscan  Sculptors  "  (2  vols.,  London,
1864) ;  •'  Italian  Sculptors  "  (1868) ;  "  Art  in  Educa
tion"  (New  York,  1870);  "  Raphael  and  Michelan
gelo  "  (Boston.  1878);  "Sepulchral  Monuments  in
Italy  "  (New  York,  1883) ;  "  Historical  Hand-Book
of  Italian  Sculptors"  (1883);  and  "Ghiberti  et  son
ecole  "  (Paris,  1886).  He  was  also  critical  editor  of
John  D.  Champlm's  "  Cyclopaedia  of  Painters  and
Paintings  "  (4  vols..  New  York,  1886-7).

PERKINS,  Elisha,  physician,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  16  Jan.,  1741 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  6  Sept.,
1799.  He  was  educated  by  his  father.  Dr.  Joseph
Perkins,  in  Plainfield,  Conn.,  and  began  the  practice
of  medicine  there  with  great  success.  About
1796  he  invented  his  metallic  tractors,  which  con
sisted  of  two  instruments,  one  resembling  brass
and  the  other  steel,  but  which  he  said  were  of  a
peculiar  composition  of  metals,  three  inches  long,
and  pointed  at  the  ends.  They  were  chiefly  used
in  local  inflammations,  pains  in  the  face  and  head,
in  rheumatism,  and  similar  diseases.  The  points
of  these  instruments  were  applied  to  the  part,  and
then  drawn  over  it  for  about  twenty  minutes  in  a
downward  direction.  This  method  of  curing  dis
eases  was  recommended  by  the  faculty  of  three
institutions  of  good  standing  in  the  United  States,
and  in  Copenhagen  twelve  physicians  and  surgeons,
most  of  them  instructors  in  the  Royal  Frederick
hospital,  began  a  course  of  experiments,  and  gave
their  opinion  in  favor  of  the  new  theory,  which
they  called  "  Perkinsism,"  publishing  the  results
of  their  investigations  in  an  octavo  volume.  In
London,  where  the  tractors  were  introduced  by
Dr.  Perkins's  son,  a  Perkinsian  institution  for  the
benefit  of  the  poor  was  established  under  the  presi
dency  of  Lord  Rivers.  The  published  cases  of
cures  numbered  5,000.  and  were  certified  to  by
eight  professors,  forty  physicians,  and  thirty  clergy
men.  The  list  of  persons  who  claimed  to  have
been  cured  by  this  remedy  was  enormous.  In  1803,
after  the  death  of  Perkins,  the  English  physicians
began  to  doubt  its  efficacy,  but  the  theory  had
numerous  defenders,  and  Thomas  G.  Fessenden
published  a  "  Terrible  Tractoration "  in  favor  of
Perkins  and  as  a  satire  on  other  physicians.  A
short  time  before  his  death  Perkins  invented  an
antiseptic  medicine,  and  administered  it  with  great
success  in  low  states  of  dysentery  and  sore  throat.
Being  anxious  to  test  its  efficacyagainst  yellowfever,
he  went  to  New  York  in  1799,  during  an  epidemic
of  that  disease,  and,  after  four  weeks  of  continuous
toil  among  the  sick,  died  of  the  fever.  He  possessed
great  native  endowments,  public  spirit,  and  gener
osity,  but  he  cannot  be  cleared  of  the  charge  of  im


posture  in  regard  to  his  tractors,  which  he  pretended
were  of  a  peculiar  combination  of  metals,  but,  in
reality  were  of  brass  and  iron. — His  son,  BENJAMIN
DOUGLAS,  was  a  bookseller,  and  resided  for  some
years  in  England,  disposing  of  the  metallic  tract
ors.  He  published  "The  Influence  of  Metallic
Tractors  on  the  Human  Body"  (London,  1798).

PERKINS,  Frederic  Ueecher,  author,  b.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  27  Sept..  1828.  He  is  a  grand
son  of  Dr.  Lyman  Beecher.  He  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  class  of  1850  at  Yale,  but  left  college  in
1848  and  began  the  study  of  law.  In  1851  lie
was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  Hartford,  and  a  year
later  he  entered  the  Connecticut  normal  school,
where  he  was  graduated  the  same  year.  He  held
various  posts  in  Hartford  until  1854,  in  which  year
he  went  to  New  York,  remaining  until  1857.  Then,
returning  to  Hartford,  he  became  assistant  editor
of  "Barnard's  American  Journal  of  Education,"
and  was  also  appointed  librarian  of  the  Connecti
cut  historical  society.  Later  he  became  secretary
of  the  Boston  public  library,  and  in  1880-'7  lie  was
librarian  of  the  San  Francisco  free  public  library.
While  there  he  published  his  "  Rational  Classifi
cation  of  Literature  for  Shelving  and  Cataloguing
Books  in  a  Library  "  (San  Francisco,  1881 ;  revised
ed.,  1882).  He  has  been  editorially  connected  witli
various  papers  and  magazines.  Among  his  writ
ings  are  "Scrape,  or  the  Lost  Library  "  (Boston,
1874) ;  "  My  Three  Conversations  with  Miss  Ches
ter  "  (New  York,  1877) ;  "  Devil-Puzzlers,  and  other
Studies  "  (1877) ;  and  "  Charles  Dickens :  his  Life
and  Works"  (1877).  He  has  also  edited  or  com
piled  bibliographical  works,  notably  a  "Check-List
of  American  Local  History  "(Boston,  1876)  and  the
4th  edition  of  "Best  Reading"  (New  York,  1877).

PERKINS,  (ireorsre  Hamilton,  naval  officer,
lj.  in  Hopkiuton.  N.  II.,  20  Dec.,  1836.  His  grand
father,  Roger,  was  an  early  settler  of  Hopkinton,
and  one  of  the  most  public-spirited  citizens  of  that
town,  and  his  father,  Judge  Hamilton,  was  the
founder  of  the  town  of  Contoocookville,  N.  II.
George  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy
in  1856,  and  became  1st  lieutenant  in  1861.  He
served  with  gallantry  as  executive  officer  of  the
"Cayuga"  at  the  passage  of  Fort  St.  Philip  and
Fort  Jackson,  and  at  the  capture  of  New  Orleans
in  April.  1862,  and  with  Capt.  Theodoras  Bailey
(q.  v.)  received  the  surrender  of  the  city,  passing
through  the  streets  in  the  midst  of  a  hooting  mob,
who  threatened  them  with  drawn  pistols  and  other
weapons.  He  became  lieutenant -commander  in
December,  1862,  was  in  charge  of  the  gun-boat
"  New  London  "  in  June,  1863,  and  conveyed  pow
der  and  despatches  between  New  Orleans  and
Baton  Rouge,  ran  the  batteries  at  Port  Hudson
successfully  five  times,  and  on  9  July  had  a  severe
skirmish  with  the  enemy  at  Whitehall's  point.  He
was  on  blockading  duty  on  the  "  Scioto,"  of  the
Gulf  squadron,  from  July.  T863,  till  April,  1864,
and  at  that  time  was  relieved,  but  volunteered
at  the  battle  of  Mobile  Bay.  In  his  official
report  of  that  engagement  Admiral  Farragut
said :  '•  1  cannot  give  too  much  praise  to  Lieut. -
Com.  Perkins,  who.  although  he  had  orders  to  re
turn  north,  volunteered  to  take  command  of  the
•  Chickasaw,'  and  did  his  duty  nobly."  He  re
mained  in  charge  of  that  ship  in  the  subsequent
operations  that  resulted  in  the  taking  of  Mobile,
the  reduction  of  Fort  Powell,  Fort  Gaines,  and
Fort  Morgan.  He  was  superintendent  of  iron-clads
in  New  Orleans  in  1865-'6,  became  commander  in
1871,  was  in  charge  of  the  store-ship  "  Relief,"  to
convey  contributions  to  the  French,  from  Septem
ber,  1871,  till  January,  1872,  and  in  1882  was  com-


PERKINS


PERKINS


729


missioned  captain.  See  his  "  Letters,"  edited  and
arranged  by  his  sister,  with  a  sketch  of  his  life  by
Com.  George  E.  Belknap  (Concord,  N.  H.,  1886).

PERKINS.  George  Henry,  naturalist,  b. in
East  Cambridge,  Mass.,  25  Sept.,  1844. He  was  |
graduated  at  Yale  in  1867,  and  in  1869  received  the  !
degree  of  Ph.  D.  there  for  post-graduate  studies. In
1869  he  was  elected  to  the  chair  of  natural  history  j
in  the  University  of  Vermont,  which  appointment
he  has  since  filled,  and  for  several  years  he  has  held
also  the  office  of  state  entomologist  of  Vermont.
Prof.  Perkins  has  devoted  considerable  study  to  ,
the  archaeology  of  the  Champlain  valley,  concern-  j
ing  which  he  has  written  numerous  articles  for  \
periodicals  and  the  transactions  of  scientific  so-  ;
cieties,  of  which  he  is  a  member. He  has  also  lec
tured  on  natural  history  with  success  in  various
places. Besides  technical  papers  in  scientific  jour
nals,  he  has  published,  under  the  authority  of  the
state  of  Vermont,  reports  •'  On  the  Injurious" Insects  •
of  Vermont "  (3  vols..  1876-'7-'8) :  "  More  Important  ;
Parasites  infesting  Man  and  the  Lower  Animals  "
(1880):  and  "The  Flora  of  Vermont"  (1882).

PERKINS,  George Roberts,  mathematician.
b.  in  Otsego  county.  N.  Y.,  3  May,  1812 ;  d.  in  New
Hartford,  Conn.,  22  Aug.,  1876. He  was  self-edu
cated,  and  at  the  age  of  eighteen  was  employed  in  |
the  slackwater  survey  of  the  Susquehanna  river,  j
He  was  a  teacher  of  mathematics  in  Clinton.  N.  Y..  i
from  1831  till  1838,  when  he  became  principal  of
Utiea  academy. On  the  opening  of  the  New  York  j
state  normal  school  in  1844  he  was  chosen  professor  i
of  mathematics  there,  and  in  1848  he  became  prin
cipal,  which  post  he  resigned  in  1852  on  being  as
signed  to  superintend  the  erection  of  the  Dudley
observatory. In  1858-'62  he  was  deputy  state  en
gineer,  and in  the  latter  year  he  was  elected  a
regent  of  the  university  of  the  state. His  works
had  a  wide  circulation,  and  some  of  them  were
translated into  Spanish. They  include  "  Higher
Arithmetic "  (New  York,  1841)";  "Treatise  on  Al
gebra" (1841); "Elements of Algebra" (1844);
"  Elements  of  Geometry  "  (1847) :  "  Trigonometry
and  Surveying "  (1851);  "Plane  and  Solid  Geom
etry  "  (1854) ;  also  a  text-book  on  astronomy. He
contributed  many  articles  to  the  scientific  journals.

PERKINS.  Granville,  artist,  b.  in  Baltimore.
Md..  16  Oct.,  1830.  He  studied  drawing  in  Phila
delphia,  and  painting  under  James  Hamilton.  For
several  years  he  devoted  himself  mainly  to  scene-
painting,  finding  employment  in  Richmond,  Va.,
Baltimore.  Philadelphia,  and  New  York.  He  began
working  for  the  illustrated  papers  about  1851,  and
in  1855  took  a  post  on  "  Frank  Leslie's  Weekly."
About  1860  he  was  engaged  by  Harper  Brothers,
with  whom  he  remained  for  several  years.  He  fur
nished  a  large  number  of  illustrations  for  books,
his  specialty  being  marine  views,  and  became  wide
ly  known  through  his  excellent  work  in  that  direc
tion.  He  has  exhibited  frequently  at  the  National
academy  since  1862.  and  at  the  exhibitions  of  the
Water-color  society,  of  which  he  is  a  member.

PERKINS,  Jacob,  inventor,  b.  in  Newburyport,
Mass.,  9  July.  1766:  d.  in  London.  England,  30
July,  1849.  In  childhood  he  was  apprenticed  to  a
goldsmith,  and  at  the  age  of  fifteen  he  carried  on
the  business  of  a  goldsmith  in  his  native  town,  and
invented  a  method  of  plating  shoe-buckles.  When
he  was  about  twenty-one  years  of  age  he  was  em
ployed  by  the  state  of  Massachusetts  to  make  dies
for  copper  coinage,  and  three  years  afterward  he
invented  a  machine  for  cutting  and  heading  nails
at  one  operation.  Through  the  mismanagement  of
his  partners  he  was  at  this  time  involved  in  great
pecuniary  distress.  He  made  great  improvements


in  bank-note  engraving  by  substituting  steel  for
copper  plates.  After  residing  for  some  time  in
Boston  and  in  New  York,  he  removed  to  Philadel
phia  in  1814,  and  became  associated  with  a  firm  of
bank-note  engravers.  In  1818  he  went  to  .England,
accompanied  by  Mr.  Fairman  and  several  work
men,  and  obtained  a  contract  for  supplying  the
Bank  of  Ireland  with  plates.  He  carried  on  his
business  extensively  for  many  years  in  London,
and  was  employed  in  perfecting  engines  and  ma
chines  to  be  worked  by  steam-power.  Pie  origi
nated  a  process  for  transferring  engravings  from
one  steel  plate  to  another,  an  instrument  called  the
bathometer,  to  measure  the  depth  of  water,  and
the  pleometer,  to  mark  with  precision  the  speed  at
which  a  vessel  moves  through  the  water.  He  con
structed  a  gun  in  which  steam,  generated  at  an
enormous  pressure,  was  used  for  propulsion  in
stead  of  gunpowder,  and  with  it  passed  balls
through  eleven  planks  of  the  hardest  deal,  each  an
inch  thick,  placed  some  distance  apart.  With  a
pressure  of  only  65  atmospheres  he  penetrated  an
iron  plate  a  quarter  of  an  inch  thick.  He  also
screwed  to  a  gun-barrel  a  tube  filled  with  balls,
which,  falling  into  the  barrel,  were  discharged  at
the  rate  of  nearly  1.000  a  minute.

PERKINS,  James  Breck,  author,  b.  in  St.
Croix  Falls,  Wis.,  4  Nov.,  1847.  He  was  graduated
at  Rochester  university  in  1867,  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1868,  and  was  city  attorney  of  Rochester  in
1874-'8.  He  has  contributed  to  periodicals,  and
has  published  "France  under  Richelieu  and  Maza-
rin  "  (2  vols..  New  York,  1886).

PERKINS.  Jonathan  Cogswell,  author,  b.  in
Ipswich,  Mass.,  21  Nov.,  1809 ;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,
12  Dec.,  1877.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in
1842,  studied  law  in  the  office  of  Rufus  Choate  at
Salem  and  at  Harvard  law-school,  and  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1835.  He  practised  success
fully  at  Salem  for  thirteen  years,  when  he  became
judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  of  Massachu
setts.  He  served  in  the  state  senate  in  1846-'8,  and
was  an  able  and  voluminous  commentator  and
writer  on  law  subjects.  He  edited  Chitty's  "  Crimi
nal  Law"  (3  vols.,  Boston,  1836);  Chitty  on  "Con
tracts  "  (1839) ;  Jarman  on  "  Wills  "  (1845) ;  Abbot
on  "Shipping"  (1846);  Daniell's  "Chancery  Prac
tice"  (3  vols..  1846);  Collyer  on  "Partnership"
(1848);  Angell  on  "Water  Courses"  (1869);  Pick
ering's  "Reports,"  vols.  ii.  to  x. ;  and  wrote  "Arbi
trations  and  Awards."  He  also  assisted  in  editing
"  Digest  of  Decisions  of  the  Courts  of  Common
Law  and  Admiralty  "  (6  vols.,  1854-'6).

PERKINS,  Joseph,  capitalist,  b.  in  Warren,
Trumbull  co.,  Ohio,  5  July,  1819 :  (\.  in  Saratoga
Springs.  N.  Y.,  26  Aug.,  1885.  His  father  was  in
1798  appointed  by  the  Erie  land  company  agent
and  surveyor  for  their  lands  on  the  Western  Re
serve,  and  acted  in  that  capacity  till  1844.  accumu
lating  a  large  property.  The  son  was  graduated  at
Marietta  college  in  1839,  and  entered  his  father's
office,  taking  entire  charge  of  his  estate  at  the  lat-
ter's  death  five  years  later.  He  removed  to  Cleve
land  in  1852,  and  did  much  to  build  up  that  city.
He  became  president  of  the  National  bank  of  com
merce,  and  was  identified  with  a  large  number  of
business  and  benevolent  institutions,  acquiring  a
reputation  for  probity  and  benevolence.  One  of
his  favorite  charities  was  the  Protestant  orphan
asylum  of  Cleveland.  He  was  its  founder,  and  for
many  years  its  president  and  principal  benefactor.

PERKINS.  Justin,  missionary,  b.  in  West
Springfield,  Mass..  12  March,  1805  ;  d.  in  Chicopee,
Mass..  31  Dec.,  1869.  L'nti)  his  eighteenth  year  he
lived  on  his  father's  farm,  but,  desiring  to  qualify


730


PERKINS


PERKINS


himself  as  a  missionary,  he  studied  in  his  native
town  and  at  Amherst,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1829.  He  spent  two  years  in  Andover  theological
seminary,  was  a  tutor  for  nearly  a  year  in  Amherst,
and  in  1833  the  American  board  sent  him  to  begin  a

mission  to  the  Nes-
torians  of  Persia.
He  was  ordained  a
minister  of  the  Con
gregational  church
on  8  Sept.,  and  soon
afterward  sailed
with  his  wife,  reach
ing  Oroomiah  in
November,  1834.
Here,  almost  un
aided,  he  laid  the
foundation  of  a
mission,  the  history
of  which  is  identi
fied  with  his  life.
Aided  by  a  priest,
l  the  lan-
of  the  Nes-


>•
a

j^

<y
*


and  translated  the
whole  Bible  into
modern  Syriac.  He  also  translated  other  books,
prepared  and  published  a  commentary  on  Genesis
and  Daniel,  and  also  aided  in  general  missionary
work,  and  in  establishing  and  directing  various
mission-schools.  In  1842  he  visited  the  United
States,  and  was  accompanied  by  Mar  Yohannan,
bishop  of  the  Nestorian  church,  who  was  one  of
his  first  converts.  la  1843  he  returned  to  Persia,
and  soon  afterward,  in  company  with  another  mis
sionary,  visited  Teheran,  the  capital,  with  the  object
of  defending  the  Protestants  against  misrepresenta
tion  and  persecution,  in  which  he  was  entirely  suc
cessful.  He  revisited  his  native  country  in  1858,
and  in  August,  1869,  wearied  by  his  labors,  he  came
home  to  die.  His  connection  with  the  mission,  of
which  he  was  the  chief  support,  lasted  about  thirty-
six  years.  He  published  "A  Residence  of  Eight
Years  in  Persia"  (Andover,  1843)  and  "Missionary
Life  in  Persia"  (18(51).

PERKINS.  Maurice,  chemist,  b.  in  New  Lon
don,  Conn.,  14  March,  183(5.  He  studied  chemistry
abroad,  spending  the  year  I860-'!  at  the  universi
ties  of  Gottingen,  Heidelberg,  and  Tubingen.  In
1802  he  was  appointed  assistant  professor  of  chem
istry  at  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in
New  York  city,  and  in  1868-'5  he  was  assistant  at
the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard.  He
was  called  \$  the  charge  of  chemistry  in  Union
college  in  18(55,  and  still  holds  that  place.  In  188(5
he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  state  board  of
health.  He  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from
Harvard  in  1865,  and  that  of  M.  D.  from  the  Al
bany  medical  college  in  1870.  Prof.  Perkins  has
been  largely  occupied  with  professional  investiga
tions  for  private  concerns,  and  has,  therefore,  pub
lished  but  little.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Manual  of
Qualitative  Analysis  "  (New  York,  1867).

PERKINS,  Nathan,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lisbon,
Conn.,  14  May,  1749  ;  d.  in  West  Hartford,  18  Jan.,
1838.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1770.  In
1771  he  was  licensed  by  the  New  London  associa
tion,  and  after  preaching  for  a  short  time  at
Wrentham,  Mass.,  he  became  minister  of  West
Hartford  Congregational  church  in  1772,  where  he
remained  till  his  death.  He  published  "Four  Let
ters  on  the  Anabaptists"  (1793),  a  volume  of  ser
mons  (1795).  and  thirteen  occasional  sermons  and
discourses  (1791-1822).


PERKINS,  Samuel,  author,  b.  in  Lisbon,  Conn.,
in  1767  ;  d.  in  Windham,  Conn.,  in  September,  1850.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1785,  studied  the
ology,  was  licensed,  and  preached,  but  afterward
practised  law  at  Windham.  He  was  the  author  of
"  History  of  the  Political  and  Military  Events  of
the  Late  War  between  the  United  States  and  Great
Britain  "  (New  Haven,  1825);  "General  Jackson's
Conduct  in  the  Seminole  War"  (Brooklyn,  Conn.,
1828);  and  "Historical  Sketches  of  the  United
States,  1815-'80"  (New  York,  1830).

PERKINS,  Samuel  Elliott,  jurist,  b.  in  Brat-
tleborough,  Vt.,  6  Dec.,  1811;  d.  in  Indianapolis,
Ind.,  17  Dec.,  1879.  He  passed  his  youth  on  ;i
farm,  and  had  few  educational  advantages.  After
attaining  his  majority  he  studied  law,  and  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  Richmond,  Ind..  in  1N37.  He
was  appointed  prosecuting  attorney  for  the  Wayne
circuit  in  1843,  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the
Democratic  ticket  in  1844,  and  from  that  year  till
1864  was  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  state.
lie  was  judge  of  the  superior  court  of  Marion
county  in  1873-'6,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  again
placed  on  the  supremo  bench,  of  which  he  was
chief  justice  at  his  death.  He  was  professor  of  law
in  the  Northwestern  Christian  university,  and
editor  and  proprietor  of  "The  Jefferson ian,"  a
Democratic  paper,  and  published  "Digest  of  the
Decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Indiana  "  (In
dianapolis,  1858)  and  "  Pleadings  and  Practice
under  the  Code  in  the  Courts  of  Indiana"  (1859).

PERKINS,  Simon,  pioneer,  b.  in  Norwich.
Conn.,  17  Sept.,  1771 ;  d.  in  Warren.  Ohio,  19  Nov.,
1844.  His  father  was  a  captain  in  the  Revolution
ary  army,  and  died  in  camp.  The  son  removed  to
Oswego,  N.  Y..  in  1795,  where  he  spent  three  years
in  extensive  land  operations.  In  1804  he  settled
on  the  "  Reserve  "  at  Warren,  Ohio,  where  he  held
extensive  land  agencies,  and  in  1815  paid  into  the
public  treasury  land-taxes  that  amounted  to  one
seventh  the  entire  revenue  of  the  state.  He  was
the  first  postmaster  in  the  "  Western  Reserve,"  and
was  intrusted  with  the  arrangement  of  other  post-
offices  in  that  region.  In  1807,  at  the  request  of
the  government,  he  established  expresses  through
the  Indian  country  to  Detroit.  In  the  autumn  of
1808  he  was  instrumental  in  securing  the  treaty  of
Brownsville,  whereby  the  Indians  ceded  lands  for
a  road  from  the  Reserve  to  Miami  of  the  Lakes.  In
May,  1808,  he  was  commissioned  a  brigadier-gen
eral  of  militia,  and  after  the  disaster  of  Gen.  Hull's
army  at  Detroit  he  wa.s  assigned  the  duty  of  pro
tecting  a  large  part  of  the  northwestern  frontier.
He  retired  from  the  army,  28  Feb..  1813,  and  after
ward  declined  a  commission  of  colonel  in  the  regu
lar  army,  which  was  offered  to  him  by  President
Harrison.  Gen.  Perkins  was  at  the  head  of  a  com
mission  that  was  intrusted  with  the  arrangement
and  execution  of  the  canal  system  of  Ohio,  and
from  1826  till  1838  was  an  active  member  of  the
board  of  canal-fund  commissioners.

PERKINS,  Thomas  Hamlasyd,  philanthro
pist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  15  Dec.,  1764;  d.  in
Brookline,  Mass.,  11  Jan.,  1854.  His  father  was  a
merchant  in  Boston,  and  his  mother,  Elizabeth
Peck,  was  a  founder  and  friend  of  the  Boston  ie-
male  asylum.  Thomas  was  educated  in  the  pub
lic  schools  and  privately,  and,  after  passing  sev
eral  years  in  a  Boston  counting-house,  visited  his
brother  James  in  Santo  Domingo  in  1785,  and  soon
became  associated  with  him  there  in  a  mercantile
house.  The  climate  injuring  his  health,  he  re
turned  to  Boston,  and  for  some  time  attended  to
the  business  of  the  firm  in  the  United  States.  In
1789  he  went  as  a  supercargo  to  Batavia  and  Can-


PERKINS


PERLEY


731


ton,  and  he  subsequently  made  several  successful
ventures  in  the  Pacific,  on  the  northwest  coast  of
America,  and  in  China.  He  then  formed  a  partner
ship  with  his  brother  James,  which  for  the  suc
ceeding  thirty  years  was  remarkable  for  the  extent
and  success  of  its  enterprises.  Soon  after  the  death
of  his  brother  in  1822  Mr.  Perkins  retired  from
business.  In  1805  he  was  elected  to  the  Massachu
setts  senate,  and  for  about  eighteen  years  subse
quently  he,  most  of  the  time,  represented  Boston
in  either  branch  of  the  legislature.  In  1827  he  was
the  projector  of  the  Quincy  railway,  the  first  in
the  United  States,  and  was  lieutenant-colonel  of
a  military  corps  in  Boston.  Mr.  Perkins  gave  his

house  and  grounds
in  Pearl  street,
valued  at  $50,000,
for  a  blind  asylum
(now  the  Perkins
institution  and
Massachusetts  asy
lum  for  the  blind),
on  condition  that
$50.000  should  be
raised  as  a  fund  for
its  support.  He
was  one  of  the
chief  contributors
to  the  funds  of
the  Massachusetts
general  hospital,
the  largest  con
tributor  to  the
Mercantile  library

association,  and,  with  other  members  of  his  family,
gave  more  than  $60,000  to  the  Boston  athemeum.
He  took  an  active  part  in  the  erection  of  Bunker
Hill  monument,  and  was  also  interested  in  urging
forward  the  completion  of  the  Washington  monu
ment.  He  wrote,  while  in  Europe,  and  at  other
times,  diaries  and  autobiographical  sketches,  which
were  partly  republished  in  Thomas  G.  Gary's  me
moir  of  his  life  (Boston,  1856). —  His  nephew,
James  Handasyd,  author,  b.  in  Boston,  31  July,
1810;  d.  in  Cincinnati.  14  Dec.,  1849,  was  edu
cated  privately  at  Phillips  Exeter  academy  and
at  Round  Hill  school,  Northampton.  In  1828-'30
he  was  a  clerk  in  his  uncle's  counting-room,  and.
after  a  tour  in  England  and  the  West  Indies,  set
tled  in  1832  in  Cincinnati.  He  studied  law  there,
which  he  soon  abandoned  for  literature.  He  con
ducted  the  "Western  Monthly  Magazine,"  and
edited  the  '•  Evening  Chronicle,"  a  weekly  paper
which  he  purchased  in  1835  and  united  with  the
"  Cincinnati  Mirror."  After  the  failure  of  his  pub
lisher  he  became  in  1839  a  minister  at  large,  a
mission  of  benevolence  to  which  he  devoted  the
rest  of  his  life,  and  at  the  same  time  opened  a
girls'  school,  which  gained  a  high  reputation  in
Cincinnati.  He  was  pastor  of  the  Cincinnati  Uni
tarian  society  in  1841-'7,  in  succession  to  his  cousin.
William  Henry  Channing.  He  identified  himself
with  the  cause  of  prison  discipline  and  reform  and
gave  much  attention  to  education,  and  during  his
latter  years  interested  himself  in  a  plan  of  Christian
union.  He  was  first  president  of  the  Cincinnati
historical  society,  and  vice-president  of  the  Ohio
historical  society,  a  trustee  of  the  Cincinnati  col
lege,  and  of  the  Astronomical  society.  He  pub
lished  a  "  Digest  of  the  Constitutional  Opinions
of  Chief-Justice  John  Marshall  "  (Boston.  1839) ;
"  Christian  Civilization,"  an  address  (Cincinnati,
1840) ;  and  "  Annals  of  the  West  "  (1847  :  revised
and  enlarged  by  John  M.  Peck,  St.  Louis,  1850) ;
and  contributed  articles  to  the  "  North  American


Review"  in  1839-'47,  chiefly  upon  the  history  of
Ohio  and  pioneer  settlement.  In  a  fit  of  depres
sion  he  drowned  himself  in  the  Ohio  river.  See
his  "  Memoirs,"  by  William  Henry  Channing  (2
vols.,  Boston.  1851).

PERKINS.  William  Oscar,  musician,  b.  in
Stockbridge,  Vt.,  23  May,  1831.  He  was  graduated
at  Kimball  union  academy,  Meriden,  N.  H.,  in
1853,  and  studied  at  the  Boston  music-school  and
under  private  teachers  here  and  in  Europe.  The
degree  of  Mus.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Ham
ilton  college  in  1879.  He  resided  in  Boston  from
1857  until  1884.  when  he  took  up  his  residence
in  New  York.  His  work  has  been  principally  that
of  a  conductor  and  voice-teacher.  He  has  com
posed  numerous  part-songs  and  hymns,  and  has
compiled  and  edited  many  collections  of  vocal
music. — His  brother.  Henry  Snutlnriek,  musi
cian,  b.  in  Stockbridge,  Vt.,  20  March,  1833,  was
graduated  at  the  Boston  music-school  in  1861.  He
taught  music  in  New  York  and  Massachusetts,  and
later  also  in  Iowa  state  university  in  1867-'8.  Iowa
academy  of  music  in  1867-'71,  and  in  other  institu
tions.  Since  1872  he  has  lived  in  Chicago,  111.,  and
in  1875-'6  he  visited  Europe  for  study.  He  has
conducted  more  than  200  musical  conventions  and
festivals  in  various  parts  of  the  United  States,  is
known  as  a  composer  of  vocal  music,  and  has  pub
lished  a  large  number  of  music  collections. — An
other  brother,  Julius  Edson,  singer,  b.  in  Stock-
bridge,  Vt.,  19  March,  1845;  d.  in  Manchester,
England,  25  Feb.,  1875.  He  received  his  musical
education  in  Boston,  and  studied  also  in  Paris,
Milan,  and  Florence.  He  filled  various  operatic
engagements  in  Italy  in  1870-'!.  and  in  \\  arsaw,
Poland,  in  1872,  and  in  1873  joined  Mapleson's
Italian  opera  company.  In  1874  he  made  his  debut
in  London,  and  the  same  year  he  married  Marie
Roze,  the  second  soprano  of  the  company.  His
voice  was  a  basso  profundo,  and  he  was  an  excel
lent  vocal  and  dramatic  artist.  He  composed  some
songs  and  pieces  for  the  piano.

PERLEY,  Henry  Fullerton,  Canadian  engi
neer,  b.  in  St.  John,  New  Brunswick.  5  March.  1831.
His  father  was  imperial  commissioner  of  fisheries
under  the  reciprocity  treaty  of  1854.  The  son  was
educated  privately  and  at  the  Collegiate  grammar-
school  at  Frederic-ton,  N.  B.  He  entered  the  pub-
lie  service  of  New  Brunswick  in  1848,  and  was  em
ployed  for  four  years  in  surveys  for  a  system  of
railways.  In  1852  he  was  again  engaged  on  sur
veys  in  New  Brunswick  and  Nova  Scotia,  and  dur
ing  1854-'6  he  was  employed  on  the  construction
of  the  Grand  Trunk  railway  between  Montreal  and
Brockville.  He  was  resident  engineer,  in  the  ser
vice  of  the  New  Brunswick  government,  on  the
construction  of  the  railway  between  St.  John  and
Shediac,  and  remained  till  the  completion  of  the
road  in  1860.  He  was  government  engineer  of
Nova  Scotia  from  May,  1863,  till  August,  1865,
when  he  resigned  to  accept  a  place  in  connection
with  the  construction  of  the  Metropolitan  Exten
sion  underground  railway,  London,  England.  In
1870,  on  the  termination  of  this  engagement,  he
returned  to  New  Brunswick  and  took  charge  of  the
works  in  connection  with  the  improvement  of  the
freight  facilities  of  the  government  railways  in  that
province,  and  the  construction  of  the  deep-water
terminus  and  its  extension  at  St.  John.  In  May,
1872,  he  was  appointed  engineer  in  charge  of  har
bors,  etc.,  in  the  maritime  provinces  for  the  Do
minion  department  of  public  works,  and  he  held
that  post  till  the  close  of  1879.  when  he  became
chief  engineer  of  the  department  of  public  works,
which  office  he  now  (1888)  retains.


732


PEHLEY


PERRIN DU LAC


PERLEY,  Ira,  jurist,  b.  in  Boxford,  Essex  co.,
Mass.,  9  Nov.,  1799 ;  d.  in  Concord,  N.  II.,  20  Feb.,
1874.  lie  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1822,
was  a  tutor  there  from  1828  till  1825.  studied  law
at  Hanover,  X.  II.,  and  began  practice  there  in
1827.  He  was  treasurer  of  the  college  from  1880
till  1835.  Mr.  Perley  was  a  member  of  the  legisla
ture  from  Hanover  in  1834,  and  from  Concord  in
1839  and  1870.  He  was  an  associate  justice  of  the
superior  court  from  July,  1850,  till  Oct.,  1852,  and
chief  justice  of  the  supreme  judicial  court  from
1855  till  1859,  and  again  from  1864  till  1809.  After
his  resignation  in  1809  he  resumed  the  practice  of
the  law  as  a  consulting  lawyer.  His  decisions  as  a
judge  were  highly  praised,  and  he  was  a  profound
scholar  and  a  good  linguist.  He  received  the  de
gree  of  LL.  D.  from  Dartmouth  in  1852.

PEROT,  Thomas  Morris,  merchant,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  8  May,  1828.  He  is  the  grand
son  of  Elliston  Perot,  a  noted  Philadelphia  mer
chant,  and  a  descendant  of  Anthony  Morris.  He
early  entered  the  retail  drug  business,  subsequently
was  graduated  at  the  Philadelphia  college  of  phar
macy,  and  in  1850  established  himself  in  business
as  a  wholesale  druggist  and  manufacturing  chem
ist,  in  which  he  has  acquired  wealth:  but  he  is
more  widely  known  for  his  philanthropic  works.
Since  1861  he  has  been  the  president  of  the  Mer
cantile  library  company  of  Philadelphia,  and  un
der  his  administration  its  library  of  22,000  vol
umes  has  grown  to  1(50,000.  Mr.  Perot  bore  an  active
part  in  founding  the  Woman's  medical  college  in
Philadelphia,  the  first  institution  of  the  kind  in
the  world,  and  has  been  for  many  years  its  presi
dent.  Since  his  youth  he  has  been  connected  with
various  charitable  institutions,  and  he  is  now  in
the  directorship  of  many  such  in  Philadelphia.
He  has  been  active  in  the  struggle  for  reform  in
municipal  affairs,  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the
first  Citizens'  reform  association,  and  became  one
of  the  original  members  of  the  Committee  of  100.

PERREAULT,  Francis  Joseph,  Canadian
author,  b.  in  Quebec,  Canada,  in  1750;  d.  there  in
1844.  Although  he  was  the  son  of  a  wealthy  con
tractor,  the  scarcity  of  books  in  the  country  placed
many  impediments  in  the  way  of  his  education,
but  by  his  energy  and  perseverance  he  succeeded
in  acquiring  much  practical  and  useful  knowledge.
He  rendered  more  service  to  Canada  by  his  pen
than  perhaps  any  of  his  contemporaries.  He  was
prothonotary  of  the  district  of  Quebec  up  to  the
close  of  his  life.  His  principal  works  are  "  Le  juge
de  paix  et  officier  de  paroisse  pour  la  province  de
Quebec  "  (Quebec,  1805) :  "  Dictionnaire  portatif  et
abrege  des  lois  et  regies  du  parlement  provincial  du
Bas-Canada  "  (1805) ;  "Manuel  des  huissiers  de  la
cour  du  bane  du  roi  du  district  de  Quebec "
(1813);  ''Question  et  reponses  sur  le  loi  criminel
du  Bas-Canada  "  (1814) ;  '•  Moyens  de  conserver  nos
institutions,  nos  langues  et  nos  lois";  "Extraits
des  registres  du  conseil  superieur  et  de  la  pre-
vote"(1824);  "  Traite  d'agriculture  adapte  au  cli-
mat  du  Canada"  (1831);  "Code  sura  1'usage  des
habitants  tant  aneiens  que  nouveaux  du  Bas-Cana
da"  (1839);  and  "  Histoire  du  Canada"  (4  vols.).

PERREIN,  Jean,  French  naturalist,  b.  near
Mont  de  Marsan  in  1750;  d.  in  New  York  in
October,  1805.  He  was  the  son  of  successful  mer
chants,  and  was  destined  for  a  commercial  career,
but  his  preference  was  for  science,  and  after  the
death  of  his  parents  he  travelled  in  northern  Africa,
Arabia,  Persia,  and  India,  forming  collections  in
natural  history.  On  his  return  he  presented  these
to  the  Academy  of  sciences  of  Bordeaux,  and  was
elected  by  that  body  an  associate  member.  In  1794


he  set  out  for  North  America,  and  visited  the  Hud
son  bay  territory,  the  Rocky  mountains,  the  prov
inces  of  Quebec  and  Ontario,  and  all  the  New
England  states.  On  his  way  to  France  he  died
of  malaria  fever.  His  collections  and  manuscripts
!  were  sent  to  Paris  and  were  utilized  by  Charles
i  Sonnini  in  his  "  Histoire  naturelle  des  poissons  et
des  cetaces"  (Paris,  1804),  and  for  the  great  edi
tion  of  Buffon's  works  (1798-1807.  127  vols.).  Per-
rein's  "Voyage  chez  les  Indiens  de  1'Amerique  du
Nord,  avec  un  apercu  des  usages  et  du  caractere  de
ces  peuples "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1809)  is  a  very  rare
and  valuable  work.  His  manuscripts  in  the  Na
tional  library  of  Paris  are  often  consulted  by  Eu
ropean  writers  on  North  America.

PERRET,  Jacques,  French  missionary,  b.  in
Flanders  in  1595;  d.  in  Sault  Sainte  Marie  in
1074.  He  was  a  Jesuit,  and,  coming  to  Canada  in
1042  as  a  missionary  to  the  Algonquins,  labored
afterward  for  nearly  twenty  years  among  the  In
dians  on  Kennebec  river  and'  the  Chippewas.  In
1671  he  was  attached  to  the  Ottawa  missions  at
Saiilt  Sainte  Marie,  and  died  there,  having  alto
gether  labored  thirty-two  years  as  a  missionary.
Among  his  papers,  which  are  preserved  in  the
National  library  of  Paris,  have  been  found  a  dic
tionary  of  the  Algonquin  language,  a  catechism,  a
grammar,  and  several  sermons  in  native  dialects.

PERRIN,  Aimer  Monroe,  soldier,  b.  in  Abbe
ville  county,  S.  C.,  in  1829;  d.  at  Spottsylvania,
Vs...  11  May.  1864.  He  was  educated  at  Bethany
academy,  S.  C.,  and  served  in  the  Mexican  war  as
1st  lieutenant  in  the  12th  volunteers.  On  his  re
turn  to  South  Carolina  he  studied  and  practised
law  until  1861,  when  he  entered  the  Confederate
army  as  captain  of  the  14th  South  Carolina  volun
teers,  and  was  promoted  colonel  in  April,  1863.  and
brigadier-general  in  May,  1864,  with  the  command
of  an  Alabama  brigade.

PERRIN,  Eloi  Philibert,  French  colonist,  b.
in  Pont-a-Mousson  in  1674;  d.  at  sea  in  1713.  He
made  several  voyages  as  supercargo  to  Acadia  and
Nova  Scotia,  and  during  his  visits  to  these  coun
tries  made  a  valuable  collection  of  plants,  which
were  utilized  by  Joseph  Pitton  de  Tourncfort  in
his  classification  of  the  American  flora.  He  also
naturalized  in  Europe  several  new  specimens  of
shrubs.  Having  obtained  a  land  grant  in  Acadia,
he  began  in  1710  a  settlement  forty-two  miles
north  of  Port  Royal,  which  he  named  Perrinet,  but
it  had  only  a  short  existence,  as  its  founder  was
lost  at  sea  during  a  voyage  to  Dieppe  for  the  pur
pose  of  forming  a  company  to  develop  his  estate.

PERRIN  DU  LAC,  Francois  Marie,  French
administrator,  b.  in  Chaux-de-Fonds  in  1700;  d.
in  Rambouillet.  Seine-et-Oise,  22  July,  1824.  He
entered  the  colonial  administration  in  1789,  and
was  attached  to  the  treasury  department  of  Santo
Domingo,  took  part  in  the  rebellion  of  Cape  Fran-
cais,  fought  under  Mauduit  du  Plessis  (q.  r.)  in  the
royal  volunteers  named  Les  Pompons  blancs,  and
acted  as  secretary  to  the  government  commissioner
that  presided  over  the  debates  of  the  colonial  as
sembly  of  St.  Marc.  In  1791  he  accompanied
Palissot  de  Beauvais  to  the  United  States  to  de
mand  the  help  of  congress  against  the  negro  insur
gents,  and  remained  in  the  country  after  the  return
of  Palissot  to  Santo  Domingo.  Having  obtained,
through  the  influence  of  his  cousin,  a  member  of
the  convention,  the  erasure  of  his  name  from  the
list  of  emigrants,  he  recovered  his  former  estate.
The  war  between  England  and  France  preventing
his  immediate  return  to  his  country,  he  travelled
through  the  United  States  and  explored  the  south
ern  and  western  states,  visiting  Louisiana,  Missis-


PERRIXE


PERRY


733


sippi,  Ohio,  Illinois,  Maryland,  and  Pennsylvania.
Toward  the  close  of  1803  he  returned  to  France,  and
he  was  attached  in  1800  to  the  prefecture  of  Ham
burg,  but  he  soon  resigned  and  retired  to  private
life  till  the  accession  of  Louis  XVIII.,  when  he
was  given  an  employment  in  the  navy  department
at  Paris.  In  1819  he  was  appointed  "'sous  prefet '"
of  Sancerre,  Cher,  whence  he  was  afterward  trans
ferred  to  Rambouillet.  He  published  "  Voyage
dans  les  deux  Louisianes,  et  jchez  les  nations  sau-
vages  du  Missouri,  par  les  Etats-Unis,  1'Ohio,  et
les  provinces  qui  le  bordent,  en  1801,  1802.  et  1803,
avec  un  apercu  des  moeurs,  des  usages,  du  caractere
et  des  continues  religieuses  et  civiles  des  peuples
de  ces  diverges  contrees  ?'  (Paris.  1805).  and  trans
lated  into  French  the  poem  of  '•  Solomon,"  by
Matthew  Prior  (Paris,  1808).

PERRINE,  Matthew  La  Rue,  clergyman,  b.
in  Freehold,  Monmouth  co.,  X.  J..  4  May,  1777 :  d.
in  Auburn.  X.  Y.,  11  Feb..  1836.  He  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1797,  studied  theology,  and  was
licensed  to  preach  in  1799.  After  serving  as  a
missionary  in  Pennsylvania  he  became  pastor  of
the  Presbyterian  church  in  Bottle  Hill,  X.  J.,  in
1802.  and  held  this  charge  until  1811,  when  he  was
called  to  the  Spring  street  church  in  Xew  York
city,  remaining  there  until  1820.  From  1821  until
his  death  he  was  professor  of  ecclesiastical  history
and  church  polity  in  Auburn  theological  seminary,
serving  also  for  two  years  as  professor  of  theology.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Alleghany
college,  Pa.,  in  1818.  He  was  the  author  of  a
"  Plan  of  Salvation  "  (1816)  and  an  ••  Abstract  of
Biblical  Geography  "  (1835).

PERRINET,  Charles  fasten,  West  Indian
physician,  b.  in  St.  Pierre  island  in  1791 ;  d.  near
Capesterre,  Guadeloupe,  in  1849.  He  received  his
education  in  Paris,  and  became  afterward  a  ma
rine  surgeon.  In  1819  he  made,  at  the  hospital  of
St.  Pierre  in  Martinique,  experiments  in  yellow
fever  that  convinced  him  that  the  malady  was  not
contagious,  and  he  recorded  his  observations  in  a
book  that  occasioned  controversies  in  the  medi
cal  world,  *'  Observations  faites  a  Phopital  de  St.
Pierre  pendant  une  epidemic  de  fievre  jaune  "  (St.
Pierre,  1821).  He  was  afterward  attached  to  the
medical  staff  of  the  penal  colony  of  Cayenne,  and
during  explorations  in  the  interior  of  Guiana  in
vestigated  the  remedies  that  were  used  formerly  by
Indians.  He  was  retired  in  1842  with  the  rank  of
surgeon-major,  and  settled  near  Capesterre,  in
Guadeloupe,  where  he  continued  to  practise  his
profession.  His  works  include  "  Traite  des  remedes
employes  par  les  Indiens  de  PAmerique  du  Sud
pour  fa  guerison  des  blessures  faites  avec  le  fer,
des  abces,  et  des  affections  syphilitiques ''  (Cayenne.
182C) ;  "  Manuel  de  medecine  pratique  a  Pusage
des  Europeens  habitant  les  pays  tropicaux "
(Basse  Terre,  1844) :  and  "  Monographic  de  la  fievre
jaune.  ses  origines,  et  des  moyens  preventifs  et
curatifs  "  (Basse  Terre,  1846).

PERROT.  Nicolas,  French  explorer,  b.  in
France  early  in  the  17th  century;  d.  after  1697.
He  received  a  good  education,  and,  coming  to  Can
ada,  rendered  great  services  to  the  government  of
that  country.  He  went  at  an  early  period  to  the
Indian  country,  and  learned  the  Algonquin  lan
guages.  On  returning  to  Quebec  in  1665  with  a
party  of  Ottawas.  he  accompanied  Daumont  de  St.
Lusson  to  the  Falls  of  St.  Mary  as  interpreter.  In
1684  he  was  employed  by  Lefebvre  de  la  Barre  in
bringing  the  western  tribes  to  his  assistance  against
the  Iroquois.  and  in  1687  he  did  the  like  service  for
the  Marquis  de  Denonville.  He  was  several  years
Indian  agent,  and  in  1697  was  on  the  point  of


being  burned  by  the  Miamis,  and  saved  only  by
the  Outagamis,  by  whom  he  was  much  beloved.
Under  Philippe  de  Rigaud.  Marquis  de  Vaudreuil,
he  was  interpreter,  and  addressed  to  him  a  memoir
respecting  the  western  country.  He  discovered
the  lead-mines  on  the  Des  Moines  river,  Iowa,  had
a  fort  on  Lake  Pepin.  had  travelled  over  most  of
Xew  France,  and  left  an  interesting  manuscript
account  of  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  Indians,
from  which  M.  de  la  Potherie  borrowed  largely  for
his  "Histoire  de  PAmerique."  Charlevoix  also
acknowledges  indebtedness  to  him.

PERROT, Pierre, surnamed Pierre Franc,
French  buccaneer,  b.  in Dunkirk  in  1632;  d.  in
Tortuga.  in  1681.  His  father,  a  banker  of  Dunkirk,
became  one  of  the  associates  of  the  Montreal  com
pany,  and  one  of  his  brothers  went  to  Canada  and
was  employed  for.  several  years  in  missionary  work
i  among  the  Hurons  and  Iroquois. Pierre  received
I  a  good  education,  but,  as  he  was  a  younger  son,  he
went  in  1652  to  Santo  Domingo  in  quest  of  fortune,
and  joined  the  buccaneers. In  the  following  year,
with  a  small  sloop  and  twenty-six  men.  he  cruised
i  off  Cape  Vela,  waiting  for  the  passage  of  vessels
i  bound  from  Maracaibo  to  the  coast  of  Campeche.
|  As  none  came  in  sight,  and  as  he  ran  short  of  pro
visions,  he  made  sail  for  Rio  Hacha.  where  a  Span-
,  ish  squadron  protected  the  pearl-fisheries. By  a
sudden  attack  he  captured  the  flag-ship,  but  the
main  division  of  the  fleet  gave  chase,  and  he  was
finally  overtaken,  and  surrendered  after  a  desperate
action. He  was  transported  to  Carthagena.  and,
worked  for  two  years  in  stone  quarries,  in  building
i  the  fortifications  of  the  city,  but  was  released  in
1655,  through  the  intervention  of  his  father,  and
returning  to  France,  published  an  interesting  narra-
i  tive  of  his  captivity. As  he  had  vowed  to  revenge
'  himself,  he  went  again  to  Tortuga.  about  1660,  took
part  in  most  of  the  successful  expeditions  of  the
;  buccaneers,  and  amassed  wealth. At  the  time  of
'  his  death  he  held  an  important  place  in  the  colonial
administration  of  Tortuga. He  published  '•  Rela-
|  tion  d'une  captivite  a  Carthagene  des  Indes,"  which
[  is  now  rare  (Amsterdam.  1657).

PERROTET,  Gustavo  Samuel  (per-ro-tay).
French  explorer,  b.  in  Strasburg  in  1793 ;  d.  in
Paris  in  1867.  He  was  attached  as  naturalist  to
1  the  expedition  around  the  world  under  command
of  Com.  Philibert,  and  sailed  from  Aix,  1  Jan.,
,  1819.  with  a  collection  of  grains  and  fruit-trees,
the  culture  of  which  he  was  to  introduce  in  the
French  possessions.  In  Cayenne  he  devoted  sev
eral  months  to  the  exploration  of  the  country,  and
formed  a  large  collection  of  plants  and  minerals  of
the  country,  with  which  he  returned  to  France  in
1821.  He  was  employed  afterward  on  missions  in
Africa,  and  in  1832  made  several  voyages  to  South
America.  He  published  "  Catalogue  raisonne  des
plantes  introduces  dans  les  colonies  Fran9aises  de
Bourbon  et  de  Cayenne,  et  de  celles  rapportees
vivantes  des  mers  d'Asie  et  de  la  Guyane  au  Jardin
du  Roi  "  (Paris,  1825) ;  "  Souvenirs  d'un  voyage
autour  du  monde  "  (1831) ;  "Etudes  sur  Phistoire
naturelle  de  la  Guyane  Francaise  "  (1837) ;  "  Me-
moire  sur  un  insecte  et  un  champignon  qui  rava-
1  gent  les  cafeiers  aux  Antilles  "  (1842) ;  and  "  Art  de
Pindigotier"  (Paris,  1842).

PERRY,  Amos,  author,  b.  in  South  Xatick,
Mass..  12  Aug..  1812.  After  graduation  at  Harvard
in  1837  he  taught  in  Xew  London,  Conn.,  and
Providence,  R.  I.  He  visited  Europe  several  times,
and  from  1862  till  1867  was  U.  S.  consul  at  Tunis.
He  has  been  secretary  of  the  Rhode  Island  histori
cal  society  since  1873",  and  its  librarian  since  1880,
,  and  in  1885  he  was  superintendent  of  the  state


734


PERRY


PERRY


census.  Brown  gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in
1841.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Carthage  and  Tunis  "
(Providence,  1869);  "  Memorial  of  Zachariah  Allen,
1795-1882  "  (Cambridge,  1883) ;  and  "  Rhode  Island
State  Census,  1885  "  (Providence,  1887).

PERRY,  Arthur  Latham,  economist,  b.  in
Lyine,  N.  PI.,  27  Feb.,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at
Williams  in  1852,  and  has  been  professor  of  history
and  political  economy  there  since  1853.  In  1874,
at  the  invitation  of  the  Nebraska  state  agricul
tural  society,  he  delivered  an  address  in  Omaha,
Neb.,  on  "  Foes  of  the  Farmers,"  which  has  been
widely  circulated.  He  has  written  editorially  for
the  Springfield  "  Republican  "  and  the  New  York
"  Evening  IJost."  Since  1883  he  has  been  presi
dent  of  the  Berkshire  historical  and  scientific  so
ciety,  and  he  is  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts
historical  society.  An  earnest  advocate  of  free-
trade,  he  has  delivered  many  lectures  and  ad
dresses  in  its  behalf.  In  1868-'9  he  took  part  in
public  debates  on  this  question  with  Horace  Greeley
in  Boston  and  New  York.  Union  college  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1874,  and  Doane  that  of
D.  D.  in  1883.  Dr.  Perry  is  the  author  of  "  Politi
cal  Economy  "  (New  York,  1865)  and  "  Introduction
to  Political"  Economy"  (1877),  and  is  now  (1888)
collecting  data  for  an  historical  work  to  be  entitled
"  Williamstown  and  Williams  College."

PERRY,  Benjamin  Franklin,  lawyer,  b.  in
Pendleton  district,  S.  C.,  20  Nov.,  1805;  d.  in
Greenville,  S.  C.,  3  Dec.,  1886.  He  was  educated
in  Asheville,  N.  C.,  and  Greenville,  S.  C.,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1827.  On
becoming  editor  of  the  Greenville  •'  Mountaineer  "
he  boldly  attacked  the  Nullification  party,  not
sparing  its  leader,  John  C.  Calhoun.  The  sturdy
defence  of  his  principles  and  the  persistent  warfare
upon  his  political  enemies  led  to  the  formation  of
a  Union  party  in  the  state,  and  he  was  the  chief
spirit  of  its  convention  in  1832.  In  1834  he  was
an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  congress,  but  in  1836
was  elected  to  the  lower  branch  of  the  legislature,
serving  until  1844,  when  he  was  sent  to  the  state
senate  and  labored  earnestly  for  the  Union  cause.
He  established  in  1850  a  Union  newspaper  at
Greenville,  entitled  "  The  Southern  Patriot."  In
the  legislature  of  1850  he  delivered  stirring  ap
peals  to  the  loyalty  of  its  members.  When  the  state
seceded  in  1860,  although  he  had  tried  to  prevent
the  act,  he  embraced  the  Confederate  cause  and
sent  his  sons  to  serve  in  the  southern  army.  Under
the  Confederacy  he  held  the  offices  of  district  at
torney  and  district  judge,  and  at  the  close  of  the
war  he  was  appointed  provisional  governor.  Sub
sequently  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator,  but  was  not
permitted  to  take  his  seat.  He  was  a  delegate  to
the  National  Democratic  convention  of  1876.  Gov.
Perry  was  the  author  of  "  Reminiscences  of  Public
Men  "  (Philadelphia,  1883),  and  left  in  manuscript
several  sketches  of  American  statesmen,  which
have  been  edited,  enlarged,  and  published  by  his
wife,  entitled  "  Sketches  of  Eminent  American
Statesmen,  with  Speeches  and  Letters  of  Gov.  Per
ry,  prefaced  by  an  Outline  of  the  Author's  Life,"
with  an  introduction  by  Wade  Hampton  (Philadel
phia,  1887). — His  son,  William  Hayne,  lawyer,  b.
in  Greenville,  S.  C.,  9  June,  1837.  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1857,  practised  law  with  his  father,  and
served  in  the  civil  war  in  Brooks's  troop  of  cavalry,
which  was  afterward  incorporated  into  the  Hamp
ton  legion.  He  participated  in  the  chief  battles
fought  by  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia,  and  de
fended  the  coast  of  South  Carolina.  Subsequently
he  served  in  the  legislature,  and  was  elected  as  a
Democrat  to  congress  in  1884  and  1886.


PERRY,  Christopher  Raymond,  naval  offi
cer,  b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  4  Dec.,  1761 ;  d.  there,
1  June,  1818.  He  was  fifth  in  descent  from  Ed
mund  Perry,  a  Quaker,  who  came  from  Devon
shire,  England,  to  Sandwich,  Mass.,  and  wrote  "  A
Railing  against  the  Court  of  Plymouth,"  dated
1st  day,  1st  month,  1676.  for  which  he  was  heavily
fined.  His  son  emigrated  to  Rhode  Island.  Chris
topher  enlisted  in  the  "  Kingston  Reds,"  served  in
the  patriot  army,  and  then  on  a  privateer,  and  on
the  "  Mifflin."  He  was  captured  and  lay  three
months  in  the  "  Jersey  "  prison-ship,  but  escaped,
re-enlisted  on  the  "  Trumbull,"  and  was  in  the
battle  with  the  "  Watt."  Again  on  a  privateer  he
was  captured  and  kept  a  prisoner  at  Newry,  Ire
land,  where  he  first  met  his  future  wife,  Sarah
Alexander.  In  the  mercantile  marine  he  made
voyages  to  the  East  Indies,  and  on  9  Jan.,  1798,
he  was  made  post-captain  in  the  U.  S.  navy.  He
built  and  commanded  the  '•  General  Greene/'  cruis
ing  in  the  West  Indies,  co-operating  with  Tous-
saint  L'Ouverture  in  the  civil  war  in  Santo  Do
mingo,  and  displaying  the  U.  S.  flag  in  Louisi
ana.  In  1801,  when  the  navy  was  nearly  dis
banded,  Capt.  Perry  was  made  collector  of  New
port,  and  later  he  returned  to  private  life. — His
wife,  Sarah  Alexander,  b.  in  Newry,  County
Down,  Ireland,  in  1768 ;  d.  in  New  London,  Conn.,
4  Dec.,  1830.  Her  grandfather,  James  Wallace,
an  officer  in  the  Scotch  army  and  a  signer  of  the
Solemn  League  and  Covenant,  fled  in  1660,  with
others,  from  County  Ayr  to  the  north  of  Ireland.
She  was  left  an  orphan  at  an  early  age,  grew  up
in  the  family  of  her  uncle,  .and  became  thoroughly
familiar  with  the  historic  ground  of  the  neigh
borhood  of  Newry.  Accompanying  her  parents'
friend,  Mr.  Calbraith  to  this  country,  she  married
on  her  arrival,  at  the  house  of  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush,
Mr.  Perry,  then  mate  of  the  ship.  She  became  the
mother  of  five  sons — Oliver  Hazard,  Raymond  II.
J.,  Matthew  Calbraith,  James  Alexander,  and  Na-
thanael  Hazard — all  of  whom  were  officers  in  the
U.  S.  navy.  Of  her  three  daughters,  Sarah  Wal
lace  married  Cant.  George  W.  Rodgers,  U.  S.  navy,
and  the  other,  Jane  Tweedy,  married  Dr.  William
Butler,  U.  S.  navy,  the  father  of  Senator  Matthew
Calbraith  Butler,  of  South  Carolina.  To  great
strength  of  character  Mrs.  Perry  added  high  intel
lectual  power  and  rare  social  grace,  training  her
children  with  extraordinary  care  to  high  ideals  of
life  and  duty.  After  the  victory  on  Lake  Erie,
some  farmers  in  Rhode  Island  declared  it  was  in
reality  "  Mrs.  Perry's  victory." — Their  son,  Oliver
Hazard,  naval  officer,  b.
in  South  Kingston,  R.  I.,
23  Aug.,  1785  ;  d.  in  Port
Spain,  Island  of  Trini
dad,  23  Aug.,  1819,  was
carefully  trained  by  his
mother,  who  "  fitted  him
to  command  others  by
teaching  him  early  to
obey,"  narrated  to  him
the  deeds  of  her  military
ancestors,  and  taught
him  how  and  what  to
read.  His  favorite  books
were  the  B:ble.  Plu
tarch's  "  Lives,"  Shake
speare,  and  Addison.  In
the  private  schools  of
Kingston,  Tower  Hill,
and  Newport  he  made  rapid  progress,  and  ex
celled  in  the  study  of  mathematics  and  naviga
tion.  Pie  was  the  pupil  of  Count  Rochambeau.


PERRY


PERRY


735


At  the  age  of  eleven  he  was  confirmed  in  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church.  In  1797  he  re
moved  with  his  father  to  Warren.  R.  I.,  where  the
latter  supervised  the  building  of  the  frigate  "  Gen
eral  Greene."  and  Oliver  received  his  commission
as  midshipman.  7  April,  1799.  He  cruised  in  the
West  Indies,  visiting  also  Louisiana,  and  in  the
"Adams,"  "Constellation."'  "Constitution,"  and
'•  Essex  "  served  twice  in  the  Tripolitan  war.  He
was  made  a  lieutenant,  15  Jan.,  1807,  and,  after
building  a  fleet  of  gun-boats,  commanded  the
schooner  "  Revenge,"  cruising  off  the  southern
coast  of  the  United  States.  He  was  honorably  ac
quitted  by  a  court  of  inquiry  that  was  summoned
to  examine  into  the  loss  of  the  "  Revenge "  by
wreck  off  Watch  Hill,  R.  I.,  8  Jan.,  1811.  In
command  of  the  Newport  flotilla  of  gun-boats,  in
waiting  for  the  war  of  1812,  he  gave  prolonged
and  detailed  study  to  the  science  and  art  of  gun
nery  and  naval  tactics.  When  the  French  engi
neer  Toussard,  at  the  request  of  Gen.  Washing
ton,  wrote,  and  in  1809  published,  his  "  Artiller
ist,"  the  name  of  Oliver  Hazard  Perry  was  among
the  first  on  the  list  of  subscribers.  When  the
war  with  England  began  there  was  probably  no
better  ordnance  officer  in  the  American  navy,  and
in  the  training  of  his  crews  he  was  unwearied
in  personal  attention  to  details.  By  assembling
his  gun-boats  occasionally,  he  gained  actual  knowl
edge  of  the  evolutions  of  a  fleet.  He  also  prac
tised  sham  battles  by  dividing  his  force  into  two
nominally  hostile  squadrons,  and  thus  acquired
facility  in  manoeuvring  several  vessels,  and  a
knowledge  of  how  and  when  to  take  advantage  of
critical  moments  and  situations.  He  applied  re
peatedly  for  a  sea  command,  but  being  disap
pointed  in  obtaining  either  the  '•  Argus  "  or  the
"  Hornet."  he  tendered  his  services  to  Com.  Isaac
Chauncey  on  the  lakes,  at  whose  request  he  was
ordered  to  Lake  Erie.  Within  twenty-four  hours
after  receipt  of  orders,  on  17  Feb.  he  had  sent
off  a  detachment  of  fifty  men,  and  on  the  22d
he  set.  out  with  his  younger  brother,  Alexander.
Travelling  chiefly  in  sleighs,  he  reached  Erie  on  27
March.  There  he  found  Xoah  Brown,  shipwright,
and  Sailing- Master  Dobbins,  awaiting  the  arrival
of  fifty  carpenters  from  Philadelphia,  who  were
more  than  fi^-e  weeks  in  making  the  wintry  jour
ney.  From  the  virgin  forest  the  squadron  was  to
be  built,  but  the  keels  of  two  twenty-gun  brigs  and
three  gun-boats  had  already  been  laid.  Incredible
toil  and  protracted  attention  to  details,  in  a  coun
try  little  better  than  a  wilderness,  enabled  Perry
to  collect  a  force  of  nine  vessels  of  1,671  tons,  with
54  guns  capable  of  throwing  a  broadside  of  930
pounds  of  metal,  of  which  288  pounds  could  be
fired  at  long  range.  In  his  squadron,  only  the
"  Lawrence  "  and  "  Niagara,"  of  500  tons  burden,
could  be  considered  men-of-war.  These  carried
each  20  guns,  2  being  long  twelve-pounders,  and
18  of  them  thirty-two-pounder  carronades.  The
other  vessels  were  of  slight  construction,  without  j
bulwarks,  but  were  armed  with  heavy  long  guns,  '
which  constituted  their  excellence.  The  long-  ,
range  guns  were  the  chief  dependence  of  the  I
Americans,  as  their  carronades  were  useless  ex
cept  at  very  short  range.  These  fired  a  scattering  !
charge  at  a  low  velocity,  but  with  frightful  effect
at  a  few  rods'  distance,  and  could  be  worked  by  j
small  squads  rapidly.  In  the  "yard-arm  engage-  <
ments"  of  the  British  these  weapons  had  been
very  effective  since  their  invention  in  1769.  They  j
took  their  name  from  the  Carron  iron-works  in  i
Scotland.  To  make  his  carronade  fire  most  effect-  ,
ive,  Perry  relied  not  only  on  grape  and  canister  ,


j  shot,  but  on  the  favorite  American  ammunition,
langrage. This  dismantling  shot  was  made  out
of  scraps  of  iron  sewed  up  in  leather  bags. En
couraging apparent prodigality at the anvils,
though  real  economy  in  fixed  ammunition,  a  large
quantity  of  bits  of  bolts,  bars,  hoops,  chisel-cut
tings,  and  splinters  were  collected  and  made  into
carronade  cartridges. As  the  aim  of  the naval
artillerist  of  to-day  is  to  pierce  the  boiler  or  dis
able  the  rudder,  so  in  the  days  of  sailing-ships  the
purpose  was  to  cut  away  masts,  sails,  and  rigging,
converting  the  enemy's  ship  into  a  helpless  hulk.
j  In  addition  to  numerical  superiority  in  ships  and
weight  of  metal  thrown,  the  Americans  were  des-
i  tined  to  have  the advantages of wind and  the
smooth  water,  which  enabled  the  small  vessels  to
lie  off  safely  at  long  range  and  damage  the  enemy.
Perry's  force  in  men  consisted  of  about  500  lands
men  and  sailors,  many  of  whom  had  never  seen
salt  water. These  were,  after  five  months'  con
stant  drilling,  changed  into  good  artillerists. On
the  British  side,  Capt.  Robert  Heriot  Barclay,  sur
mounting  almost  equal  difficulty,  dismantling  the
fort  at  Amherstburg  to  equip  his  largest  ship,  final
ly  succeeded  in  collecting  a  squadron  of  six  vessels
of  1,460  tons,  manned  by nearly  500  men. His
i  cannon  were  63  in  number,  nine  more  than  the
j  American,  but  most  of  his  metal  was  carronade,
I  his  total  broadside  was  but  459  pounds,  and  of
this  only  195  pounds  could  be  fired  at  long  range.
j  In  long-gun  metal  the  Americans  excelled  the  Brit-
!  ish  three  to  two,  in  carronades  two  to  one,  in  ships
j  three  to  two. Perry  moved  out  from  Put-in  bay  on
the  morning  of  10  Sept.,  1813.  with  all  his  squadron,
including  the  "  Lawrence,"  "  Niagara,"  "  Caledo-
1  nia,"  "  Scorpion,"  "  Porcupine,"  "  Tigress,"  "  Ariel,"
|  "  Somers,"  and  "  Trippe,"  to  meet  the  British  force,
|  consisting  of  the  "  Chippewa,"  "  Detroit,"  "  Hunt-
I  er,"  "  Queen  Charlotte."  "  Lady  Prevost,"  and  "  Lit
tle  Belt." Barclay,  one  of  Nelson's  veterans,  though
i  "confronted  by  famine  and  Indian  treachery,"  ex-
:  pected  easy  victory. As  the  fleets  approached  each
I  other  at  about  eleven  o'clock,  the  bugle  sounded
j  from  the  flag-ship,  the  men  of  the  whole  British  line
gave  three  cheers,  and  the  long  guns  of  the  "  De
troit  "  opened  on  the  "  Lawrence  "  at  the  distance
of  a  mile  and  a  half. By  noon  the  battle  began
in  earnest,  in  the  form  of  a  duel,  the  heaviest  ves
sel  in  each  fleet  confronting  the  other. Being  able
to  employ  at  once  a  heavier  battery  in  a  smaller
space,  Barclay  had  at  first  a  manifest  advantage.
With  more  enthusiasm  than  science,  the  gunners  of
the  '•  Lawrence."  depending  too much on their
carronades,  fired  too  fast,  and,  overshotting  their
stumpy  guns,  were  unable  seriously  to  harm  the
"  Detroit,"  though  pitting  and  denting  her  sides.
The  "  Lawrence."  on  the  contrary,  was  reduced  by
the  steady  British  fire  to  a  hulk. After  two  hours
only  one  gun  was  left  mounted,  the  cockpit  was
crowded  with wounded, and only  eighteen un
harmed  men.  including  commander  and  surgeon,
were  left  on  board. Meanwhile  the  most  effective
gunnery  on  the  American  side  had  been  done  by
the  heavy  cannon  of  the  "  Caledonia,"  '•  Scorpion,"
and  "  Ariel,"  which  had  nobly  assisted  Perry,  while
the  "  Niagara,"  for  some  reason,  had  remained  in
the  rear,  and  the  more  distant  vessels  were  able  to
do  little  to  prevent  what  seemed  an  imminent  Brit
ish  victory. At  this  moment,  with  the  audacity  of
genius.  Perry  called  four  sailors  to  man  the  boat,
and  with  his  brother  Alexander,  the  flag  of  the
'•  Lawrence "  wrapped  round  his  arm,  he  left  his
ship. At  first  shielded  by  the  battle  smoke,  and
then  safely  escaping  the  volley  of  the  enemy,  he
reached,  after  a  fifteen  minutes'  pull,  the  "  Niaga-


736


PERRY


PERRY


ra."  Sending  Capt.  Elliot  to  bring  up  the  lag
gard  vessels,  he  ordered  sail  to  bring  his  best  ship
close  to  the  "  Detroit."  The  breeze  now  freshened,
quickly  speeding  the  "  Niagara  "  and  the  American
schooners  into  action.  The  "  Queen  Charlotte,"  in
endeavoring  to  get  a  position  for  a  broadside,  to
be  followed  by  boarding  the  coming  "  Niagara,"
was  disabled  in  her  sail-gear  by  the  langrage
shot  of  Perry's  caironad.es,  and,  falling  foul  of  the
"  Detroit,"  the  two  ships  became  entangled.  Tak
ing  advantage  of  this,  the  American  schooners
took  raking  positions.  The  full  battery  of  the
"  Niagara,''  joining  in  the  steady  and  rapid  fire,
swept  the  British  decks,  and  filled  the  air  with
canister,  grape,  ball,  and  scrap-iron,  while  the
Kentucky  riflemen  in  the  tops,  acting  as  marines,
picked  off  every  enemy  visible.  At  three  o'clock
the  British  flag  was  hauled  down,  and  for  the  first
time  in  her  history  Great  Britain  lost  an  entire
squadron,  which  surrendered  to  a  young  man  of
twenty-seven.  On  the  deck  of  the  "Lawrence"
Perry  despatched  to  the  secretary  of  the  navy  a
brief  account  of  the  victory,  and  shortly  afterward
to  Gen.  William  II.  Harrison,  the  famous  line  :  "  We
have  met  the  enemy,  and  they  are  ours."  In  the
military  operations  at  Detroit  and  in  the  battle  of
the  Thames.  5  Oct.,  1813,  he  took  an  important  part,
both  with  his  fleet  and  as  commander  of  the  naval
battalion  on  the  land,  and  on  his  return  to  the  east
he  was  honored  by  public  demonstrations  in  many
towns  and  cities.  Congress  voted  him  thanks,  a
medal,  and  the  rank  of  captain.  The  city  of  Bos
ton  presented  him  with  a  set  of  silver,  and  other
cities  voted  him  thanks,  lie  assisted  in  the  de
fence  of  Baltimore,  and  in  the  squadron  that  was
sent  to  the  Mediterranean  in  1815  he  commanded
the  frigate  "Java."  In  June,  1819,  while  in  com
mand  of  the  "John  Adams"  and  other  United
States  vessels  in  the  West  Indies,  he  was  attacked
by  the  yellow  fever  in  the  Orinoco,  and  died  after
a  brief  illness.  His  remains,  removed  bv  act  of
congress  in  a  ship-of-war,  were  buried  in  Newport,
4  Dec.,  1826.  In  addition  to  the  granite  obelisk
erected  by  the  state  of  Rhode  Island  and  a  marble
statue  by  Walcutt,  which  was  dedicated  in  Cleve
land,  Ohio,  in  September,  I860,  a  bronze  statue  of
Perry  by  William  G.  Turner  was  unveiled  on  10
Sept.,  1885.  It  stands  opposite  his  old  home,  and
was  erected  by  citizens  of  Newport.  The  state  of
Ohio  has  also  placed  in  the  capitol  at  Washington
a  picture  of  the  battle  of  Lake  Erie  and  of  Perry
leaving  the  "  Lawrence  "  for  the  "  Niagara."  Bi
ographies  of  Perry  have  been  written  by  John  M.
Niles  (Hartford,  1820);  Alexander  S.  "Mackenzie
(2  vols.,  New  York,  1843);  and  James  Fenimore
Cooper,  in  his  "  Lives  of  Distinguished  American
Naval  Officers  "  (Philadelphia,  1846).  See  also  the
account  of  the  dedication  of  the  statue  at  Cleve
land,  with  the  addresses  and  other  proceedings
(Cleveland,  1861).— Another  son,  Matthew  Cal-
braith,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  10  April,
1794  ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  4  March,  1858.  entering
the  navy  as  midshipman,  16  Jan.,  1809,  served  in
the  schooner  "  Revenge  "  under  his  brother  Oliver.
He  was  ordered,  on  10  Oct.,  1810.  to  the  flag-ship
"  President,"  and  for  three  years  was  trained  un
der  the  eye  of  Com.  John  Rodgers.  He  was  in  the
affair  of  the  "  Little  Belt,"  of  which  his  diary  gives
a  clear  account,  and  in  the  chase  of  the  "Belvi-
dera "  when  Rodgers  fired  the  first  hostile  shot
afloat  in  the  war  of  1812 ;  and  in  the  cruises  as
commerce-destroyer  of  the  "  President "  in  the  seas
of  northern  Europe  when  twenty  British  men-of-war
in  pairs  were  scouring  the  ocean  for  the  American
frigate.  He  was  made  a  lieutenant,  27  Feb.,  1813,


spent  several  months  of  inaction  on  the  blockaded
frigate  "  United  States,"  and,  after  recruiting  work
and  service  on  the  brig  "  Chippewa,"  he  obtained
furlough  and  made  commercial  voyages  to  Europe.
In  1819  he  was  executive  officer  of  the  "  Cyane  "  to
convoy  the  first
colony  of  negroes
from  this  coun
try  to  Africa.  In
an  interview  with
the  Portuguese
governor  of  Ten-
eriffe,  who  de
spised  republics,
Lieut.  Perry  re
fused  an  honor
ary  salute  unless
returned  gun  for
gun.  In  1821,  in
command  of  the
"  Shark,'7  he  se
lected  the  site  of
the  future  Mon
rovia.  All  his
life  he  was  a  dili
gent  student  of
books  and  a  keen  observer  of  men  and  things,
and  he  so  mastered  the  question  of  ship  hygiene
that  the  regulations  for  use  on  the  African  station
drawn  up  by  him  were  in  force  for  many  years.
He  was  one  of  the  first  naval  officers  to  see  clearly
into  the  underlying  causes  of  scurvy  and  to  experi
ment  successfully  upon  its  prevention.  Under
Com.  David  Porter  in  the  West  Indies  in  1822  he
fought  and  ferreted  out  pirates,  making  also  a
voyage  to  Africa  and  another  in  1823  to  Mexico,
where  he  began  and  later  mastered  the  Spanish
language.  As  executive  officer  of  the  line-of-bat tie-
ship  "  North  Carolina,"  then  the  finest  war-vessel
and  carrying  the  heaviest  floating  armament  in  the
world,  he  went  to  the  Mediterranean,  protecting
American  commerce  from  Greek  pirates.  At  home
he  studied  the  question  of  recruiting,  and  founded
the  first  U.  S.  naval-apprenticeship  system.  In  com
mand  of  the  sloop  "  Concord  "  in  1829  he  took  John
Randolph  as  envoy  to  the  czar  in  the  first  Ameri
can  man-of-war  to  enter  Russian  waters.  At  a
private  audience  that  was  granted  Perry  by  Nicho
las,  he  was  offered  high  rank  in  the  Russian  navy,
but  declined.  He  entertained  and  was  entertained
by  Mehemet  Ali,  conqueror  of  Khartoum  and
founder  of  the  khedival  dynasty  of  Egypt.  From
the  swords  presented  to  Perry  the  "Mameluke
grip  "  was  copied  for  adoption  into  the  U.  S.  navy.
He  commanded  the  forty-four-gun  frigate  "  Bran
dy  wine"  in  the  brilliant  naval  demonstration  of
Com.  Patterson  in  the  harbor  of  Naples  when  the
reluctant  Ferdinand  II.  and  Count  Cassaro  paid
the  spoliation  claims  that  were  urged  by  President
Jackson  on  the  arrival  in  the  bay  of  the  sixth  U.  S.
war-vessel.  As  master-commandant,  7  Jan.,  1833,
he  began  ten  years  of  shore  duty  at  the  Brooklyn
navy-yard.  This  decade  of  study  and  application,
most  fruitful  in  results  in  naval  science  and  of  in
fluence  upon  our  marine,  caused  him  in  after-
years  to  be  spoken  of  as  "  a  chief  educator  of
the  U.  S.  navy."  To  summarize  results,  he  or
ganized  the  Brooklyn  naval  lyceum,  still  active
with  museum,  library,  trophy-room,  and  corre
spondence,  assisted  to  found  and  liberally  con
tributed  to  the  "  Naval  Magazine,"  studied  and
tabulated  the  action  of  the  tides  at  Gardiner's  isl
and  for  the  United  States  and  British  admiralty
charts,  declined  the  command  of  the  Antarctic  ex
ploring  expedition,  though  furnished,  mainly  by


PERRY


PERRY


737


himself,  the  dietetic  directions  for  the  cruise,  or
ganized  the  first  steam  service,  and  from  1838  till
1840  commanded  the  first  steam  war-vessel  of  our
navy,  the  "Fulton  II.,"  making  the  engineers  on  a
par  with  the  other  officers,  the  staff  equal  with
the  line,  and,  when  the  "  Fulton "  struck  and
badly  damaged  the  brig  •'  Montevideo."  he  noted
the  principle  of  sinking  an  enemy  by  collision,
studied  the  problem  practically  and  mathemati
cally,  and  urged  the  adoption  of  the  ram  on  war-
steamers.  He  studied  the  problems  of  ordnance
and  armor,  resistance  and  penetration,  and  was
one  of  the  committee  that  reported  on  the  Ste
vens  iron-clad  battery.  In  charge  of  the  school
of  gun-practice  at  Sandy  Hook,  he  demonstrated
the  safety  in  use  and  the  power  of  horizontal  shell-
fire  from  navy  cannon  and  the  effect  of  pivot-gun
firing  on  the  decks  of  ships,  deducing  ideas  that
are  valuable  in  ship-construction.  He  organized
and  directed  the  school  of  apprentices  for  sail  and
steam  service  of  the  navy,  went  to  Europe  in  one
of  the  first  steamships  regularly  crossing  the  At
lantic  to  study  light-house  illumination,  and  se
cured  the  passage  of  laws  that  adopted  the  Fresnel
system  of  lenses,  the  first  light  being  placed  at
Sandy  Hook.  With  William  C.  Redfield  he  was
influential  in  effecting  revolutions  in  naval  archi
tecture.  The  steamers  "  Missouri "  and  "  Missis
sippi,"  then  without  peers  in  the  world,  were  built
in  their  chief  features  according  to  ideas  that  he
strenuously  insisted  upon,  and  were  conspicuously
a  success,  while  later  ones,  built  on  plans  that  he
had  condemned,  were  failures.  He  was  made  a
captain  on  15  March,  1837,  and  in  command  of  the
yard,  and  on  12  June,  1841,  he  hoisted  the  com
modore's  broad  pennant.  He  commanded  the
eighty -gun  squadron  in  Africa  in  1843-'5,  en
forcing  the  Webster-Ashburton  treaty,  carrying
out  a  powder-and-ball  policy  at  Berribee  against
the  savages,  and  securing  a  decent  burial-ground
for  American  sailors.  In  the  Mexican  war  he  had
oversight  of  the  steam  navy,  and  at  the  siege  of
Vera  Cruz,  in  command  of  the  Gulf  fleet,  when
Scott's  light  artillery  was  unable  to  breach  the  walls,
he  landed  six  of  the  heaviest  ship's  guns,  and  in
"  the  naval  battery  "  sent  picked  crews  to  batter
down  the  wall  at  o*nly  800  yards'  distance.  In  two
days  the  sailors  fired  1,800  rounds,  reducing  the
wall  to  rubbish  and  making  a  breach  fifty  feet
wide,  enabling  Scott's  army  to  dictate  terms  and
proceed  into  the  interior.  He  formed  the  first
U.  S.  naval  brigade  of  sailors  trained  as  infantry,
captured  Tuspan,  Tabasco,  and  Laguna,  and
blockaded  the  coast,  occupying  every  important
landing-place  until  the  end  of  the  war.  In  the
fishery  disputes  with  Canada  he  visited  the  waters
of  Newfoundland  and  assisted  to  bring  about  the
reciprocity  treaty  of  1854.  He  organized  and
commanded  the  expedition  to  Japan,  delivering
the  president's  letter  on  14  July,  1853,  and  on  31
March,  1854,  signing  a  treaty  of"  peace,  amity,  and
protection  to  American  sailors.  On  his  return  he
wrote  the  report  of  the  expedition,  to  which  were
added  papers  on  special  subjects  by  other  writers
and  a  preface  and  notes  by  Rev.  Francis  L.  Hawks,
D.  D.  The  whole  work  is  entitled  "  Report  of  Com.
Perry's  Expedition  to  Japan  "  (3  vols.,  Washing
ton,  1856).  A  bronze  statue  in  Touro  park,  New
port,  R.  L.  a  marble  bust  by  Erastus  D.  Palmer,  of
Albany,  oil-portraits  at  Annapolis  and  Brooklyn,
and  a  gold  medal  presented  by  the  merchants  of
Boston,  commemorate  his  services.  See  "  Life  of
Commodore  Matthew  Calbraith  Perry,  a  Typical
American  Naval  Officer,"  by  William  Elliot  Griffis
(Boston,  1887).— Matthew  Calbraith's  son,  Mat-

VOL. IV. 17


]  thew  Calbraith,  naval  officer,  b.  about  1821 ;  d.

I  in  New  York  city,  10  Nov.,  1873,  was  appointed  a
midshipman  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  1  June,  1835,  and

!  ordered  to  the  frigate  "  Potomac."  He  was  acting
master  of  the  brig  "  Somers  "  during  its  first  cruise
and  the  famous  mutiny  (see  MACKENZIE,  ALEXAN
DER  S.),  was  on  the  frigate  "  Cumberland  "  during
the  Mexican  war,  and  by  permission  of  his  father
joined  the  army  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Robert  Pat
terson.  He  was  made  a  lieutenant,  3  April,  1848,
and  served  for  several  years  on  the  coast  survey.
After  various  services  he  was  placed  on  the  retired
list,  receiving  his  commission  as  captain,  4  April,
1867.  His  sea-service  covered  a  period  of  over  fif
teen  years.  —  Christopher  Raymond's  grandson,
James  Alexander,  soldier,  b.  in  New  London,
Conn.,  11  Dec.,  1828,  is  the  son  of  Nathanael  Haz-

|  ard.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  acad
emy  in  1851,  assigned  to  the  2d  artillery,  and  served
against  the  Seminole  Indians  in  1852.  He  was  as
sistant  professor  of  mathematics  at  West  Point  in
1852-'7,  in  frontier  service  in  the  northwest  during
hostilities  with  the  Sioux  and  Chippewa  Indians,
and  became  captain  in  the  quartermaster's  depart
ment.  He  served  in  the  civil  war  as  chief  quar
termaster  of  the  Department  of  Florida,  and  par
ticipated  in  the  relief  and  defence  of  Fort  Pickens.
On  20  April,  1862,  he  became  lieutenant-colonel  of
volunteers,  and  in  1864  he  was  made  chief  of  a  bu
reau  in  the  quartermaster's  department  with  the
rank  of  colonel.  He  was  brevetted  major,  lieuten
ant-colonel,  and  colonel,  on  13  March,  1865.  and
also  brigadier-general.  U.  S.  army,  for  faithful  and
meritorious  services  in  that  department.  He  was
commissioned  major  on  29  July,  1866,  and  lieuten
ant-colonel  on  3  March,  1875.  Since  1869  he  has
served  as  chief  quartermaster  of  various  depart
ments,  and  he  is  now  (1888)  assistant  quartermas
ter-general  of  the  division  of  the  Pacific. — Oliver
Hazard's  grandson,  Thomas  Sergeant,  author,  b.
in  Newport,  R.  I.,  23  Jan.,  1845.  His  mother  is
great-granddaughter  of  Benjamin  Franklin.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1866,  studied  at  the
Sorbonne  and  College  of  France,  and  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Berlin.  He  was  tutor  in  German  at  Har
vard  from  1868  till  1872,  and  instructor  in  English
there  from  1877  till  1881.  Mr.  Perry  was  editor  of
the  "  North  American  Review  "  from  1872  till  1874,
and  is  the  author  of  "  Life  and  Letters  of  Francis
Lieber  "  (Boston.  1882) ;  "  English  Literature  in  the
Eighteenth  Century "  (New  York,  1883) ;  "  From
Opitz  to  Lessing"  (Boston,  1885);  "  The  Evolution
of  the  Snob"  (1887);  and  "History  of  Greek  Lit
erature  "  (New  York,  1888).

PERRY,  Edward  Aylesworth,  governor  of
Florida,  b.  in  Richmond,  Berkshire  county,  Mass.,
15  March.  1833.  He  entered  Yale  in  the  class  of
1854,  but  left  college  in  1853  and  went  to  Alabama,
where  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1857,  and  began  practice  hi  Pensacola,  Fla.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  became  captain  of  a
company  that  he  raised  for  the  Confederate  service,
and  was  made  colonel  of  his  regiment,  which  he
commanded  at  Seven  Pines  and  the  other  battles
around  Richmond,  being  wounded  at  Fraser's  farm.
He  was  then  made  brigadier-general,  and  led  a  bri
gade  in  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia,  which  lost
a  larger  number  of  men  at  Gettysburg  than  any
other  on  the  Confederate  side.  He  was  wounded  a
second  time  at  the  battle  of  the  Wilderness  in  May,
1864.  At  the  close  of  the  war  Gen.  Perry  resumed
practice  in  Pensacola.  He  was  elected  governor
of  Florida  for  four  years  from  January,  1885.

PERRY,  Eli,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Cambridge,
N.  Y.,  25  Dec.,  1799;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  17  May,


738


PERRY


PERRY


1881.  He  received  a  common-school  education,
was  thrown  on  his  own  resources  when  he  was  fif
teen  years  old,  and  became  a  merchant  in  Albany.
He  was  mayor  of  Albany  from  1856  till  till  1865,  a
member  of  the  New  'York  legislature,  and  in
1871-'5  a  member  of  congress,  having  been  chosen
as  a  Democrat.  He  was  a  candidate  for  a  third
term  as  an  independent  Democrat,  but  was  de
feated.  Mr.  Perry  was  noted  for  his  large  gifts  to
benevolent  objects.  He  made  during  his  lifetime
generous  donations  to  the  Emmanuel  Baptist
church,  of  which  he  was  a  member,  and  in  his  will
he  provided  that  at  the  decease  of  his  widow  his
estate,  estimated  at  $400,000,  should  be  divided
among  charities  of  the  Baptist  denomination.

PERRY,  Enoch  Wood,  artist,  b.  in  Boston.
Mass.,  31  July,  1831.  About  1848  he  went  to  New
Orleans,  and  thence  to  Europe,  where  he  studied
in  1852-'3  in  Dusseldorf  and  Paris.  After  this  he
spent  some  time  in  Rome  and  in  Venice,  where
he  was  U.  S.  consul  from  1856  till  1858,  in  which
year  he  returned  to  this  country,  settling  in  Phila
delphia.  Here  he  remained  two  years,  then  visited
New  Orleans,  San  Francisco,  and  other  places  in
the  south  and  west,  and  about  1863  sailed  for  the
Sandwich  islands.  Finally,  in  1865,  he  went  to
New  York,  where  he  has  since  resided.  During
1871-'3  he  was  recording  secretary  in  the  Academy
of  design,  and  has  held  the  same  post  in  the  Ameri
can  art  union  during  its  existence.  He  exhibited
first  in  the  Academy  of  design  in  1858,  was  elected
an  associate  in  1868,  and  academician  in  1869.  He
is  also  a  member  of  the  American  water-color
society.  Among  his  genre  pictures  are  "  The
Weaver"  and  "Fireside  Stories"  (1869);  "Lost
Art "  (.1871) ;  "  Thanksgiving  Time  "  (1872) ;  "  The
Old  Story,"  "  Young  Franklin  and  the  Press,"  in
the  Buffalo  academy  of  fine  arts  (1875) ;  "  Words
of  Comfort,"  "The  "Sower"  (1877);  "The  Story"
(1878);  "Tabouret"  (1880);  "Mother  and  Child"
(1881) ;  "  Afternoon  Nap  "  and  "  The  Story-Book  "
(1882);  "Grandfather's  Slippers"  (1883);  "Soli
taire  "  (1884) :  "  The  Letter  "  and  "  A  Modern  Eve  "
(1885);  "The  Milkmaid"  and  "  Fortunes"  (1886);
and  "  The  Wicker- Workers  "  and  "  The  Cradle-
Song"  (1887).  His  numerous  portraits  include
those  of  Jefferson  Davis,  John  C.  Breckinridge,  and
John  Slidell,  painted  about  1860,  King  Kameha-
meha  IV.  and  Kamehameha  V.,  and  Gen.  Grant.

PERRY,  Horatio  Justus,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Keene,  N.  H.,  23  Jan.,  1824.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1844,  and  on  5  July,  1849,  was  com
missioned  secretary  of  legation  in  Spain.  Mr.
Perry  remained  in  this  post  many  years,  filling  it
with  great  ability  on  account  of  his  knowledge  of
the  Spanish  language  and  people,  and  his  thorough
acquaintance  with  foreign  diplomacy.  He  acted
many  times  as  charge  d'affaires  ad  interim.  On
one  of  these  occasions,  while  Pierre  Soule,  then
U.  S.  minister,  was  absent  in  France  in  1855,  this
country  was  on  the  brink  of  war  with  Spain.  His
prompt  and  firm  yet  courteous  bearing  toward  the
Spanish  government  settled  the  difficulty  without
compromising  our  national  dignity.  Mr.  Soule's
policy  had  been  aggressive  and  warlike.  On  his
return  he  censured  Mr.  Perry  in  his  despatches  to
the  government.  The  cabinet  at  Washington
secretly  approved  of  Mr.  Perry's  course,  but  felt
obliged  to  reprimand  him  for  what  they  deemed  a
breach  of  diplomatic  etiquette.  Mr.  Perry,  con
scious  of  the  service  he  had  rendered  his  country,
replied  in  terms  more  spirited  than  prudent,  and
he  was  recalled.  Mr.  Perry  married  in  1853  Caro
lina  Coronado,  poetess  laureate  of  Spain.  He  was
again  secretary  of  legation  from  1861  till  1869,


when  he  was  again  removed  on  account  of  a  differ
ence  with  Minister  John  P.  Hale  (q.  v.).  He  now
(1888)  resides  in  Lisbon,  Portugal,  where  he  has
occupied  himself  in  preparing  memoirs.

PERRY,  Nora,  poet,  b.  in  Massachusetts  in
1841.  In  early  years  she  removed  to  Providence,
R.  I.,  where  her  father  was  a  merchant.  She  was
educated  at  home  and  in  private  schools,  and  at  the
age  of  eighteen  began  to  write  for  magazines,  her
first  serial  story,  "  Rosalind  Newcomb,"  appearing
in  "  Harper's  Magazine  "  in  1859-'60.  For  several
years  she  was  Boston  correspondent  to  the  Chicago
"  Tribune,"  and  she  now  holds  the  same  relation  to
the  Providence  "Journal."  She  contributes  fre
quently  to  magazines,  and  is  the  author  of  "  After
the  Ball,  and  other  Poems "  (Boston,  1874  and
1879) ;  "  The  Tragedy  of  the  Unexpected,  and  other
Stories"  (1880);  "Book  of  Love  Stories"  (1881);
"  For  a  Woman  "  (1885) :  "  New  Songs  and  Ballads  "
(1886);  and  "Flock  of  Girls"  (1887).  Her  most
successful  poem  is  "  After  the  Ball,"  often  printed
with  the  title  "Maud  and  Madge."

PERRY,  William,  physician,  b.  in  Norton,
Mass.,  20  Dec.,  1788:  d.  in 'Exeter,  N.  H.,  11  Jan.,
1887.  He  was  partly  educated  at  Union,  and  in
1807  he  was  one  of  the  passengers  on  Robert  Ful
ton's  steamboat,  "The  Clermont,"  on  its  first  trip
down  the  Hudson.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1811,  and  at  the  Medical  school  in  1814,  after
which  he  settled  in  Exeter,  N.  H.,  where  he  prac
tised  until  a  few  years  before  his  death.  In  1835-'6
he  was  lecturer  on  the  theory  and  practice  of  medi
cine  at  Bowdoin,  and  later  he  declined  a  profes
sorship  there.  He  was  especially  eminent  as  a  sur
geon  and  as  an  expert  in  insanity,  and  was  the
first  to  suggest  the  erection  of  a  state  insane
asylum,  of  which  he  was  a  director.  Until  1878  he
was  frequently  called  into  court  to  testify  in  cases
involving  mental  alienation,  as  well  as  those  re
lating  to  surgery.  He  operated  successfully  five
times  for  strangulated  hernia  after  reaching  his
eighty-seventh  year,  and  once  again  with  success
when  he  was  ninety-two.  Dr.  Perry  discovered. the
true  character  of  "  British  gum,"  or  charred  potato-
starch,  which  was  formerly  used  largely  as  sizing
in  cotton-mills,  and  liable  to  heavy  duty.  He  en
gaged  in  its  manufacture  at  Exeter  from  1828  till
1835.  His  son,  John  T.  Perry,  was  for  a  time  editor
of  the  "  Cincinnati  Gazette."

PERRY,  William  Stevens,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Providence,  R,  I.,  22  Jan.,  1832.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1854.  For  a  time  he  was  at  the
Virginia  theological  seminary,  but  he  completed
his  studies,  preparatory  for  orders,  privately  in
Boston.  He  was  ordained  deacon  in  Grace  church,
Newton,  Mass.,  29  March,  1857,  by  Bishop  East-
burn,  and  priest  in  St.  Paul's  church,  Boston,  7
April,  1858.  He  was  assistant  minister  of  St.
Paul's  church,  Boston,  in  1857-'8,  rector  of  St.
Luke's  church,  Nashua,  N.  H.,  in  1858-61,  of  St.
Stephen's  church,  Portland,  Me.,  in  1861-'3,  of  St.
Michael's  church,  Litchfield,  Conn.,  in  1864-'9,
and  of  Trinity  church,  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  in  1869-'76.
For  a  few  months  in  1876  he  was  president  of
Hobart  college,  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  and  he  had  served
previously  as  professor  of  history  in  the  same  col
lege  in  1871-'3.  For  nearly  twenty  years  he  was
busily  occupied  in  church  work,  in  addition  to  his
parochial  labors.  He  was  deputy  to  the  general
convention  from  New  Hampshire  in  1859,  from  the
diocese  of  Maine  in  1862,  assistant  secretary  to  the
house  of  deputies  in  1862,  secretary  in  1865-'74,
was  appointed  historiographer  of  the  American
church  in  1868,  and.  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  J.  Cot
ton  Smith,  edited  "  The  Church  Monthly  "  (Boston,


PERSICO


PESSAO


739


1864).  He  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from
Trinity  in  1809  and  Oxford  in  1888.  and  that  of
LL.  D.  from  William  and  Mary  in  187(5.  He  was
elected  bishop  of  Iowa,  and  consecrated  in  Geneva,
N.  Y.,  10  Sept.,  1876.  In  1887  he  was  elected  bishop
of  Nova  Scotia,  but  did  not  accept.  Since  his  ele
vation  to  the  episcopate  he  has  continued  his  labors
in  the  line  of  church  history  especially.  He  has
published  more  books  probably  than  any  living
clergyman  in  the  Episcopal  church.  A  full  list  of
his  writings  is  furnished  in  Dr.  Batterson's  "  Ameri
can  Episcopate  "  (1885).  They  include  "Journals
of  the  General  Conventions  of  the  Protestant  Epis
copal  Church  of  the  United  States  .of  America."
with  illustrative  notes,  with  Dr.  Francis  L.  Hawks
(Philadelphia,  1861) ;  "  Documentary  History  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  Church  in  the  United  States
of  America,"  with  documents  relating  chiefly  to
Connecticut,  with  the  same  co-editor  (2  vols.,  New
York.  1863-'4);  "Historical  Collections  of  the
American  Colonial  Church,"  including  "  Virginia"
(1871),  "Pennsylvania"  (1872),  "  Massachusetts  "
(1873),  "  Maryland  "  (1878),  and  "  Delaware  "  (1878) ;
"  Handbook  of  the  General  Convention  "  (4th  ed.,
1881) ;  "  Some  Summer  Days  Abroad  "  (Davenport,
Iowa,  1880) :  "  The  History  of  the  American  Epis
copal  Church,  1587-1883  "  (2  vols.,  Boston.  1885) :
and  "  Life  Lessons  from  the  Book  of  Proverbs  "
(4th  ed.,  1885) ;  numerous  sermons  preached  on
special  occasions  (1864-'85) ;  and  twelve  episcopal
addresses  (1877-'88).

PERSICO,  tenatins,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Naples,
Italy,  30  Jan..  Itf23.  After  completing  his  classical
course  in  the  Jesuit  college  in  Naples,  he  entered
the  order  of  the  Minor  Capuchins,  was  ordained
in  1846,  and  in  1847  was  graduated  at  the  Propa
ganda  in  Rome,  and  became  apostolic  missionary
to  Patna.  He  was  made  apostolic  visitor  to  the
East  Indies  in  1852,  was  subsequently  sent  to  Eng
land  to  advocate  before  the  government  the  inter
ests  of  the  Roman  Catholic  population  in  India,
and  secured  the  same  privileges  for  this  church
that  were  accorded  to  the  Established  church.  He
was  consecrated  bishop  of  Gratianopolis  in  1854,
established  schools,  churches,  and  missions  in  Cash
mere,  Cabul,  Afghanistan,  and  Thibet,  was  captured
and  imprisoned  during  the  Sepoy  war,  and  on  his
release  became  a  chaplain  in  the  British  army.  He
resigned  his  vicariate  in  1867  on  account  of  the
failure  of  his  health,  spent  the  next  two  years  as
missionary  to  Charleston,  S.  C.,  was  a  member  of
the  provincial  and  Vatican  councils  at  Baltimore,
and  in  1870  became  bishop  of  Savannah,  which
see  he  resigned  in  1873.  Since  1878  he  has  been
bishop  of  the  united  dioceses  of  Aquino,  Ponte-
corvo,  and  Sosa,  Italy.

PERSON,  Thomas,  patriot,  b.  in  Granville
county,  N.  C.,  about  1740;  d.  in  Franklin  county,
N.  C.,  in  November,  1799.  He  was  devoted  to  the
cause  of  liberty,  strenuously  opposed  the  stamp-
act,  and  was  an  active  Regulator.  In  1770  he  pre
sented  a  petition  from  the  inhabitants  of  Bute
county  complaining  of  the  many  exorbitant  and
oppressive  measures  of  the  public  officers.  For  a
time  he  was  confined  in  prison  by  Gov.  Tryon,  from
whom  he  suffered  severe  treatment,  and  he  was  one
of  those  that  were  excepted  in  Tryon's  proclama
tion  of  1771.  which  offered  pardon  to  those  that
would  take  the  oath  of  allegiance.  While  he  was
on  parole  he  rode  secretly  to  Goshen  by  night  and
secured  his  valuable  possessions  in  a  brick  kiln,  re
turning  at  dawn  to  Hillsboro.  When  the  British
soldiers  demanded  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Micklejohn,  in
whose  house  he  resided,  whether  Person  had  broken
his  parole  the  night  before,  •'  I  supped  and  break-


j  fasted  with  the  general,"  was  the  equivocal  reply.
He  was  a  delegate  from  Granville  to  the  first  colo
nial  assembly  that  met  in  New  Berne  in  defiance  of
the  royal  governor  in  1774,  and  to  that  which  met
in  Halifax  on  15  April,  1776,  and  again  on  12  Nov.,
1776,  to  form  the  state  constitution.  He  was  ap
pointed  a  brigadier-general  of  militia  in  1776,  and
from  1777  till  his  death  represented  Granville
county  in  the  legislature.  He  was  a  surveyor  by
profession,  and  owned  70,000  acres  of  land.  He  left
to  Mr.  Micklejohn  his  house,  "Goshen  Place,"  in
Granville.  which  was  afterward  called  "  The  Glebe."
For  his  liberality  to  the  State  university  one  of  the
halls  at  Chapel  Hill  bears  his  name.  A  county  of
North  Carolina  was  also  named  for  him  in  1791.
PESADO,  Jose  Joaqnin  (pay-sah'-do).  Mexican

Soet,  b.  in  San  Agustin  del  Palmar,  9  Feb..  1801 ;
.  in  the  city  of  Mexico.  3  March.  1861.  His  edu
cation  was  acquired  by  his  own  efforts.  He  was  an
authority  in  the  Spanish  language,  was  familiar
with  Latin,  Italian,  French,  and  English,  and
studied  philosophy,  theology,  law,  history,  and
natural  science.  He  entered  public  life  in  1833  as
a  member  of  the  legislature  of  Vera  Cruz,  of  which,
in  1834,  he  became  governor.  In  the  same  year,
with  Francisco  Modesto  Olaguibel,  he  conducted  a
paper,  "  La  Oposicion,"  and  wrote  a  short  novel  at
tacking  the  conduct  of  the  Inquisition  of  Mexico.
In  1838  he  entered  the  cabinet  of  Bustamante  as
minister  of  the  interior  and  foreign  affairs,  but  in
1839  he  retired  from  public  life.  He  received  in
1854  the  honorary  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the  Uni
versity  of  Mexico,  was  a  member  of  all  the  sci
entific,  artistic,  and  literary  societies  of  the  country,
and  corresponding  member  of  the  Royal  Spanish
academy.  He  published  a  collection  of  "  Poesias
originates  y  traducidas"  (1839;  2d  ed..  1840):  a
volume  containing  part  of  his  poem  "  La  Revela-
cion  "  (1856);  and  a  partial  translation  of  the
"  Gerusalemme  Liberata  "  of  Tasso  (1860).

PESCHAN,  Ferdinand  William  Elias, clergy
man,  b.  in  Zellerfeld-Clausthal,  Hanover,  Germany,
17  Feb.,  1849.  His  father  was  of  French  descent.
His  parents  emigrated  to  this  country  when  the
son  was  five  years  old,  and  settled  in  Wheeling,
W.  Va.  He  was  graduated  at  Pennsylvania  college,
Gettysburg,  in  1872,  and  at  the  Lutheran  theologi
cal  seminary  there  in  1873.  In  the  autumn  of  the
same  year  he  was  licensed  to  preach,  and  in  1876
he  was  ordained.  He  has  taught  in  several  places,
held  various  pastorates,  and  since  1882  has  had
charge  of  a  congregation  at  Wilmington,  N.  C.
He  twice  declined  the  presidency  of  North  Caro
lina  college.  He  has  filled  many  offices  of  honor  in
his  church,  and  is  an  agreeable  and  forcible  public
speaker.  He  is  a  frequent  contributor  to  religious
and  secular  periodicals,  in  1880  was  managing
j  editor  of  "  The  Southern  Monthly  Illustrated  Maga-
I  zine,"and  since  1882  has  been  one  of  the  editors  of
"  The  Lutheran  Visitor."  Among  his  works  are
several  musical  compositions,  and  he  is  also  the
author  of  numerous  poems,  among  them  an  "Ode
to  Jackson,"  which  was  sung  at  the  unveiling  of
the  equestrian  statue  of  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson,  at
Nashville,  Tenn.  A  volume  of  his  sermons  and
addresses  is  in  press  (1888).

PESSAO,  Jose  Elloy  (pes-song').  Brazilian
soldier,  b.  in  Bahia,  27  July,  1792:  d.  there,  2
March,  1841.  He  received  his  education  in  his  na
tive  city,  enlisted  in  the  army,  and  was  promoted
to  the  rank  of  captain.  The?  captain  -  general,
Count  d'Arcos,  obtained  for  him  leave  to  attend
the  University  of  Coimbra,  and  after  his  gradua
tion  he  returned  to  Brazil  with  the  rank  of  major.
He  took  part  in  a  revolutionary  demonstration  in


740


PETER


PETERS


Bahia.  on  3  Nov.,  1821,  and  was  arrested  and  sent
to  Lisbon,  but  afterward  returned  and  joined  the
patriot  army.  After  the  liberation  of  Bahia  he
was  promoted  by  the  emperor  to  the  rank  of  lieu
tenant-colonel,  and  in  command  of  the  artillery  in
that  city  he  displayed  energy  in  suppressing  a
mutiny.  He  took  part  in  the  Cisplatine  war,  and
afterward  entered  the  engineer  corps,  rendering
important  services  in  the  construction  of  military
works.  He  also  lectured  on  artillery  and  field-for
tifications  to  a  class  which  he  opened  on  3  May,
1832,  and  taught  chemistry  in  Bahia.  He  met  his
death  at  the  hands  of  an  unknown  assassin  as  he
was  returning  from  Bahia  to  his  country  residence.
PETER,  Robert,  chemist,  b.  in  Launceston,
England,  21  Jan.,  1805.  He  received  his  earliest
education  principally  in  England,  and  subsequently
by  self-instruction.  About  1821  he  came  to  the
United  States  and  settled  in  Pittsburg,  where  he
learned  the  drug  business.  While  so  engaged  he
devoted  much  attention  to  botany,  and  to  the  con-
chology  of  the  rivers,  especially  to  the  unios,  also
founding  a  botanical  society,  and  becoming  asso
ciated  in  the  organization  of  the  Philosophical  so
ciety  and  the  Philological  institute  of  Pittsburg.
At  the  invitation  of  Amos  Eaton,  he  studied  for  a
session  at  Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute,  Troy,
N.  Y.,  in  1828,  where  he  received  the  title  of  lec
turer  on  natural  and  demonstrative  science.  In
1830-'!  he  was  called  to  deliver  experimental  lec
tures  on  chemistry  at  the  Western  university  of
Pennsylvania,  and  also  at  the  Mechanics'  institute
in  Pittsburg.  In  1832  he  delivered  a  course  of
chemical  lectures  at  the  Eclectic  institute  of  Lex
ington,  Ky.,  and  was  engaged  to  assist  in  the
chemical  instruction  of  the  medical  department
of  Transylvania  university,  also  becoming  pro
fessor  of  chemistry  in  Morrison  college  of  that  uni
versity.  He  then  entered  the  medical  department,
was  graduated  in  1834,  and  in  1838  was  appointed
professor  of  chemistry  and  pharmacy  in  that  in
stitution.  In  1839  he  visited  Europe  in  order  to
secure  books,  anatomical  preparations,  and  appa
ratus  for  the  university,  and  at  the  same  time
he  attended  lectures  in  Paris  and  London.  He
was  associated  in  founding  the  Kentucky  school
of  medicine  at  Louisville  in  1850,  but  three  years
later  returned  to  the  Medical  school  of  Lexing
ton.  During  the  greater  part  of  the  civil  war  he
was  employed  as  acting  assistant  surgeon  in  charge
of  the  U.  S.  general  hospitals  in  Lexington.  In
18G5  he  was  appointed  professor  of  chemistry  and
experimental  natural  philosophy  in  Kentucky  uni
versity,  which  in  I860  acquired  the  Agricultural
and  mechanical  college  of  Kentucky,  in  which  he
remained  until  1887,  when  he  was  made  emeritus.
Dr.  Peter  was  chemist  to  the  Kentucky  geological
survey  in  1854-'GO,  and  in  1859-'60  conducted  the
chemical  department  of  the  geological  surveys  of
Indiana  and  Arkansas.  This  work  was  interrupted
by  the  civil  war,  but  resumed  in  1875,  and  since
that  year  he  has  again  filled  the  post  of  chemist  to
the  Kentucky  geological  survey.  In  this  capacity
he  has  accomplished  numerous  analyses  of  soils,
ores,  waters,  and  other  materials  which  have  been
published  in  the  reports  of  the  surveys.  He  edited
the  "  Transylvania  Medical  Journal "  in  1837-'8,
and  besides  many  articles  on  chemistry,  geology,
and  medicine,  in  periodicals  and  the  transactions
of  societies  of  which  he  is  a  member,  he  prepared
the  "  Geological  Formations  of  Kentucky "  for
Collins's  "  History  of  Kentucky."  His  most  recent
publications  are "'  A  Digest  of  the  Report  of  the
Geological  Survey  of  Arkansas  "  and  a  "  Digest  of
the  Reports  of  the  First  Geological  Survey  of  Ken


tucky,"  prepared  under  the  auspices  of  the  U.  S.
geological  survey.

PETER,  Sarah,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Valley
Mills,  Ross  co.,  Ohio,  1(3  May,  1800;  d.  in  Cincin
nati,  Ohio,  G  Feb.,  1877.  She  was  the  daughter  of
Thomas  Worthington,  governor  of  Ohio  in  1814-'18,
and  at  the  age  of  sixteen  married  Eld  ward  King,
son  of  Rufus  King.  After  his  death  in  1830  she
married  in  1844  William  Peter,  British  consul  at
Philadelphia.  She  founded  the  School  of  design
for  women  in  that  city,  which  was  opened  on  2
Dec.,  1850,  and  bestowed  her  wealth  on  many
charitable  institutions.  After  Mr.  Peter's  death
in  1853  she  returned  to  Cincinnati  and  engaged  in
establishing  the  Ladies'  academy  of  art  (now  the
Art-school  of  Cincinnati),  for  which  she  bought
pictures  and  statuary  in  Europe.  She  became  a
Roman  Catholic  in  185G,  and  has  crossed  the  ocean
nine  times  on  special  visits  to  the  pope.  She  has
established  several  sisterhoods  in  Cincinnati,  and
founded  convents  in  Philadelphia.

PETERKIN,  George  William,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Clear  Spring,  Washington  co.,  Md.,  21  March,
1841.  He  studied  at  the  University  of  Virginia  in
1858-'9,  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  Confederate  army
in  April,  1861,  was  commissioned  2d  lieutenant  in
April,  1862,  and  appointed  adjutant  of  his  regiment
in  May,  1862,  serving  until  he  was  paroled  at  Ap-
pomattox  Court- House,  10  April,  1865.  He  then
entered  the  Theological  seminary  of  Virginia,  at
Alexandria,  and  was  graduated  in  June,  1868.  He
was  ordained  deacon  in  the  chapel  of  the  seminary,
24  June,  1868,  by  Bishop  Johns,  and  priest  in  the
same  place,  25  June,  1869,  by  Bishop  Whittle.  He
passed  his  diaconate  as  assistant  to  his  father,  the
Rev.  Joshua  Peterkin,  D.  D.,  rector  of  St.  James's
church,  Richmond.  Va.  In  June,  1869,  he  became
rector  of  St.  Stephen's  church,  Cul pepper,  Va.,
which  post  he  held  for  four  years.  In  1873  he  accept
ed  the  rectorship  of  the  Memorial  church,  Baltimore,
Md.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Kenyon
college,  Ohio,  in  1878.  and  from  Washington  and
Lee  University,  Va.,  the  same  year.  When  the
diocese  of  West  Virginia  was  organized  in  1877  he
was  elected  to  be  its  first  bishop,  and  was  conse
crated  in  St.  Matthew's  church,  Wheeling,  Va.,  30
May,  1878.  Bishop  Peterkin  has  published  several
occasional  sermons,  addresses  at  the  church  con
gress  and  elsewhere,  and  has  contributed  freely
to  religious  magazines  and  journals.

PETERS,  Absalom,  clergyman,  b.  in  Went-
worth,  N.  II.,  19  Sept.,  1793;  d^  in  New  York  city,
18  May.  1869.  On  his  mother's  side  he  was  a  lineal
descendant  of  John  Rogers,  the  Smithfield  martyr.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  181G,  studied
in  Princeton  theological  seminary,  and  then  served
as  a  missionary  in  northern  New  York.  From
1820  till  1826  he  was  pastor  of  the  first  church  in
Bennington,  Vt.,  and  he  then  became  secretary  of
the  United  domestic  missionary  society,  and  aided
in  forming  the  American  home  missionary  society,
of  which  he  was  the  first  secretary  until  1837.  He
was  professor  of  pastoral  theology  and  homiletics
in  Union  theological  seminary,  New  York  city,  in
1842-'4,  and  then  pastor  of  the  first  church  in
Williamstown,  Mass.,  where  he  remained  until
1857.  Here  he  originated  and  edited  the  •'  Ameri
can  Eclectic,"  and  also  projected  the  "  American
Journal  of  Education,"  which  was  soon  merged  into
Dr.  Henry  Barnard's  journal  of  the  same  title.  Mid-
dlebury  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1833.  Dr.
Peters  also  edited  the  "  Home  Missionary  and  Amer
ican  Pastor's  Journal  "  in  1829-'37.  and  the  •'  Ameri
can  Biblical  Repository  "  in  1828-'42.  He  published
sermons  and  polemical  treatises,  and  wrote  a  vol-


PETERS


PETERS


741


urae  of  poems  entitled  "  Life  and  Time — A  Birth
day  Memorial  of  Seventy  Years  "  (New  York,  1865).

PETERS,  Christian  Henry  Frederick,  as
tronomer,  b.  in  Coldenbiittel.  Schleswig,  19  Sept.,
1813.  He  was  educated  at  the  University  of  Ber
lin,  where  in  1836  he  received  the  degree  o'f  Ph.  D.,
and  then  continued  his  professional  studies  in  Co
penhagen.  In  1838  he  accompanied  Baron  Sarto-
rius  von  Walthershausen  to  Sicily,  where,  until
1843,  he  was  engaged  on  the  survey  of  Mount
Etna.  The  published  results  of  this  work  are  said
to  afford  the  most  exhaustive  description  that  has
been  given  of  any  mountain.  On  the  completion
of  this  survey,  Dr.  Peters  was  engaged  in  Naples,
for  several  years,  in  the  geodetic  survey  of  that
kingdom,  but  at  the  close  of  the  revolution  of
1848  he  left  Italy  and  went  to  Turkey,  devoting
himself  to  the  pursuit  of  his  chosen  science.  In
1853,  on  the  recommendation  of  George  P.  Marsh,
he  came  to  the  United  States  with  letters  from
eminent  scientists,  which  procured  for  him  a  place
on  the  U.  S.  coast  survey.  At  first  he  was  sta
tioned  at  the  Cambridge  observatory,  and  later  at
the  Dudley  observatory  in  Albany.  In  1858  he
was  called  to  Hamilton  college  as  the  first  director
of  the  Litchfield  observatory,  and  in  1867  he  was
made  professor  of  astronomy  in  addition  to  his
directorship.  His  scientific  work  has  included  ob
servations  on  comets  and  solar  spots,  many  of
which  are  as  yet  unpublished.  In  his  study  of
the  sky  for  the  mapping  of  the  stars  he  has  been
the  first  discoverer  of  forty-seven  asteroids.  Under
the  auspices  of  the  regents  of  the  University  of
the  state  of  New  York  he  has  determined  the  longi
tude  of  several  places  in  the  state  of  Xew  York,  in
cluding  the  western  boundary-line.  He  had  charge
of  one  of  the  parties  sent  out  to  Des  Moines,  Iowa,
to  observe  the  solar  eclipse  of  7  Aug.,  1869,  and
also  led  the  government  expedition  that  was  sent
to  Xew  Zealand  to  observe  the  transit  of  Venus,  9
Dec.,  1874,  and  on  that  occasion  he  was  the  most
successful  of  all  the  observers  at  that  station,  se
curing  237  photographs  of  the  transit,  Dr.  Pe
ters  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  in
1876  was  elected  to  the  Xational  academy  of
sciences.  In  1887  he  received  the  decoration  of
the  cross  of  the  Legion  of  honor  from  the  French
government.  Besides  articles  in  various  scientific
journals,  he  published  in  1882  a  first  series,  twenty
in  number,  of  his  "Celestial  Charts,"  which  give
an  accurate  picture  of  the  parts  of  the  sky  that  '•
they  depict,  and  which  will  serve  hereafter  as  a
sure  basis  for  studying  changes  in  the  heavens.  |
A  second  series  has  been  completed,  and  is  now
(1888)  ready  for  the  press.

PETERS.  Edward  Dyer,  metallurgist,  b.  in
Dorchester,  Mass.,  1  June,  1849.  He  was  educated
at  the  Freiberg  mining-school,  Saxony,  in  1869,
and  has  since  devoted  himself  to  copper-smelting.
In  1870  he  was  appointed  territorial  assayer  of
Colorado,  which  office  he  held  for  two  years,  and
after  filling  various  other  places  he  returned  to
Massachusetts,  and  in  1877  was  graduated  at  Har
vard  medical  school.  Continuing  his  metallurgical
practice,  he  held  the  superintendency  of  the  Orford
sulphur  and  copper  company  in  1880-'2.  and  of  the
Parrot  silver  and  copper  company  in  1884— '5.  Mr.
Peters  is  a  member  of  the  American  institute  of
mining  engineers  and  of  other  scientific  societies.
In  addition  to  various  professional  papers,  he  has
published  "  Modern  American  Methods  of  Copper
Smelting  "  (Xew  York.  1887).

PETERS,  George  Nathaniel  Henry,  clergy
man,  b.  in  Xew  Berlin.  Union  co.,  Pa.,  30  Xov.,
1825,  He  was  graduated  at  Wittenberg  college,


Springfield.  Ohio,  in  1850.  and  was  pastor  of  Lu
theran  churches  in  Woodbury,  Springfield.  Xenia,
and  Plymouth,  Ohio,  but  has  been  retired  for  many
years.  He  is  a  conservative  premillenarian.  and.  in
addition  to  numerous  articles,  has  published  "The
Theocratic  Kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  the
:  result  of  thirty  years'  labor  (3  vols.,  Xew  York,  1884).
PETERS, 'Hugh,  clergyman,  b.  in  Fowey.  Corn-
|  wall,  England,  in  1599  ;  d.  in  London,  England,
16  Oct.,  1660.  After  graduation  at  Cambridge  in
1622  he  took  orders  and  preached  for  some  time  at
the  Church  of  St.  Sepulchre.  London,  but  was  com
mitted  to  prison  by  Archbishop  Laud  for  non-con
formity.  Obtaining  his  release,  he  removed  to
Rotterdam,  where  he  was  pastor  of  an  independent
congregation  with  Dr.  William  Ames  for  several
years,  and  in  1635  he  came  to  Xew  England  with
his  brothers  William  and  Thomas.  On  21  Dec.,
1636,  he  became  pastor  of  the  1st  church  in  Salem,
Mass.,  succeeding  Roger  Williams,  whose  doctrines
he  disclaimed  and  whose  adherents  he  excommuni
cated.  In  1637  he  was  appointed  an  overseer  of
Harvard.  He  took  an  active  part  in  mercantile
and  civil  affairs,  and  suggested  coasting  and  foreign
voyages,  and  the  plan  of  the  fisheries.  In  March,
j  1638,  he  was  appointed  by  the  general  court  to
assist  in  collecting  and  revising  the  colonial  laws.
I  In  1640  he  associated  Edward  Norris  with  him  in
I  the  pastorate  of  his  church.  He  received  from  his
|  church  200  acres  of  land  in  what  is  now  Xorthfield
j  as  a  reward  for  his  services,  and  his  farm  was  known
[  as  Peters  Neck.  On  3  Aug.,  1641.  he  was  sent  to
England  with  Rev.  Thomas  Welde  and  William
Hibbins  to  procure  an  alteration  in  the  laws  of
excise  and  trade,  and,  probably  owing  to  their  in
fluence,  an  act  of  parliament  was  passed  in  1643
relieving  all  commodities  that  were  carried  between
England  and  New  England  from  the  payment  of
"any  custom,  subsidy,  taxation,  imposition,  or  any
other  duty  "  till  the  further  order  of  the  house  of
commons.  In  England  he  joined  the  Parliament
ary  party  and  became  a  preacher  in  the  army.  He
had  interviews  with  Charles  I.  in  regard  to  his
"  Xew  England  business,"  in  which,  said  Peters,
"  he  used  me  civilly,  and  I  offered  my  poor  thoughts
three  times  for  his  safety."  In  1651  he  was  ap
pointed  by  parliament  a  commissioner  to  amend
the  laws,  an  office  for  which  he  was  eminently  un
qualified.  He  said  that  he  "  went  there  to  pray
rather  than  to  mend  laws."  In  1654  he  was  made
one  of  the  "  tryers "  of  ministers,  and  in  1658
preached  to  the  English  garrison  in  Dunkirk.  In
1660  he  accompanied  Gen.  Monk  from  Scotland  to
London,  preached  before  him  on  a  fast-day,  and  it
is  said  "  troubled  the  general  with  a  long  sermon."
After  the  restoration  of  Charles  II.,  Peters  was
committed  to  the  Tower,  and  indicted  for  high
treason  as  having  been  concerned  in  the  death  of
Charles  I.  It  was  alleged  that  he  was  one  of  those
that  stood  masked  on  the  scaffold  when  the  king
was  beheaded,  and,  to  render  him  more  odious,  it
was  reported  that  he  was  the  executioner.  During
his  imprisonment  in  Xewgate  he  wrote  several  let
ters  of  advice  to  his  daughter,  which  were  pub
lished  under  the  title  of  "  A  Dying  Father's  Legacy
to  an  Only  Child"  (London,"  1660),  of  which  his
great-nephew.  Samuel,  said  :  "  It  was  printed  and
published  in  Old  and  Xew  England,  and  myriads
of  experienced  Christians  have  read  his  legacy  with
ecstasy  and  health  to  their  souls."  Notwithstand
ing  this  prediction,  the  work  is  now  very  rare  and
almost  forgotten.  After  execution  his  head  was
stuck  on  a  pole  and  placed  on  London  bridge.  His
preaching  was  popular  with  the  multitude,  owing
to  his  coarse  but  striking  images.  His  private


PETERS


PETERS


character  has  been  the  subject  of  much  discussion.
He  was  charged  by  his  enemies  with  gross  immo
rality,  and  the  most  bitter  epithets  have  been  applied
to  him.  Of  late  years  he  has  been  estimated  more
favorably.  Gov.  Winthrop  describes  him  as  "  a
man  of  a  very  public  spirit  and  singular  activity
for  all  occasions."  He  was  said  to  have  been  "  tall
and  thin,  active  and  sprightly,  and  peculiarly  forci
ble  in  language  and  speech."  According  to  Dr.
John  G.  Palfrey,  his  name  should  be  written  Peter.
His  publications  are  "  God's  Doings  and  Man's
Duty  opined  in  a  Sermon  preached  before  the
House  of  Commons  "  (1646) ;  "  Peter's  Last  Report
of  the  English  Wars,"  in  answer  to  the  queries  of  a
friend  (1646) ;  "  A  Word  for  the  Army  and  Two
Words  for  the  Kingdom,  to  clear  the  One  and  cure
the  Other,  Forced  in  much  Plainness  and  Brevity
from  their  Faithful  Servant,  Hugh  Peters"  (1647)';
"  A  Good  Work  for  a  Good  Magistrate,  or  a  Short
Cut  to  a  Great  Quiet"  (1651),  in  which  he  recom
mends  burning  the  historical  records  in  the  Tower ;
and  notes  of  a  sermon  that  he  preached  in  New
gate  on  14  Oct.,  1660.  See  "  The  Tales  and  Jests
of  Mr.  Hugh  Peters  "  (1660) ;  "  The  History  of  the
Life  and  Death  of  Hugh  Peters,  that  Arch  Traytor,
from  the  Cradell  to  the  Gallowes  "  (1661) ;  "  Eng
land's  Shame  :  the  Life  and  Death  of  that  Grand
Impostor,  Hugh  Peters,"  by  Dr.  William  Yonge
(1663);  "An  Historical  and  Critical  Account  of
Hugh  Peters,"  by  William  Harris  (1751);  and
"  History  of  Hugh  Peters,"  by  Samuel  A.  Peters
(New  York,  1807).— His  daughter,  Elizabeth,  b.
in  Salem,  Mass.,  in  1640,  returned  to  New  Eng
land  after  the  execution  of  her  father  and  was
kindly  received.  She  married  a  Mr.  Barker,  of  New
port,  R.  I.,  with  whom  she  removed  to  England.
After  his  death  she  recovered  from  the  crown  her
father's  foreign  possessions,  which  had  been  illegally
confiscated.  For  several  years  previous  to  her
death  she  was  afflicted  with  a  mental  disorder,  and
suffered  many  years  in  extreme  poverty. — Hugh's
great-nephew,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hebron,
Conn.,  12  Dec.,  1735;  d.  in  New  York  city,  19
April,  1826,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1757,  and
travelled  in  Europe  in  1758.  In  1759  he  took
orders  in  the  Church  of  England  in  London.  Af
ter  his  return  to  Connecticut  in  1760  he  married,
and  in  1762  took  charge  of  churches  in  Hartford
and  Hebron.  He  imitated  the  style  of  an  English
nobleman  in  his  house,  which  he  built  in  a  forest,
kept  a  coach,  and  looked  with  scorn  upon  Republi
cans.  "  In  his  domestic  and  private  relations  he
was  all  that  could  be  desired."  The  Whigs  accused
him  of  communicating  with  England,  and  a  com
mittee,  accompanied  by  a  threatening  assemblage  of
300  persons,  visited  him  in  August,  1774,  and  ob
tained  from  him  a  written  declaration  that  he  had
not  "  sent  any  letter  to  the  bishop  of  London,  or
the  venerable  Society  for  the  propagation  of  the
gospel,  relative  to  the  Boston  port  bill,  or  the  tea
affair,  or  the  controversy  between  Great  Britain
and  the  colonies,  and  design  not  to,  during  my
natural  life,  as  these  controversies  are  out  of  my
business  as  a  clergyman."  He  gave  them  also  a
copy  of  the  "  Thirteen  Resolves "  which  he  con
fessed  that  he  had  written  for  the  press.  They  re
late  principally  to  the  tea  question,  and  their  pub
lication  produced  new  difficulties.  In  September
he  was  again  visited  by  the  people,  who  carried  him
to  the  meeting-house  green,  or  parade-ground,  and
compelled  him  to  sign  another  paper.  Soon  after
ward  he  fled  to  Boston  with  the  intention  of  sailing
for  England  to  make  a  representation  there  of  his
treatment.  It  was  feared  that  he  would  procure  a
withdrawal  of  the  charter  of  Connecticut,  and  his


letters  to  his  family  and  others  were  intercepted.
One,  dated  1  Oct.,  1774,  and  addressed  to  Rev.  Dr.
Samuel  Auchmuty,  of  New  York,  proposed  that
Connecticut  should  be  divided  between  New  York
and  Massachusetts.  Dr.  Peters  obtained  a  pension
and  a  grant  for  his  property  that  was  afterward
confiscated  by  the  Americans,  but,  owing  to  a  quar
rel  with  William  Pitt,  he  lost  this  about  1803.  In
1794  he  was  chosen  bishop  of  Vermont  by  a  con
vention  of  that  diocese,  but  the  archbishop  of  Can
terbury  refused  his  consecration  on  the  ground  that
the  number  of  bishops  for  America  were  limited.
In  1805  he  returned  to  this  country  and  travelled
to  the  Falls  of  St.  Anthony,  where  he  obtained
from  Capt.  Jonathan  Carver  (q.  v.)  a  grant  of  a
tract  of  land  one  hundred  miles  square.  He  spent
several  years  in  Washington  petitioning  congress
for  a  confirmation  of  this  grant.  In  1817  he  re
visited  the  land,  and  in  1818  settled  in  New  York
city,  where  he  lived  in  obscurity  and  on  charity.
After  the  death  of  his  brother  Andrew  he  frequently
wrote  his  name  Samuel  Andrew.  Columbia  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1761.  He  was  the
author  of  a  "  General  History  of  Connecticut,  by
a  Gentleman  of  the  Province  "  (London,  1781 ;  2d
ed.,  1782 ;  3d  ed.,  with  illustrations,  New  Haven,
1829).  This  contains  numerous  anecdotes  and
is  a  satire  independent  of  time,  place,  or  proba
bility.  In  this  book  he  originated  the  story  of  the
so-called  "Blue-Laws"  of  the  New  Haven  colony.
He  also  published  a  "Letter  to  the  Rev.  John
Tyler  concerning  the  Possibility  of  Eternal  Pun
ishments  and  the  Improbability  of  Universal  Sal
vation  "  (London.  1785) ;  a  "  History  of  the  Rev.
Hugh  Peters  "  (New  York,  1807) ;  and  a  brief  "  His
tory  of  Hebron."  John  Trumbull,  in  his  epic
"  McFingal,"  thus  mentions  him  :

"  What  warnings  had  ye  of  your  duty,
From  our  old  rev'rend  Sam  Auchmuty ;
From  priests  of  all  degrees  and  metres,
To  our  fag-end  man,  Parson  Peters?"
— Samuel's  grandson,  Samuel  Jaryis,  merchant,
b.  in  York  (now  Toronto),  Canada,  30  July,  1801 ;
d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  11  Aug.,  1855,  after  spend
ing  some  time  in  a  French  counting-room  in  New
York,  removed  to  New  Orleans  in  1821  and  became
a  merchant. In  1829  he  was  a  member  of  the  New
Orleans  city  council,  and  chairman  of  its  finance
committee. He  was  an  originator  of  the Pont-
chartrain  railroad,  and  the  first  president  of  the
chamber  of  commerce,  which  office  he  held  until
his  death. He  was  also  president  of  the  City  bank,
and  the  State  bank  of  Louisiana,  and  in  1849  he
was  made  collector  of  the  port. He  was  instru
mental  in  introducing  into  New  Orleans  the  com
mon-school  system,  in  connection  with  which  he
founded  a  public  lyceum  and  library.

PETERS,  John  Charles,  physician,  b.  in  New
York  city,  6  July,  1819.  He  was  educated  at
Nazareth  Hall,  Pa.,  at  the  College  of  physicians
and  surgeons  in  New  York,  and  also  studied  in
Berlin  and  Vienna,  receiving  his  medical  degree  in
1842.  On  his  return  to  New  York  he  devoted  him
self  to  homoeopathy,  but  finally  changed  to  the
old  school  of  practice,  and  has  endeavored  to
reconcile  the  methods  of  the  two  schools.  He  sug
gested  the  employment  of  alcohol  in  the  treatment
of  consumption,  the  use  of  phosphates  in  medi
cine,  the  curative  treatment  of  Bright's  disease
with  corrosive  sublimate,  and  the  use  of  the  salts
of  potassium  in  true  membranous  croup.  He
founded  with  Dr.  Middleton  Goldsmith  and  Dr.
Lewis  A.  Sayre  the  New  York  pathological  so
ciety,  of  which  he  has  been  president.  Dr.  Peters
has  also  been  president  of  the  Medical  society  of


PETERS


PETERS


743


the  county  of  New  York,  and  member  of  various
medical  societies.  He  was  the  physician  and
friend  of  Washington  Irving.  In  1873  he  vol
unteered  to  go  to  the  south  to  examine  the  chol
era,  suggested  measures  by  which  the  plague  was
stopped,  and  assisted  Dr.  Ely  McC'lellan  in  pre
paring  a  "  Report  on  Cholera,"  which  was  pub
lished  by  order  of  congress  (Washington,  1873).  In
1878  he  went  to  Memphis  to  aid  in  arresting
the  yellow -fever  scourge.  He  has  edited  the
"North  American  Journal  of  Homoeopathy"  and
the  "  Transactions  of  the  Pathological  Society "
(1873-'6),  and,  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  Alexander
S.  Wrotherspoon,  translated  Rokitansky's  "  Patho
logical  Anatomy"  (New  York,  1849).  With  Dr.
Frederick  G.  Snelling  and  others  he  published
"  Materia  Medica  "  (1856-'60).  In  addition  to  arti
cles  in  medical  journals  he  is  the  author  of  "  Dis
eases  of  the  Brain  and  Nervous  System "  (New
York,  1852) ;  "  Diseases  of  Women  "  '(1853) ;  "  Dis
eases  of  the  Eye "(1854);  and  "Notes  on  Asiatic
Cholera"  (I860);  and  he  assisted  Dr.  Edmund  C.
Wendt  in  his  book  on  "Asiatic  Cholera"  (1885).

PETERS,  John  Thompson,  jurist,  b.  in  He
bron,  Conn.,  11  Oct.,  1765  ;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
28  Aug.,  1834.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1789,
studied  law,  and  began  to  practise  in  his  native
town.  In  1813  he  was  appointed  collector  of  reve
nue  for  the  1st  district,  and  in  May.  1818,  he  was
made  judge  of  the  state  supreme  court,  which  office
he  held  for  many  years. — His  son,  Hugh,  poet,  b.
in  Hebron,  Conn..  30  Jan..  1807;  d.  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  9  June.  1831.  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1826,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  and  began
practice  in  Cincinnati.  His  body  was  found  in  the
Ohio  river,  and  it  is  supposed  that  he  drowned
himself  while  temporarily  insane.  He  wrote  a
series  of  humorous  Yankee  lyrics,  which  were
printed  in  the  "  New  England  Weekly  Review."
His  farewell  to  Connecticut,  written  on  Long  Island
sound,  and  entitled  "  My  Native  Land,"  is  consid
ered  his  best  poem.

PETERS,  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Liverpool,
England,  in  1704;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  10  July,
1776.  His  father.  Ralph,  was  town-clerk  of  Liver
pool.  The  son  was  educated  at  Westminster  school,
and  at  Oxford  and  Leyden,  and  after  studying  law
took  orders  in  theChurch  of  England  in  1730-'!,  and
came  to  this  country  on  account  of  domestic  troubles
about  1735.  He  was  employed  for  some  time  in
Christ  church,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  as  assistant  min
ister,  but,  having  resigned  in  1737,  he  became  sec
retary  to  the  land  office,  was  secretary  to  a  succes
sion  of  governors,  and  was  one  of  the  provincial
council  until  his  death.  In  the  summer  of  1762  he
was  invited  to  officiate  in  the  United  churches  of
Philadelphia,  and  was  chosen  to  be  rector  at  the
close  of  the  year.  He  made  a  visit  to  England  in
1764,  for  the  benefit  of  his  health  chiefly,  and  re
turned  to  Philadelphia  at  the  close  of  1765.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  f rom  the  University
of  Oxford  in  1770.  Conscious  of  the  infirmities  o'f
age,  he  resigned  his  rectorship  in  September,  1775.
He  was  one  of  those  that,  with  Benjamin  Frank
lin,  founded  the  Public  academy,  out  of  which  j
grew  the  College  of  Philadelphia.  He  was  one  of  '
the  original  trustees  of  the  latter,  president  of  the
board  in  1756-'64,  an  incorporator  of  the  Phila
delphia  library,  and  one  of  the  original  managers
of  the  Pennsylvania  hospital.  Bishop  White  speaks
of  Dr.  Peters  "  with  respect  and  affection,"  he  hav
ing  been  one  of  the  assistant  ministers  in  the
United  churches  during  the  latter  years  of  Dr.
Peters's  rectorship.  Bishop  White  says  that  he  had
adopted  the  fantastical  notions  of  Jacob  Bochman,


the  German  cobbler,  in  regard  to  the  "  inward
light "  and  kindred  topics,  and  he  was  a  public
opponent  of  George  Whitefield  during  the  latter's
evangelistic  journey  through  the  country.  He
published  "  The  Two  Last  Sermons  preached  at
Christ  Church,"  printed  by  Franklin  (Philadel
phia,  1737) ;  and  other  discourses. — His  nephew,
Richard,  jurist,  b.  at  his  father's  seat  of  Bel-
mont,  Philadelphia,  22  June,  1744;  d.  there,  22
Aug.,  1828,  was  a  son  of  William  Peters,  who  was
for  many  years  register  of  the  admiralty,  and  a
judge  of  the  courts  of  common  pleas,  quarter  ses
sions,  and  orphans'  court.  The  son  was  gradu
ated  in  1761  at  the  College  of  Philadelphia  (now
University  of  Pennsylvania),  from  which  he  re
ceived  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1827,  and  of  which
he  was  a  trustee  in  1788-'91.  He  studied  law,
came  to  the  bar  in  1763,  and  soon  rose  to  eminence
in  his  profession.  In  1771  he  became  register  of
the  admiralty,  retaining  this  post  until  the  war  for
independence  was  begun.  When  most  of  the  lead
ers  of  the  Philadelphia  bar  went  over  to  the  side
of  the  king  in  the  early  days  of  the  Revolution,  he
remained  true  to  the  cause  of  the  colonies.  He
commanded  a  company  of  provincial  troops  in
1775,  on  13  June,  1776,  was  elected  by  congress
secretary  of  the  Continental  board  of  war,  and
later  was  also  a  commissioner  of  war,  in  which  post
he  rendered  important  services  to  the  patriot
cause.  Peters  discovered  that  Benedict  Arnold  was
applying  to  his  own  use  funds  that  had  been  placed
in  his  hands  for  the  purchase  of  the  clothing
and  subsistence  for  the  army,  and  an  attempt  on
Peters's  part  to  stop  this  robbery  produced  between
him  and  Arnold  an  open  quarrel.  In  a  letter  to  a
friend  he  wrote :  "  I  did  not  conceal,  but  wrote  to
headquarters  my  want  of  confidence  in  Arnold.
When  his  traitorous  conduct  at  West  Point  became
public,  neither  Col.  Pickering  nor  myself  were  the
least  surprised."  In  1780  Peters  was  one  of  those
that  subscribed  £5,000  each  to  the  Pennsylvania
bank  for  the  provisioning  of  the  army.  In  Decem
ber,  1781,  when  he  resigned  his  post  in  the  war
office,  congress  voted  him  their  "thanks  for  his
long  and  faithful  services."  In  1782-?3  he  was  a
member  of  the  Continental  congress:  in  1787  he
became  a  member  of  the  assembly,  and  he  was  the
speaker  of  this  body  in  1788-'90.  in  which  capacity
he  and  Gen.  Thomas  Mifflin,  the  speaker  of  the
senate,  were  the  representatives  of  Pennsylvania
that  met  Gen.  Washington  as  he  entered  the  state
on  his  way  to  New  York  to  be  inaugurated  as  first
president  of  the  United  States.  In  1791  he  was
the  speaker  of  the  state  senate.  On  the  formation
of  the  Federal  government  he  was  tendered  the
comptrollership  of  the  treasury,  but  declined  it.
On  11  April.  1792,  he  was  commissioned  judge  of
the  U.  S.  district  court  for  Pennsylvania,  which
office  he  held  until  his  death.  Judge  Story  wrote
of  him  :  "  I  have  learned  much  in  his  school,  and
owe  him  many  thanks  for  his  rich  contribution  to
the  maritime  jurisprudence  of  our  country."  One
of  Mr.  Peters's  important  works  was  his  active  in
strumentality  in  securing  the  act  of  succession  for
the  ministers  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church
in  the  United  States.  In  1785  he  went  to  England
to  obtain  from  the  British  prelates  ordination  to
the  office  of  bishop  for  three  priests  of  the  Ameri
can  church,  and  it  was  largely  through  his  energy
and  endeavor  that  this  end  was  accomplished.
Judge  Peters  was  a  practical  farmer,  one  of  the
founders  of  the  Philadelphia  agricultural  society,
and  its  first  president,  retaining  the  place  till  his
death,  a  period  of  more  than  thirty  years.  The
"Memoirs"  of  the  societv  contain  more  than  one


744


PETERS


PETERSON


hundred  papers  by  him.  Judge  Peters  had  a  high
reputation  as  a  wit,  and  was  a  great  favorite  in  so
ciety.  At  both  his  city  home  and  his  country-seat,
Belmont,  he  extended  a  princely  hospitality,  and  he
was  visited  by  the  most  eminent  men  of  his  own
country,  and  by  distinguished  foreigners.  One  of
his  most  frequent  guests  was  Gen.  Washington,
with  whom  Judge  Peters  was  on  terms  of  the
closest  intimacy  from  1776  till  Gen.  Washington's
death.  The  French  traveller,  Chastellux.  desig
nates  Belmont  as  a  "  tasty  little  box  in  the  most
charming  spot  nature  could  embellish."  This  es
tate,  containing  more  than  200  acres,  is  now  in
cluded  in  Fairmount  park,  and  during  1876  was
the  site  of  the  Centennial  exhibition  buildings.
He  was  instrumental  in  constructing  the  first  per
manent  bridge  over  the  Schuylkill  river,  serving
as  the  first  president  of  the  bridge  company.  Judge
Peters  published  "  Admiralty  Decisions  of  the  Dis
trict  Court  of  the  United  States  for  the  Pennsyl
vania  Districts,  1780-1807"  (Philadelphia,  1807).
See  "  Address  on  the  Death  of  Hon.  Richard
Peters,"  by  Samuel  Breck  (Philadelphia,  1828). —
The  second  Richard's  son,  Richard,  lawyer,  b.  at
Belmont,  Philadelphia,  in  August,  1780;  d.  there,
2  May,  1818,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1800.  He  was  the  solicitor  of  Philadelphia
county  in  1822-'5,  and  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Philadelphia  saving  fund  society,  the  oldest  in
stitution  of  that  kind  in  Pennsylvania,  if  not  in  this
country.  He  succeeded  Henry  Wheaton  as  reporter
of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  and  published  "  Re
ports  of  the  IT.  S.  Circuit  Court,  1803-'18"  (Phila
delphia,  1819);  "Reports  of  the  U.  S.  Supreme
Court,  1828-'43"  (17  vols.,  1828-'43);  "Condensed
Reports  of  Cases  in  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  from
its  Organization  till  1827"  (6  vols.,  1835);  and
"  Full  and  Arranged  Digest  of  Cases  determined  in
the  Supreme,  Circuit,  and  District  Courts  of  the
United  States  from  the  Organization  of  the  Gov
ernment  "  (3  vols..  1838-'9 ;  new  ed.,  2  vols ,  1848).
He  edited  "  Chitty  on  Bills  of  Exchange  "  (3  vols.,
1819)  and  Bushrod  Washington's  "  Circuit  Court
Reports  "  (4  vols.,  1826-'9).

PETERS.  William  Cummin?,  musician,  b.  in
Woodbury,  Devonshire,  England,  10  March,  1805;
d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  20  April,  1866.  He  studied
music  with  his  father  in  England  and  Texas  in
1820-'3,  but  was  mainly  self-instructed.  During
1825-'8  he  taught  music  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and  in
the  following  year  he  opened  a  music-store  in
Louisville,  Ky.,  establishing  branch  houses  in  Cin
cinnati  in  1839,  and  in  Baltimore  in  1849.  From
1829  till  his  death  he  was  constantly  engaged  as  a
leader  of  concerts  and  choirs,  and  in  composing
and  writing.  He  composed  many  vocal  and  instru
mental  pieces,  some  of  which  became  very  popular,
but  his  most  important  work  was  in  connection
with  the  Roman  Catholic  church,  for  which  he
wrote  some  excellent  music,  notably  a  mass  in  D.
He  compiled  also  numerous  collections  of  music,
including  "  The  Catholic  Harmonist "  (1850)  and
"Catholic  Harp  "  (18G2),  and  systems  of  instruc
tion  for  the  voice  and  different  instruments,  among
them  the  "  Eclectic  Piano  Instructor  "  (1855).

PETERSEN.  Johan  Erik  Christian,  artist,  b.
in  Copenhagen.  Denmark,  3  April,  1839 ;  d.  in  Bos
ton,  Mass.,  19  March,  1'874.  He  began  the  study
of  art  in  1860,  under  Niels  Carl  M.  F.  Dahl,  and  at
the  Royal  academy.  After  serving  in  the  war  be
tween  Prussia  and  Denmark  in  1864,  he  came  to
this  country  in  1865,  opened  a  studio  in  Boston,
and  devoted  himself  principally  to  marine  paint
ing.  His  later  works  include  numerous  strong
and  effective  paintings,  among  which  are  "  The


Start  of  the  Ocean  Race  of  1866  from  Sandy
Hook";  "Phantom  Ship"  (1869):  "  Making  Sai'l
after  the  Gale  " ;  and  "  After  the  Collision."

PETERSILEA,  Carlyle,  musician,  b.  in  Bos
ton,  14  Jan.,  1844.  Pie  received  his  first  musical
education  from  his  father,  and  in  1862  went  to
Germany,  where  he  studied  for  three  years  at  the
Leipsic  conservatory.  He  was  graduated  with  hon
or,  and  then  made  a  professional  tour  of  Germany,
meeting  with  great  success.  On  his  return  to  this
country  he  settled  in  Boston,  where,  in1  1871,  he
founded  the  Petersilea  academy  of  music,  elocution,
and  languages,  which  existed  until  1886,  since
which  year  he  has  taught  in  the  New  England
conservatory  of  music.  He  has  at  various  times
appeared  as  a  soloist  in  Germany  and  the  United
States,  and  is  known  for  his  technique  and  mem
ory.  He  is  the  author  of  an  original  piano  system.
His  work  as  a  composer  is  limited  to  some  tran
scriptions  of  songs,  his  technical  studies,  and  a
few  unpublished  string  quartettes  and  sonatas.
He  has  also  invented  a  mute  piano  for  practice.

PETERSON,  Charles  Jacobs,  publisher,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  20  July,  1819  ;  d.  there,  4  March,  1887.
He  was  a  descendant  of  Erick  Pieterson,  who  came
to  the  Delaware  with  a  colony  from  Sweden  in
1638,  and  was  the  first  of  the  name  in  this  country.
The  godfather  of  Erick  was  Laurence  Peterson,
archbishop  of  Sweden,  who,  with  his  brother  Oolof,
translated,  in  1552,  the  Bible  into  the  Swedish  lan
guage,  a  copy  of  which  is  in  possession  of  the  fami
ly.  He  was  the  editor,  with  Mrs.  Ann  S.  Stephens,
of  "  Peterson's  Ladies'  National  Magazine,"  and  the
author  of  many  contributions  to  journals  and  peri
odicals  and  "  The  Military  Heroes  of  the  Revolu
tion,  with  a  Narrative  of  the  War  of  Independ
ence"  (Philadelphia,  1847);  "  The  Military  Heroes
of  the  War  of  1812  and  of  the  War  with  Mexico"
(1848) ;  "  Grace  Dudley,  or  Arnold  at  Saratoga  "
(1849) ;  "  Cruising  in  the  Last  War  "  (1849) ;  "  The
Naval  Heroes  of  the  United  States  "  (1850) ;  "  Valley
Farm";  "Kate  Aylesford,  a  Story  of  the  Refu
gees"  (1855);  "Mabel,  or  Darkness  and  Dawn"
(1857) ;  "  The  Old  Stone  Mansion  "  (1859) ;  and  a
continuation  from  1840  to  1856  of  Charles  von
Rotteck's  "  History  of  the  World  "  (4  vols.,  1856).
— His  brother,  Theophihis  Beasley,  publisher,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  14  Feb.,  1821,  left  school  at  the
age  of  thirteen,  entered  a  dry-goods  store  as  clerk,
and  afterward  served  in  the  same  capacity  in  a
shipping-house.  Next  he  entered  a  stereotype-
foundry  and  learned  the  business,  as  well  as  that  of
printing.  In  1843  he  became  foreman  in  the  office
of  the  "  Saturday  Evening  Post,"  which  was  edited
by  George  R.  Graham  and  Charles  J.  Peterson.
Two  years  afterward  he  withdrew  from  this  work
and  began  business  for  himself  as  a  bookseller
and  news-agent.  His  first  publication  was  issued
in  1846,  being  a  reprint  of  Lady  Charlotte  Bury's
novel  "  The  Divorced.''  The  price  of  the  London
edition  was  .$7.50 ;  that  of  Peterson's  edition  was
twenty-five  cents.  His  success  in  this  effort  con
firmed  him  in,  his  original  resolution  to  stereotype
all  the  most  popular  foreign  and  American  books
of  fiction  of  which  he  could  gain  possession,  and
publish  them  in  economical  forms.  In  1858  he
admitted  his  brothers,  George  W.  and  Thomas,  into
partnership,  under  the  firm-name  of  T.  B.  Peterson
and  Brothers.  His  firm  has  also  made  a  specialty
of  publishing  cook-books.  An  original  idea  of  this
house  is  the  issuing  of  their  catalogue  with  a  por
trait  of  their  principal  authors,  and  a  sketch  of
their  life  and  writings.

PETERSON,  Henry,  publisher,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  7  Dec.,  1818.  lie  is  a  cousin  of  Charles


PETIGRU


PETIOX


745


.1.  Peterson,  and  at  the  age  of  fourteen  entered  a
hardware-store,  and  in  1839  began  business  with
Edmund  Deacon.  Subsequently  they  published
the  "Saturday  Evening  Post  "  under  the  firm-
name  of  Deacon  and  Peterson,  and  Henry  was  its
assistant  editor  for  twenty  years.  He  has  writ
ten  a  drama  entitled  "Helen,  or  One  Hundred
Years  Ago,"  which  was  produced  in  Philadelphia
in  1876,  and  is  also  the  author  of  "  The  Twin
Brothers "  (Xew  York,  1843) ;  "  Universal  Suf
frage  "  (Philadelphia,  1867) ;  "  The  Modern  Job  "
(1869) ;  "  Pemberton,  or  One  Hundred  Years  Ago  "
(1873) ;  "  Faire-Mount,"  a  poem  (1874) ;  "  Confes
sions  of  a  Minister  "  (1874) :  "  Bessie's  Lovers  "
(1877);  "Caesar,  a  Dramatic  Study"  (1879);  and
two  volumes  of  "  Poems  "  (1863  and  1883).— Henry's
wife,  Sarah  Webb,  b.  in  Wilmington,  Del.,  9
Nov.,  1820,  edited  "  The  Lady's  Friend  "  for  ten
years,  and  has  written  several  poems. — Their  son,
Arthur,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Gerrnantown,  20  Sept.,
1851.  was  assistant  editor  of  the  "Saturday  Even
ing  Post  "and  editor  of  "  Peterson's  Journal,"
after  which  he  entered  the  navy  as  assistant  pay
master  in  1877,  and  in  1883  was  promoted  to  passed
assistant  paymaster,  ranking  as  lieutenant.  He  is
the  author  of  "  Songs  of  Xew  Sweden,  and  other
Poems"  (Philadelphia,  1888).— Henry's  brother,
Robert  Evans,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  12
Xov.,  1812,  entered  the  hardware  business,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1843,  and  afterward
engaged  in  the  second-hand  book  business.  After
the  death  of  his  father-in-law,  John  Bouvier,  he
founded  with  George  W.  Childs  the  publishing-
house  of  Childs  and  Peterson,  and,  after  this  was
discontinued,  studied  medicine  in  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  and  was  licensed  to  practise  in  1862.
He  presented  the  library  of  his  father-in-law.  Judge
John  Bouvier,  to  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.
He  edited  one  volume  of  Judge  Bouvier's  edition
of  Bacon's  "Abridgment  of  the  Law,"  an  edition
of  "  Familiar  Science,"  founded  upon  E.  C.  Brewer's
"  Guide  to  Scientific  Knowledge  of  Things  Famil
iar"  (London,  1850);  and  is  the  author  of  "The
Roman  Catholic  not  the  only  True  Religion  ;  not
an  Infallible  Church"  (Philadelphia,  1869).— Rob
ert's  first  wife.  Hannah  Mary  Bouvier,  author,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1811 ;  d.  at  Long  Branch,
X.  J.,  4  Sept.,  1870,  devoted  much  attention  to  as
tronomy,  and  published  "  Familiar  Astronomy,  or
an  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Heavens,"  with
a  "  Treatise  on  the  Globes  and  a  Comprehensive
Astronomical  Dictionary,"  which  was  commended
by  many  astronomers  (Philadelphia,  1857).  She
died  in  the  house  of  her  son-in-law,  Mr.  George  W.
Childs,  at  Seaview,  Long  Branch.  In  1872  Mr.
Peterson  married  Blanche  Gottschalk,  sister  of
Louis  M.  Gottschalk,  and  after  her  death  in  1879
married  Clara,  another  sister  of  the  pianist.

PETItrRU,  James  Lewis,  statesman,  b.  in
Abbeville  district,  S.  C.,  10  March,  1789;  d.  in
Charleston,  S.  C.,  3  March,  1863.  On  his  father's
side  he  was  of  mixed  Scotch  and  Irish  descent,  and
his  maternal  ancestors  formed  a  part  of  the  Hugue
not  colony  that  in  1695  emigrated  to  South  Caro
lina  to  escape  religious  persecution  in  France.  He
was  graduated  at  the  University  ot  South  Caro
lina  in  1809.  admitted  to  the  bar  about  two  years
afterward,  and  began  practice  in  his  native  district,
but  soon  removed  to  Charleston.  He  was  state
attorney-general  in  1822-'30,  succeeding  Robert  Y.
Hayne,  and  during  his  occupation  of  that  office
took  the  highest  place  in  the  confidence  of  his  con
stituents.  But  during  the  nullification  difficulties
of  1830-'2  he  vigorously  and  eloquently  opposed
the  doctrine  of  the  state  veto,  and  became  a  leader


in  the  Union  party,  standing  almost  alone  among
the  men  of  wealth,  position,  and  reputation  in  the
state.  On  the  defeat  of  his  party  he  lost  his
popularity,  and  suffered  much  opprobrium,  al
though  he  remained  without  a  rival  at  the  bar.
He  was  subsequently  district  attorney  for  a  short
time,  which  subject
ed  him  to  further
odium,  and  was  later
in  the  state  legisla
ture.  The  secession
of  South  Carolina  in
1860  found  him  too
advanced  in  years  to
take  an  active  part  in
political  controver
sies,  but  he  strongly
opposed  disunion,
and  in  a  letter  to
Reverdy  Johnson,
dated  16  April,  1861,
in  which  he  deplored
the  action  of  his
state,  he  said : "  What
is  to  be  the  end  of
all  this  seems  to  me  inscrutable.  But  even  if  the
Gulf  states  and  South  Carolina  do  flake  off  forever,
I  shall  never  cease  to  witness  with  joy  whatever
increases  the  prosperity  and  honor  of  the  United
States."  The  great  work  of  his  life  was  the  codifica
tion  of  the  laws  of  South  Carolina,  which  had  been
confided  to  him  by  the  legislature,  notwithstanding
his  well-known  political  principles.  During  the
first  year  of  the  civil  war  he  devoted  himself  al
most  exclusively  to  the  completion  of  this  work
(Charleston,  1862).  He  was  president  of  the  South
Carolina  historical  society,  and  published  a  "  Semi-
Centennial  Oration,"  delivered  at  the  College  of
South  Carolina  (Columbia,  1855),  and  "  An  Ad
dress  before  the  South  Carolina  Historical  Soci
ety"  (Charleston,  1858).  See  his  "  Biography,"  by
William  J.  Grayson  (1866),  and  also  a  memorial  vol
ume  including  the  proceedings  of  the  Charleston
bar  (1867). — His  daughter,  Caroline,  artist,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C.,  24  May,  1819,  was  educated  in
her  native  city,  and  early  developed  artistic  tastes.
She  married  William  A.  Carson,  of  St.  John's  par
ish,  S.  C.,  in  1840.  She  was  attached  to  the  na
tional  cause,  and  in  1860  settled  in  Xew  York  city.
She  has  recently  lived  in  Rome,  Italy,  where  she
occasionally  paints  portraits.  That  of  her  father  is
among  the  best  known  of  her  works.

PETION,  Alexander  (pay-se-ong),  president  of
Hayti,  b.  in  Port  au  Prince,  2  April,  1770;  d.
there,  29  March,  1818.  He  was  the  son  of  a  colonist
named  Sabes  and  a  mulatto  woman.  His  father  wras
wealthy  and  gave  him  a  good  education.  He  rose  to
the  rank  of  adjutant-general  during  the  civil  war  in
the  island,  and  after  the  evacuation  of  Santo  Domin
go  by  the  English  in  1798  he  supported  Gen.  Rigaud
in  his  opposition  to  Toussaint  1'Ouverture.  and  won
reputation  by  his  defence  of  Jacmel.  When  Rigaud
was  forced  to  quit  the  island  in  1800,  Petion  accom
panied  him  to  France,  but  he  returned  with  Gen.
Leclerc  in  1802.  with  the  rank  of  colonel.  His
prudent  counsels  were  disregarded  by  Leclerc,  and
at  last  he  abandoned  the  French  ranks  in  October,
1802,  with  such  of  his  compatriots  as  were  able  to
escape,  and  took  service  under  Henry  Christophe,
and  later  under  Dessalines.  After  the  murder  of
the  latter  in  1806,  at  which  time  Petion  was  com
mander  of  Port  an  Prince,  the  hostility  of  Presi
dent  Christophe  to  the  mulattoes  excited  fears  in
the  south  and  west,  and  Petion  was  chosen  presi
dent  of  that  part  of  the  island,  10  March,  1807.


746


PETIT


PETTIGREW


Civil  war  was  renewed  in  consequence,  and  Chris-
tophe  invaded  Potion's  dominions,  but  without  suc
cess.  From  the  beginning  of  his  presidency  Petion
opened  his  ports  to  all  nations  and  granted  security
and  protection  to  Frenchmen  engaged  in  commer
cial  pursuits.  The  civil  war  and  the  administration
of  DessaJines  had  exhausted  the  finances,  but
Petion  paid  all  debts,  and  the  commercial  and  agri
cultural  prosperity  that  ensued  gained  for  linn  the
title  of  the  father  of  his  country.  In  1815  he  was
re-elected  president  for  life,  with  power  to  nominate
his  successor.  In  the  following  year  the  govern
ment  of  Louis  XVIII.  opened  certain  negotiations
with  him.  but  he  refused  all  arrangements  to  which
the  recognition  of  the  independence  of  Hayti  was
not  a  preliminary.  In  the  same  year  he  assisted
the  expedition  of  Simon  Bolivar  to  Venezuela,
which  brought  about  the  liberation  of  that  country,
and  in  return  only  asked  for  the  abolition  of  slavery.
In  the  latter  part  of  his  administration  the  finances
again  became  involved,  and  the  government  was
compelled  to  debase  the  coinage.  Petion  fell  into
hypochondria,  fancying  that  he  was  in  danger  of
assassination,  and  finally,  refusing  nourishment,
died.  His  funeral  took  place  amid  imposing  relig
ious  solemnities,  and  the  senate  ordered  a  mau
soleum  to  be  erected  to  his  memory,  but  his  remains
were  later  transported  to  Pere  la  Chaise  cemetery
in  Paris,  where  a  magnificent  monument  now  marks
his  resting-place.

PETIT,  Louis  Le,  French  missionary,  lived
in  the  first  part  of  the  18th  century.  He  was  a
Jesuit  missionary  in  Louisiana,  founded  the  Choc-
taw  mission  in  1727,  and  remained  there  till  about
1730.  He  wrote  "  Lettre  du  P.  le  Petit  au  P.
d'Avaucour,  procureur  des  missions  de  1'Amerique
Septentrionale — colonie  francaise  des  Natchez  sur
les  bords  du  Mississippi,"  published  in  the  "  Lettres
edifiantes  "  (Paris,  1839).  There  is  a  German
translation  in  Stocklein's  "  Welt  -  Bote  *'  (Griitz,
1725-'30),  and  it  is  also  given  in  English  in  Kip's
"  Early  Jesuit  Missions  in  North  America"  (1846).

PETO,  Sir  Samuel  Morton,  bart.,  English  en
gineer,  b.  in  Woking,  Surrey,  England,  4  Aug.,
1809.  He  served  an  apprenticeship  of  seven  years
with  his  uncle,  who  was  a  builder,  became  a  part
ner  in  the  firm,  and  was  subsequently  engaged  in
the  construction  of  a  large  number  of  railroads  in
England,  on  the  continent,  and  in  Canada.  lie
was  made  a  baronet  in  1855  for  building  a  railroad
from  Balaklava  to  Sebastopol  at  his  own  expense.
His  most  important  work  in  Canada  was  the  con
struction  of  the  Grand  Trunk  railway,  with  the
tubular  bridge  near  Montreal.  He  subsequently
served  several  terms  in  parliament,  but  retired  in
1868  in  consequence  of  the  failure  of  his  firm,
Peto,  Betts  and  Crampton,  with  liabilities  of  more
than  £7,000.000.  He  published  "  Taxation,  its
Levy  and  Expenditure"  (London,  1863),  and,  after
visiting  the  United  States  in  1805,  "Resources  and
Prospects  of  America  "  (1866).

PETTEE,  Otis,  inventor,  b.  in  Foxborough,
Mass..  5  March,  1795;  d.  in  Newton  Upper  Falls.
Mass.,  12  Feb.,  1853.  He  was  a  manufacturer  in
Newton  Upper  Falls,  and  made  several  inventions
in  cotton-machinery,  notably  in  roving  frames  or
double  speeders,  by  introducing  a  geared  cone,
with  gears  arranged  in  a  hyperbolic  series.  This
invention,  according  to  Prof.  Daniel  Treadwell,
was  "absolutely  perfect  and  founded  upon  princi
ples  that  are  eternal."  Mr.  Pettee  was  postmaster
of  Newton  Upper  Falls  in  1828-'33,  and  selectman
for  several  years.  In  1848  he  became  president  of
the  Charles  River  railroad,  which  place  he  filled
until  his  death,  and  he  was  also  director  of  the


Newton  bank.— His  son.  William  Henry,  mining
engineer,  b.  in  Newton  Upper  Falls,  Mass.,  13  Jan.,
1838,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1861,  and  con
tinued  there  in  1863-'5  as  assistant  in  chemistry.
During  1865-'8  he  studied  at  the  Freiberg,  Sax
ony,  mining-school,  and  was  appointed  in  1869
instructor  in  mining,  and  in  1871  assistant  pro
fessor  in  that  subject  at  Harvard,  also  serving  as
assistant  in  1870-'!  to  Prof.  Josiah  D.  Whitney  on
the  geological  survey  of  California.  In  1875  he
was  called  to  the  University  of  Michigan,  where  he
has  since  remained,  and  now  fills  the  chair  of
mineralogy,  economic  geology,  and  mining  en
gineering.  Prof.  Pettee  is  a  member  of  various
scientific  societies,  was  vice-president  of  the  Ameri
can  institute  of  mining  engineers  in  1880-'2,  and
in  1887  was  general  secretary  of  the  American  as
sociation  for  the  advancement  of  science.  Besides
his  scientific  papers,  he  prepared  the  "Contribu
tions  to  Barometric  Hypsometry,"  issued  by  the
survey  of  California  in  1874,  a  supplementary  chap
ter  in  1878,  and  appendices  A  and  C  of  Josiah  I).
Whitney's  "  Auriferous  Gravels  of  the  Sierra  Ne
vada"  (Cambridge.  1880).

PETTIGREW,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Penn
sylvania  in  1748;  d.  on  Bonarva  plantation,  Tyrrel
co.,  N.  C.,  7  April,  1807.  The  family  was  origi
nally  French,  but  his  father  was  settled  in  County
Tyrone,  Ireland,  whence  he  emigrated  to  this  coun
try  in  1740.  The  family  emigrated  to  South  Caro
lina  in  1768.  Charles  was  educated  in  North  Caro
lina,  and  in  June,  1773,  appointed  principal  of  the
public  school  in  Edenton.  Soon  afterward  he  be-

fan  to  study  for  the  ministry  in  the  Church  of
ingland,  and  in  the  winter  of"  1774-'5  he  made  a
voyage  across  the  ocean  to  obtain  orders.  He  was
ordained  deacon  by  the  Bishop  of  London,  and
priest  by  the  Bishop  of  Rochester  in  1775.  He  re
turned  to  the  United  States  in  the  last  ship  that
sailed  before  the  war  of  the  Revolution  began.
His  parish  church  was  in  Edenton,  but  in  addi
tion  he  had  chapels  of  ease  in  adjoining  counties,
and  was  very  zealous  and  active  in  the  discharge
of  his  duties.  He  was  also  noted  for  his  sincere
loyalty  to  his  country  and  her  rights  in  the  strug
gle  with  England.  Although  invited  several  times
to  accept  posts  in  Virginia,  he  preferred  to  remain
where  he  was  in  Carolina.  In  1790  he  took  some
steps  toward  organizing  the  Episcopal  church  in
North  Carolina.  A  meeting  of  the  clergy  was
held  in  Tarboro  in  June,  1790,  but  nothing  of  mo
ment  was  done  for  three  or  four  years.  In  May,
1794.  a  convention  was  held  in  Tarboro.  a  consti
tution  was  framed  and  adopted,  and  Mr.  Petti-
grew  was  elected  bishop.  He  accepted  the  post
with  reluctance,  owing  to  feeble  health  and  increas
ing  infirmities,  and  he  never  received  consecration.
He  gave  cordial  help  toward  establishing  the  Uni
versity  of  North  Carolina,  and  was  one  of  its  over
seers  from  1790  till  1793.  About  1794  he  took  up
his  residence  at  the  plantations  of  Bonarva  and
Begrod,  near  Lake  Scuppernong,  and  built  there
Pettigrew's  chapel,  which  he  presented  to  the
church.  Ever  after  this  he  declined  all  compensa
tion  for  clerical  services.  Mr.  Pettigrew  was  a
man  of  excellent  attainments.  He  published  sev
eral  tracts  on  infant  baptism  for  local  circulation
without  his  name,  and  in  1797  he  addressed  a  let
ter  to  his  sons  in  college.  This  was  subsequently
printed,  and  is  spoken  of  as  portraying  the  charac
ter  of  a  Christian  gentleman  in  a  very  felicitous
manner. — His  son,  Ebenezer,  congressman,  b.  near
Edenton,  N.  C.,  10  March,  1783;  d.  in  Magnolia,
Tyrrel  co.,  N.  C.,  8  July,  1848,  devoted  himself  en
tirely  to  agriculture  for  many  years,  but  was  chosen


PETTIXGILL


PETTIT


747


to  the  state  senate  in  1809  and  1810,  and  in  1835-7
served  a  term  in  congress,  having  been  elected  as  a
Whig.  He  did  much  to  improve  methods  of  farm
ing  in  his  county,  and  his  own  estate  on  Lake
Phelps  was  a  model.  —  Ebenezer's  son,  James
Johnston,  soldier,  b.  in  Tyrrel  county,  X.  C.,  4
July,  1828;  d.  near  Winchester,  Va.,  17  July,  1803,
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  North  Caro
lina  in  1847,  and  became  assistant  professor  in  the
Xaval  observatory  at  Washington,  but  shortly  af
terward  began  the  study  of  law.  He  travelled  in
Europe  in  1850-'2,  and  then  began  practice  in
Charleston.  S.  C.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature
in  1856,  and  in  1858  went  abroad  again  and  entered
the  Sardinian  army ;  but  the  peace  of  Villa  Franca
prevented  him  from  seeing  active  service,  and  after
a  visit  to  Spain  he  returned  to  South  Carolina  and
devoted  himself  to  the  improvement  of  the  militia,
in  which  he  was  elected  captain.  In  1860,  by  order
of  Gov.  Pickens,  he  demanded  of  Maj.  Robert  An
derson  the  evacuation  of  Fort  Sumter.  He  was
afterward  made  colonel  of  the  12th  North  Carolina
regiment,  and  in  18(52  was  promoted  brigadier-
general  in  the  Confederate  army.  He  was  wounded
and  taken  prisoner  at  Seven  Pines,  and  after  his
exchange  fought  at  Gettysburg,  where  he  com
manded  Heth's  division  on  the  third  day,  took
part  in  Pickett's  charge,  and  was  wounded  again.
On  the  retreat  into  Virginia  that  followed  he  was
surprised  by  a  small  party  of  National  cavalry
and  received  wounds  from  which  he  died  three
days  later.  Gen.  Pettigrew  published  "  Spain  and
the  Spaniards"  (1859).  See  '•  Memorial  of  J.  John
ston  Pettigrew,"  by  William  H.  Trescott  (Charles
ton,  S.  C.,  1870).

PETTIXUILL,  Amos,  clergyman,  b.  in  Salem,
N.  H..  9  Aug.,  1780;  d.  in  Salem  Bridge,  Conn.,  17
Aug.,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1805,
and  was  pastor  of  Methodist  Episcopal  churches  in
X"ew  York  and  Connecticut  from  his  ordination  in
1807  until  his  death.  He  was  also  a  successful
teacher.  He  published  a  "  View  of  the  Heavens  "
(1826);  "The  Spirit  of  Methodism"  (1829):  some
occasional  sermons,  and  a  rotary  celestial  map.  See
a  memoir  of  him  by  Luther  Hart  (Boston.  1832).

PETTIXGILL,  John  Hancock,  theologian,  b.
in  Manchester,  Vt.,  11  May,  1815;  d.  in  Xew  Haven,
Conn.,  27  Feb..  1887.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1837,  and  subsequently  at  Union  theological  semi
nary,  Xew  York  city."  Until  1843  Mr.  Pettingill
was  a  professor  in  the  Institution  for  the  deaf  and
dumb  in  the  latter  city,  but  in  that  year  he  ac
cepted  a  call  to  be  pastor  of  a  Congregational
church  at  South  Dennis,  Mass.,  where  he  remained
until  1847.  He  was  subsequently  called  to  Essex
and  Westbrook.  Conn.,  and  Saxonville,  Mass.,  be
sides  acting  as  district  secretary  of  the  American
board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  missions,  resid
ing  in  that  capacity  at  Albany,  X.  Y.,  from  1852
till  1860.  In  1856-7  he  visited'the  missions  of  the
American  board  in  Servia,  Turkey,  and  Greece,  and
between  18(56  and  1872  he  travelled  extensively
over  northern  Europe  in  behalf  of  the  American
seamen's  friend  society,  residing  at  Antwerp  as  its
chaplain.  During  the  prevalence  of  the  cholera  in
1866  he  devoted  much  time  to  the  care  of  the  sick,
and  was  publicly  thanked  by  the  Belgian  govern
ment.  On  returning  to  this  country,  he  resided  for
a  time  in  Xew  York  city,  afterward  removing  to
Philadelphia,  where  the  most  of  his  books  and
essays  were  written.  Mr.  Pettingill  was  chiefly
known  as  a  writer  on  theological  subjects,  and  as
the  original  American  advocate  of  what  is  known
as  conditional  immortality,  holding  that  only  those
who  believe  in  Christ  receive  the  gift  of  eternal


life,  and  maintaining  that  this  doctrine  was  held
by  the  early  Christian  church  until  it  was  cor
rupted  by  Platonism.  These  views  not  meeting
with  recognition  or  acceptance,  Mr.  Pettingill  suf
fered  from  financial  embarrassment,  religious  per
secution,  and  even  social  ostracism.  He  at  first
experienced  great  difficulty  in  getting  his  books
printed,  but  lived  to  see  them  widely  circulated.
They  have  been  translated  into  German,  Italian,
and  other  European  languages.  In  England  their
sale  has  been  very  large,  and  their  author  was  there
regarded  as  one  of  the  brightest  and  most  vigorous
writers  on  his  side  of  the  controversy.  At  the  time
of  his  death  Mr.  Pettingill  had  a  large  following,
and  was  in  constant  receipt  of  letters  from  friends
and  converts  both  in  this  country  and  in  Europe.
Besides  contributing  largely  to  periodical  litera
ture,  he  wrote  "  The  Homiletical  Index,"  a  refer
ence-book  for  clergymen  (Xew  York.  1877) ;  "  The
Theological  Trilemrna"  (1878);  "Platonism  versus
Christianity"  and  "  Bible  Terminology  "  (Philadel
phia.  1881)";  "Life  Everlasting"  (1882'):  "The  Un
speakable  Gift "  (Yarmouth,  Me.,  1884) ;  and
"  Views  and  Reviews  in  Eschatology  "  (1887).

PETTIT,  Charles,  patriot,  b.  near  Amwell,
X.  J.,  in  1736;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4  Sept.,  1806.
His  ancestors,  who  were  Huguenots,  emigrated  to
this  country  about  the  middle  of  the  17th  century
and  settled"  in  southern
Xew  York.  Charles  re
ceived  a  classical  educa
tion,  and  early  in  life  mar
ried  the  sister  of  Joseph
Reed,  to  which  connection
he  owed  his  first  success.
When  Reed  was  appoint
ed  provincial  surrogate  by
Gov.  William  Franklin  in
1767,  Pettit  was  commis
sioned  surrogate  under
him,  and  succeeded  Reed
as  deputy  secretary  of  the
province  in  1769.  He  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in
1770.  became  a  councillor
in  1773,  was  secretary  to
Gov.  Franklin  in  1772-'4,
and  went  with  him  when
he  removed  from  Burling
ton  to  South  Amboy;  but  when  Franklin  adhered
to  the  royal  cause,  Pettit  took  sides  with  the  people,
and  rendered  valuable  service  in  behalf  of  the  colo
nies.  He  retained  the  secretaryship  under  Gov.
William  Livingston,  and  held  office  until  1778,  when
he  resigned  to  become  assistant  quartermaster-gen
eral  of  the  Continental  army.  He  declined  the  post
of  quartermaster-general  to  succeed  Gen.  Xathanael
Greene,  and  served  in  his  original  office  until  the
close  of  the  war.  He  then  settled  in  Philadelphia
as  a  merchant,  and  while  a  member  of  the  legislature
in  1783-'4  originated  the  funding  system  of  Penn
sylvania.  He  was  chosen  by  that  body  a  delegate
to  congress  in  April,  1785,  and  served  till  1787.
He  was  a  powerful  advocate  of  the  adoption  of  the
Federal  constitution  in  the  general  convention  in
Harrisburg,  and  in  1791  was  chosen  to  present  to
congress  the  claims  of  Pennsylvania  for  expendi
tures  during  the  Revolution.  He  was  a  trustee  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1791-1802,  an
active  member  of  the  American  philosophical  so
ciety,  and  in  1796-'8  and  in  1799-1806  was  presi
dent  of  the  Insurance  company  of  Xorth  America.
— His  grandson,  Thomas  McKean,  lawyer,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  26  Dec..  1797;  d.  there".  30  May,
1853,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsyl-


748


PETTIT


PEYTON


vania  in  1815,  and  admitted  to  the  Philadelphia
bar,  became  city  solicitor  in  1820,  and  shortly  after
ward  was  deputy  state  attorney-general.  He  was
in  the  legislature  in  1830-'!,  associate  judge  of  the
district  court  in  1832-'o,  and  its  presiding  judge
for  the  next  ten  years,  subsequently  declining  fur
ther  service.  He  then  resumed  practice,  but  was
soon  afterward  appointed  by  President  Polk  U  S.
attorney  for  the  eastern  district  of  Pennsylvania,
and  in  March,  1853,  became  director  of  the  U.  S.
mint,  which  post  he  held  for  a  month  before  his
death.  He  was  a  vice-president  of  the  Historical
society  of  Pennsylvania.  Mr.  Pettit  was  active  in
the  service  of  the  Democratic  party  in  Pennsyl
vania,  and  promoted  the  election  of  Gen.  Jackson
to  the  presidency.  He  assisted  Thomas  Sergeant  to
prepare  "  The  Common  Law  Reports  of  England  "
(Philadelphia,  1822);  and  published  numerous  ad
dresses,  which  include  discourses  before  the  His
torical  society  of  Pennsylvania  (Philadelphia.  1828) ;
the  Philomathean  society  of  Pennsylvania  (1830) ;
and  "Memoirs  of  Robert  Vaux"  in  the  "Memo
rials"  of  the  former  body.

PETTIT,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Sackett's  Harbor,
N.  Y.,  24  June,  1807;  d.  in  Lafayette,  Ind.,  17  Jan.,
1877.  After  receiving  a  classical  education,  and
studying  law.  he  removed  to  Indiana  in  1831  and
settled  in  Lafayette.  He  soon  became  active  in
state  politics,  was  in  the  legislature,  and  served  as
U.  S.  district  attorney.  He  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  Democrat  in  1842,  served  two  terms,  and  was
in  the  State  constitutional  convention  in  1850.  He
was  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1853-'5,  having
been  chosen  to  fill  the  unexpired  term  of  Jaines
Whitcomb,  was  subsequently  circuit  judge,  and  in
1859  he  was  appointed  by  President  Buchanan  chief
justice  of  Kansas.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Chi
cago  Democratic  convention  in  1864,  and.  return
ing  to  Indiana,  became  judge  of  the  state  supreme
court  in  1870.  He  was  renominated  in  1870,  but
his  name  was  withdrawn  before  the  election.

PEYRI,  Antonio,  missionary,  b.  in  Catalonia,
Spain,  in  17(55;  d.  after  1832.  He  became  a  mem
ber  of  the  order  of  St.  Francis  at  an  early  age,  and
was  sent  to  the  American  mission  soon  after  his
ordination.  He  built  a  cottage  on  the  banks  of
San  Luis  river,  Cal.,  obtained  some  cattle  and  a
few  converted  Indians  from  other  missions,  and
began  the  foundation  of  the  mission  of  San  Luis
Rev  de  Francia  among  the  Quechi  Indians,  which,
under  his  care,  became  the  greatest  in  California.
He  was  a  skilful  architect,  and  built  a  church  of
great  size  and  beauty.  His  Indian  converts  num
bered  3,500,  scattered  over  twenty  ranches,  and
were  noted  for  their  industry  and  prosperity.  Here
he  had  lived  among  his  flock  for  twenty-six  years
when  the  arrival  of  Echandia,  the  first  governor
that  was  sent  to  California  by  the  republic  of
Mexico,  changed  the  condition  of  the  missions.
The  new  governor  was  a  bitter  enemy  to  them,  and
interfered  continually  with  the  missionaries.  Father
Peyri  resisted  his  attempts  to  deprive  the  Indians
of  their  rights,  and  became  obnoxious  to  the  Mexi
can  authorities.  He  was  at  length  driven  from  the
mission  in  1832,  and  in  a  few  years  many  of  the
Indians  sank  back  into  barbarism.  When  he  left
them  they  had  00,000  head  of  cattle,  and  raised
13,000  bushels  of  grain  a  year,  while  many  of
them  were  blacksmiths,  carpenters,  and  mechan
ics.  Father  Peyri  went  to  Mexico,  where  he  lived
for  some  time,  but  finally  returned  to  Spain,  and
appears  to  have  resided  in  Barcelona.  See  Alvin
Robinson's  "Life  in  California"  (New  York,  1846)
and  John  R.  Bartlett's  "Personal  Narrative"  (2
vols.,  New  York,  1854).


PEYTON,  Balie,  congressman,  b.  in  Sumner
county,  Tenn.,  26  Nov.,  1803:  d.  in  Gallatin,  Tenn.,
19  Aug.,  1878.  He  was  educated  at  a  private  school,
adopted  the  profession  of  law,  was  a  representa
tive  to  congress  in
1833-'7,  having  been
elected  as  a  Whig,
and  in  1837  removed
to  Louisiana,  where
he  was  U.  S.  district-
attorney.  In  1841
he  declined  the  sec
retaryship  of  war.
During  the  Mexican
war  he  served  on  the
staff  of  Gen.  Will
iam  J.  Worth.  He
was  U.  S.  minister  •  ,
to  Chili  in  1849-'53,
and  subsequently


sumed  practice. He

returned  to  Tennessee  in  1859,  was  a  presidential
elector  in  1860  on  the  Bell-Everett  ticket,  and  was
an  ardent  Unionist,  throughout  the  war  consist
ently  throwing  his  influence  on  the  national  side.
He  resumed  his  profession  in  1865,  served  in  the
state  senate,  and  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for
congress.  His  brother,  JOSEPH  H.,  was  a  member
of  congress  in  1843- '5.  —  His  cousin,  Ephraim
Geoffrey,  jurist,  b.  near  Elizabethtown,  Ky.,  29
Oct.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Jackson,  Miss.,  5  Sept.,  1876,  was
educated  at  Gallatin  college,  Tenn.,  but  left  before
graduation  to  emigrate  to  Mississippi.  After  many
hardships  he  found  employment  in  a  printing-
office,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1824.  He  subsequently  settled  in  Gallatin,  Miss.,
served  one  term  in  the  legislature,  became  district
attorney  in  1839,  and  after  several  years  returned
to  his  profession.  He  bitterly  opposed  secession,
and  after  the  civil  war  joined  the  Republican  party.
He  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  state  supreme
court  in  1868,  and  was  chief  justice  from  1870  till
his  retirement  in  1875.

PEYTON,  John  Howe,  lawyer,  b.  in  Stafford
county,  Va.,  3  April,  1778;  d.  in  Staunton,  Va.,  3
April,  1847.  His  ancestor.  John,  emigrated  to  this
country  in  1644,  and  settled  in  Westmoreland
county,  Va.  John  Howe  was  graduated  at  Prince
ton  in  1797,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1799,  estab
lishing  a  reputation  as  a  criminal  lawyer.  He
served  many  years  in  the  legislature,  and  was  the
author  of  a  series  of  resolutions  upon  the  attitude
of  the  state  of  Pennsylvania  with  reference  to  an
amendment  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United
States  that  provided  a  tribunal  for  settling  dis
putes  between  the  state  and  the  federal  judiciary.
Of  these  resolutions  Daniel  Webster  said :  "  They
are  so  conclusive  of  the  question  that  they  admit
of  no  further  discussion."  He  was  prosecuting  at
torney  for  the  Augusta  district  in  1808-'9.  Dur
ing  the  war  of  1812  he  was  commissioned  major
of  militia,  and  served  till  1815.  He  then  became
deputy  U.  S.  attorney  for  the  western  district  of
Virginia,  and  declined  a  nomination  to  congress  in
1820  and  a  judgeship  in  1824.  He  was  in  the  state
senate  in  1830-'44,  at  which  date  he  fell  from  his
horse  and  received  an  injury  that  compelled  his  re
tirement  from  public  life.  In  1840  he  was  appointed
a  visitor  to  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  and  he  wrote
the  report  of  that  year.  For  ten  years  he  was  presi
dent  of  the  board  of  directors  of  the  Western
Virginia  lunatic  asylum.  Mr.  Peyton  was  an  active
member  of  the  Whig  party,  opposed  nullification


PEZET


PFEIFFER


749


and  secession,  and  favored  all  schemes  for  internal
improvements and public  education. He  won  a
brilliant  reputation  at  the  bar. See  a  sketch  of  his
life  by  John  T.  L.  Preston  (Boston.  Mass.,  1881).
— His  son,  John  Lewis,  author,  b.  in  Staunton.
Va..  15  Sept.,  1824.  was  graduated  at  the  law  de
partment  of  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1845.
He  declined  the  office  of  district  attorney  for  Utah
in  1855.  and  settled  in  Chicago  about  that  time.
In  1861  he  was  appointed  an  agent  in  Europe  for
the  southern  Confederacy,  and  ran  the  blockade  of
Charleston, S. C. He remained  abroad many
years,  engaged  in  literary  pursuits,  and  returned
in  1880. His  publications  include  "  A  Statistical
View  of  the  State  of  Illinois "  (Chicago, 1854) ;
"Pacific  Railway  Communication,  and  the  Trade
of  China  "  (1854) :  "  The  American  Crisis  "  (London.  [
1866) ; "  Over the Alleghanies, and Across  the  ,
Prairies  "  (1870) ;  "  The  Adventures  of  my  Grand-  !
father  "  (1871) ;  "  Memoir  of  William  M.  Peyton  "
(1872) ; "  Memorials  of  Nature  and  Art "  (1881) ;  ;
and  "  History  of  Augusta  County.  Va."  (Staunton,  |
Va.,  1882). He  also  edited,  with  an  introduction,  ;
the  "  Glasse  of  Time  "  (Xew  York,  1886).

PEZET,  Juan  Antonio  (pay-thet),  president  of
Peru,  b.  in  Lima  in  1806. He  was  the  son  of  a  •
French  physician,  and  entered  the  military  college  ;
of  San  Carlos,  but  when  Gen.  San  Martin  with  the  ;
Chilian  army  obliged  the  viceroy  to  evacuate  the  \
capital  in  1821.  young  Pezet  joined  the  patriots  ;
and  took  part  in  the  campaign  as  sub-lieutenant,  i
In  1823  he  was  promoted  lieutenant,  and  under  i
Bolivar  and  Sucre  fought  at  Junin  and  Ayacucho.
He  became  captain  in  1828.  and  in  1835,  as  colonel
of  the  battalion  of  sharp-shooters  of  Rimac,  took
part  in  the  rising  of  Gamarra  against  the  Peru-
Bolivian  confederation  and  was  banished. After  j
his  return  he  was  appointed  prefect  of  Lima,  took  |
part  in  the  revolution  of  Vivanco  in  1843,  and  was
appointed  inspector-general  of  the  army  and  pre-  j
feet  of  La  Libertad. He  was  wounded  and  taken
prisoner  in  1844.  but  was  pardoned,  became  prefect
of  Arequipa  in  1847,  and  in  1848  was  made  general-
in-chief  of  the  division  of  the  south,  and  prefect  of
Moquegua. Under  President  Echenique,  in  1853,
he  was  appointed  inspector-general  arid  chief  of
the  Army  of  the  South  during  the  invasion  of  Bo
livia. In  1859  he  was  secretary  of  war,  and  in  1862
lie  was  elected  vice-president  with  Gen.  San  Roman,
assuming  the  executive  at  the  death  of  the  latter  in
1863. During  his  administration the  difficulties
with  Spain  began  which  culminated  in  the  occu
pation  of  the  Chinchas  islands,  14  April,  1864,  but
when  he  signed  a  treaty  with  the  Spaniards,  on  27
Jan.,  1865,  which  was  considered  derogatory  to  the
national  honor,  a  general  uprising  followed,  so  that
on  7  July.  1865,  he  delivered  the  executive  to  the
vice-president,  and  retired  to  Europe.  He  retumed
in  1871.  and  has  since  lived  in  retirement.

PEZUELA,  Jacobo  de  la,  Cuban  historian,  b.
in  Cadiz.  Spain,  in  1811 ;  d.  in  Havana.  Cuba,  in
1882.  He  entered  the  army,  and  in  1842  went  to
Cuba  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Valdes,  governor-
general  of  the  island.  He  filled  various  public
offices,  and  gave  a  great  part  of  his  time  to  histori
cal,  geographical,  and  statistical  researches  con
cerning  Cuba,  the  result  of  which  was  the  publi
cation  of  "  Ensayo  historico  de  la  Isla  de  Culm"
(Havana,  1844) ;  "  Diccionario  Historico  Geografico
de  Cuba"  (4  vols.,  Madrid,  1863);  "  Historia  de
Cuba"  (1868);  and  '•  Xecesidades  de  Cuba"  (1869).

PEZUELA,  Joaquin  de  la  (pay-thoo-ay'-lah),
viceroy  of  Peru,  b.  in  Xaval,  Aragon,  in  1761 ;  d.
in  Madrid  in  1830.  He  received  his  military  in
struction  in  the  artillery  college  of  Segovia,  served


in  the  siege  of  Gibraltar  in  1782,  and  in  1793  in
Xavarre  against  the  French  revolutionary  army.
In  1805,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  he  went  to  Peru
as  sub-inspector  of  artillery,  and  as  such  he  directed
in  1808  the  building  of  a  powder-factory,  which
did  good  service  during  the  revolution.  He  was
promoted  brigadier  in  1811,  and  in  1813  major-
general  and  commander-in-chief.  Immediately  he
began  active  operations  against  the  invading  "Ar
gentine  army  under  Gen.  Belgrano.  whom  he  de
feated  at  Villapujio  on  1  Oct.,  and  at  Ayohuma  on
14  Nov.  In  the  following  year  he  invaded  Argen
tine  territory,  and  on  29  Nov.,  1815,  routed  Gen.
Rondeau  at  Sipisipe,  in  reward  for  which  he  was
promoted  lieutenant-general  and  provisional  vice
roy.  In  April,  1816,  he  gave  up  his  command,  and
on  7  July  took  charge  of  the  government  at  Lima.
He  was  appointed  full  viceroy,  20  March,  1817,  and
in  December  of  the  same  year  sent  an  unsuccessful
expedition  under  his  son-in-law,  Mariano  Osorio
(q.  v.\  for  the  reconquest  of  Chili.  In  1820  Pezuela
began  to  prepare  means  of  defence  against  the
threatened  invasion  of  Peru  by  San  Martin's  army.
The  latter  landed  in  Pisco  on  8  Sept.,  and  Pezuela
sent  a  commission  to  negotiate  a  treaty.  After  the
viceroy  had  proclaimed  the  liberal  constitution  of
Cadiz  on  17  Sept..  a  meeting  of  commissioners  took
place  at  Miraflores,  but  the  negotiations  produced
no  result,  and  on  4  Oct.  hostilities  were  opened.
Pezuela's  position  in  Lima  soon  became  critical,
but  he  refused  to  evacuate  the  capital  as  he  was
advised  by  a  council  of  war,  and  sent  Gen.  Canterac
against  the  enemy ;  but  Gen.  La  Serna,  who  had
been  appointed  general-in-chief,  refused  to  co-oper
ate.  There  was  a  mutiny  on  29  Jan.,  1821,  and
Pezuela  was  forced  by  his  officers  to  resign  the
viceroyalty  in  favor  of  La  Serna.  On  29  June  of
that  year  he  left  Callao  in  an  American  schooner
for  Rio  Janeiro,  and  returned  thence  to  Spain.  He
was  granted  the  title  of  Marquis  of  Villuma,  and
appointed  in  1825  captain-general  of  Xew  Castile,
which  post  he  held  at  his  death. — His  son,  Juan
Manuel,  Marquis  Pezuela  and  Count  of  Cheste,
Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Lima,  Peru,  in  May,  1810,
went  with  his  parents  to  Spain  and  entered  the  army
as  a  boy.  He  took  part  in  the  first  Carlist  war  on
the  side  of  the  government,  and  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  in  1838.  He  was  captain-general
of  Andalusia,  governor-general  of  Porto  Rico,  was
brevetted  lieutenant-general,  and  in  1853  appointed
governor-general  of  the  island  of  Cuba.  During
his  administration  he  took  stringent  measures  to
suppress  the  slave-trade,  and  this,  together  with  his
well-known  anti-slavery  ideas  and  his  measures  for
the  relief  of  the  negro  "race  in  Cuba,  made  him  an
object  of  hate  to  the  slave-owners,  at  whose  re
quest  the  home  government  recalled  him  in  De
cember,  1854.  While  he  was  in  Havana,  Pezuela
began  a  metrical  translation  of  Dante's  "  Divina
Commedia"  and  Tasso's  *•  Gerusalemme  Liberata,"
which  afterward  were  published  at  Madrid.  There
he  published  also  his  translation  of  Ariosto's  "Or
lando  Furioso  "  and  Camoen's  '•  Lusiadas,"  and  a
lyrical  poem,  "El  Cerco  de  Zamora."  He  is  now
president  of  the  Spanish  Academia  de  la  lengua.

PFEIFFER.  Carl,  architect,  b.  in  Brunswick,
Germany,  in  1834:  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C.,  27
April.  1888.  He  came  to  the  United  States  at  the
age  of  sixteen,  and,  after  residing  several  years  in
the  west,  established  himself  as  an  architect  in  Xew
York  city  in  1864.  and  became  eminent.  Among  the
Xew  York  buildings  that  were  designed  or  erected
by  him  are  the  Church  of  the  Messiah,  the  Roosevelt
and  City  hospitals,  the  Berkshire  apartment-house,
!  and  the"  Fifth  avenue  Presbyterian  church.


750


PFEIPFER


PHELPS


PFEIFFER,  Lndwlg1  Georgr,  German  physi
cian,  b.  in  Cassel,  4  July,  1805;  d.  there,  2  Oct.,
1877.  He  received  his  education  in  Cassel,  and
became  professor  of  pathology  there  in  1828.  He
served  as  surgeon-major  in  Cracow  during  the  Po
lish  rebellion  of  1831,  travelled  afterward  through
Europe  for  the  interest  of  science,  and  was  given
in  1839  by  the  Bavarian  government  a  mission  to
study  the  natural  history  of  the  West  Indies.  He
remained  for  more  than  two  years  in  Cuba,  then
visited  most  of  the  West  India  islands,  and  on  his
return  to  Europe  published  "  Monographia  Heliceo-
rum  viventium"  (4  vols.,  Leipsic,  1847-'8;  supple
ment,  1853);  "Symbolaad  historian!  heliceorum"
(3  vols.,  Cassel,  1851-'6) ;  and  other  works.

PHELAN,  John  Dennis,  jurist,  b.  in  New
Brunswick,  X.  J.,  23  March,  1809;  d.  in  Birming
ham,  Ala.,  9  Sept.,  1879.  He  removed  with  his
parents  to  Huntsville,  Ala.,  in  1818,  was  gradu
ated  at  the  University  of  Nashville  in  1828,  stud
ied  law  in  Virginia,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
of  that  state,  but  returned  to  Alabama  in  1830.
He  became  editor  of  the  Huntsville  ''  Democrat,"
was  in  the  legislature  in  1833-'5,  attorney-general
of  the  state  in  1836,  speaker  of  the  house  in  1839,
and  a  judge  of  the  circuit  court  in  1841-'ol.  He
was  then  elevated  to  the  supreme  bench,  held  office
for  two  years,  and  again  in  1863-'5.  In  the  inter
val  he  was  clerk  to  that  body,  and  subsequently  in
1805-'8.  He  became  professor  of  law  in  the  Uni
versity  of  the  south  in  1809,  holding  the  chair  till
his  death. — His  brother.  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Hunts-
ville,  Ala.,  20  Nov.,  1820 ;  d.  in  Memphis,  Tenn.,
17  May,  1873,  was  apprenticed  as  a  printer  to  the
•'  Democrat "  at  fourteen  years  of  age,  subsequently
edited  the  "  Flag  of  the  Union,"  a  Democratic
organ,  and  became  state  printer  in  1843.  He  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840.  removed  to  Mississippi
in  1849,  and  settled  in  Aberdeen,  where  he  soon
established  a  large  practice.  He  was  elected  to  the
state  senate  in  1860,  and  on  the  organization  of  the
Confederate  congress  was  chosen  senator,  and  was
an  active  member  of  that  body.  In  1863  he  intro
duced  what  was  called  the  "  Crucial  bill  of  the
Confederacy,"  which  was  a  proposition  to  impress
all  the  cotton  in  the  south,  paying  for  it  in  Con
federate  bonds,  and  using  it  as  a' basis  for  a  foreign
loan.  The  bill  passed  the  house,  but  was  defeated
in  the  senate,  and  created  so  much  indignation
among  the  planters  that  Mr.  Phelan  was  burned  in
effigy,  and  defeated  in  the  next  canvass.  He  then
served  as  judge-advocate  till  the  end  of  the  war,
when  he  settled  in  Memphis,  and  practised  law  in
that  city  until  his  death. — James's  son,  James,
congressman,  b.  in  Aberdeen,  Miss.,  7  Dec.,  1856,
leaving  the  Kentucky  military  institute  in  1874,
went  abroad,  studied  in  the  University  of  Leipsic,
and  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  there.  He  re
turned  to  the  United  States  in  1878,  began  the
practice  of  law  in  Memphis,  and  in  1886  was  elect
ed  to  congress  as  a  Democrat.  In  1884  he  became
proprietor  of  the  "Memphis  Avalanche."  He  is
the  author  of  "Philip  Massinger  and  his  Plays"
(Leipsic,  1878)  and  "  History  of  Tennessee,  'the
Making  of  a  State"  (Boston,  1888).

PHELAN,  Michael,  billiard-player,  b.  in  County
Kilkenny,  Ireland,  in  1816;  d.  in  New  York  city,
21  Oct..  1871.  He  came  to  this  country  at  an  early
age,  apprenticed  himself  to  a  silve'rsmith  and
jeweler,  and  during  his  leisure  hours  played  billiards
until  he  became  an  expert.  In  1851  he  gave  exhi
bitions  in  Ireland  for  the  benefit  of  the  suffering
poor.  On  his  return  he  opened  rooms  on  Broad
way,  New  York  city,  subsequently  removed  to  San
Francisco,  Cal.,  and,  after  a  series  of  unfortunate


speculations,  re-established  himself  in  New  York
and  became  a  manufacturer  of  billiard-tables  with
Hugh  W.  Collender.  The  game  was  introduced
into  private  houses  through  improved  applications
of  his  manufacture.  He  took  an  active  part  in
many  billiard  contests,  and  was  uniformly  success
ful.  His  death  was  the  result  of  injuries  that  he
received  in  attempting  to  rescue  his  grandson  from
drowning.  He  published  "  Rules  for  the  Govern
ment  of  the  Game  of  Billiards"  (New  York,  1850).

PHELAN,  Richard,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  nearBally-
raggett,  County  Kilkenny,  Ireland,  1  Jan.,  1825.
He  was  educated  by  private  tutors,  and  in  the  Col
lege  of  St. .  Kyran,  Kilkenny.  In  1850  he  accom
panied  Bishop  Michael  O'Connor  to  the  United
States,  and  entered  St.  Mary's  theological  seminary,
Baltimore.  He  was  ordained  priest  in  Pittsbufg
on  4  May,  1854,  and  sent  to  Indiana  county,  where
he  remained  until  he  was  summoned  to  Pittsburg.
He  remained  for  three  years  attached  to  the  cathe
dral  of  this  city,  and  was  then  appointed  pastor  of
Freeport.  In  1868  he  became  pastor  of  St.  Peter's
church.  Alleglmny.  He  built  a  new  church  at  a
cost  of  more  than  $150.000,  and  also  completed  the
schools  that  his  predecessor  had  begun.  During
the  absence  of  Bishop  Twigg  in  18.81  ho  was  ap
pointed  administrator  of  the  dioceses  of  Pittsburg
and  Alleghany,  and  he  was  subsequently  made
vicar-general.  In  1885  he  was  nominated  coadjutor
to  the  two  sees,  with  right  of  succession,  and  on  2
Aug.  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Cebeyra  in  parlibu».
lie  resides  in  Allcghany,  and,  owing  to  the  feeble
health  of  Bishop  Twigg,  practically  administers
the  affairs  of  the  two  dioceses.

PHELPS,  Abner,  physician,  b.  in  Belchertown,
Mass.,  5  Sept.,  1779  ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass..  24  Feb.,
1873.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1806,  and
at  the  medical  departments  of  Brown  in  1813  and
Yale  in  1814.  After  practising  for  several  years  in
Reading,  Mass.,  he  removed  to  Boston  in  1810.
While  in  college  he  read  an  account  of  the  railways
in  the  quarries  in  Wales  that  led  him  to  believe
that  such  roads  were  practicable  for  common
travel.  As  early  as  1808  he  endeavored  to  bring  a
proposition  before  the  legislature  for  building  a
railroad  between  Boston  and  Albany,  but  the  sug
gestion  was  not  acted  upon,  and  in  1820,  while  he
was  a  member  of  the  house,  he  made  the  first  mo
tion  of  that  character  that  was  offered  before  a
legislative  body  in  the  United  States.  Having
prepared  an  able  report,  he  secured  the  appoint
ment  of  commissioners,  and  the  undertaking  of
surveys,  and  much  of  the  construction  was  done
under  his  personal  supervision  and  at  his  expense.
He  published  "  The  Crucifixion  of  Christ,  anatomi
cally  Considered"  (Boston,  1853).

PHELPS,  Almira  Hart  Lincoln,  educator,  b.
in  Berlin,  Conn..  15  July,  1193:  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  15  July,  1884.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Sam
uel  Hart,  and  was  a  lineal  descendant  of  Thomas
Hooker,  the  founder  of  Hartford,  Conn.  She  was
educated  by  her  sister,  Mrs.  Emma  Willard  (q.  v.\
taught  in  her  father's  house  at  nineteen  years  of
age,  and  subsequently  was  in  charge  of  the  Sandy
Hill,  N.  Y.,  female  academy.  She  married  in  1817
Samuel  Lincoln,  of  Hartford,  who  died  in  1823,
and  she  soon  afterward  became  associated  with
Mrs.  Willard  in  the  Female  seminary  in  Troy,
N.  Y.  In  1831  she  married  Judge  John  Phelps,  of
Vermont.  She  took  charge  of  a  seminary  in  West
Chester,  Pa.,  in  1838,  and  afterward  taught  in
Rahway,  N.  J.  In  1841,  on  the  invitation  of  the
bishop  of  Maryland,  she  became  associated  with
her  husband  in  the  charge  of  the  Patapsco  insti
tute,  a  diocesan  female  school,  which  soon  attained


PHELPS


PHELPS


751


a  high  reputation.  After  the  death  of  Judge
Phelps  in  1847  she  conducted  it  alone  for  the  suc
ceeding  eight  years.  She  then  settled  in  Balti
more,  and  spent  her  latter  years  in  retirement,
She  was  the  second  woman  that  was  elected  a
member  of  the  American  association  for  the  ad
vancement  of  science,  and  read  before  that  body  in

1866  a  paper  on  the  religious  and  scientific  char
acter  and  writings  of  Edward  Hitchcock,  and  in
1878  one  on  the  "  Infidel  Tendencies  of  Modern  Sci
ence." Her  educational  works,  which  had  a  large
sale,  were  devoted  mainly  to  natural  science. They
include  "  Familiar  Lectures  on  Botany  "  (Hartford,
Conn., 1829); "Dictionary  of  Chemistry"  (Xew
York,  1830);  "Botany  for  Beginners"  (Hartford,
1831);  "Geology  for  Beginners"  (Brattleborough,
Vt.,  1832) ;  "  Female  Student,  or  Fireside  Friend  "
(Boston, 1833; London, 1838); "Chemistry  for
Beginners  "  (Xew  York,  1834) ;  "  Lectures  on  Nat
ural  Philosophy"  (1835);  "Lectures  on  Chemis
try  "(1837);  "  Natural  Philosophy  for  Beginners"
(1837) ;  and  "  Hours  with  My  Pupils  "  (1869). She
also  wrote  the  tales  "  Caroline  Westerly  "  (1833) ;
"  Ida  Xorinan"  (Baltimore,  1850);  and  "Christian
Households"  (I860) ;  and  edited  "  Our  Country  in
its  Relation to  the  Past,  Present,  and  Future "
(Baltimore,  1868),  for  the  benefit  of  the  Christian
and sanitary commissions. — Mrs. Phelps's  son,
Charles  Edward,  jurist,  b.  in  Guilford,  Vt.,  1
May,  1833,  removed  with  his  parents  to  Pennsyl
vania  in  1837,  and  to  Maryland  in  1841. He  was
graduated  at Princeton  in  1852,  and  at  Harvard
law-school  in  1854. After  a  tour  abroad  he  set
tled in practice in Hosmrd county  and subse
quently  in  Baltimore,  Md. He  joined  the  National
army in 1862 as lieutenant-colonel of the 7th
Maryland regiment,  soon  afterward  became  colo
nel,  was  severely  wounded  at  Spottsylvania,  while
temporarily commanding  a division of  the  5th
army  corps,  and  was  captured. He  served  in  the
Wilderness  campaign,  and  in 1864  received the
brevet  of  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  for  "  gal
lant  conduct  in  the  battle  of  Spottsylvania." He
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Unionist  in  1864.  re-
elected  in  1866,  and  at  the  expiration  of  his  term
resumed the  practice of law in Baltimore. In

1867  he  declined  the  appointment  of  judge  of  the
Maryland  court  of  appeals. In  1877  he  raised  a
volunteer  regiment  to  serve  during  the  riots  of
that  summer. In  1882  he  was  elected  associate
judge  of  the  superior  court  of  Baltimore,  for  a  term
of  fifteen  years. Judge  Phelps  has  been  for  many
years  a  member  of  the  American  society  for  the  ad
vancement  of  science,  was  president  of  the  board  of
school  commissioners  of  Baltimore,  is  president  of
the  Alumni  association  of  Princeton,  and  professor
of  equity  in  the  Baltimore  law-school. In  1880,  at
the request  of the  Maryland  Historical society,
he  delivered  the  address  in  commemoration  of  the
150th  anniversary  of  the  foundation  of  Baltimore.
— Her  stepson,  John  Wolcott,  soldier,  b.  in  Guil
ford,  Vt.,  13  Nov.,  1813 ; d.  there,  2  Feb.,  1885.
Five  of  his  paternal  ancestors  were  lawyers  of  high
standing. His  father,  John  Phelps.  was  a  lawyer.
and  a  lineal  descendant  of  William  Phelps  (q.  v.),
The  son  was  graduated  at  the  U.S.  military  academy
in  1836  with  the  rank  of  2d  lieutenant. He  served
against  the  Creeks  and  Seminoles,  and  was  engaged
in  the  action  at  Locha  Hutchee  in  1838. He  was
put  in  charge  of  the  emigration  to  the  west  of  the
Cherokee  Indians  in  that  year. At  the  beginning
of  the  Mexican  war  he  led  a  company,  which  was
under  his  command  for  two  years. During  that
time  he  was  in  the  battles  of  Vera  Cruz,  Contreras,
and Churubusco. For  gallant conduct he was


brevetted  captain,  but  declined  to  accept  the  nomi
nal  promotion  until  1850,  when  he  received  the
full  commission.  In  1852  he  obtained  a  leave  of
absence,  and  spent  a  year  in  Europe,  and  on  his
return  wrote  and  published,  anonymously,  a  volume
entitled  "  Sibylline  Leaves,  or  Thoughts'upon  visit
ing  a  Heathen  Temple  "  (Brattleboro,  Vt.,  1853).  In
1859  Capt.  Phelps  resigned  his  commission  after
serving  for  some  time  in  the  Utah  expedition,  and
returned  to  Brattleboro.  Vt.,  where  he  had  pre
viously  taken  up  his  residence.  He  had  completed
nearly  twenty-three  years  of  continuous  military
service.  Much  of  the  intervening  period  between
his  leaving  the  army  and  the  civil  war  was  spent  in
writing  articles  against  the  aggression  of  the  slave
power.  He  volunteered  his  services  to  lead  the  1st
company  of  Vermont  volunteers  in  1861,  which,  to
gether  with  one  regiment  from  Massachusetts  and
one  from  Xew  York  under  his  command,  took  pos
session  of  the  mouth  of  James  river.  Thence  he  was
ordered  to  the  southwest,  where  he  occupied  Ship
island  with  a  XTew  England  brigade.  On  17  May,
1861,  he  was  made  brigadier-general  in  the  volun
teer  service.  Subsequently  he  took  part  in  the  re-
duction  of  New  Orleans.  At  that  time  he  con
ceived  the  idea  of  organizing  slaves  as  soldiers,  but
he  was  in  advance  of  the  time,  and  the  government
commander  bade  him  cease  and  set  them  at  work
instead.  As  he  could  not  conscientiously  do  the
latter,  he  returned  to  Vermont,  after  resigning  his
commission  on  21  Aug.,  1862.  During  his  occupa
tion  of  Ship  island  he  issued  a  manifesto  "  to  the
loyal  citizens  of  the  southwest,"  in  which  he  set
forth  his  views  on  slavery.  He  declined  a  major-
general's  commission  when  the  negroes  were  finally
armed,  and  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  in  Brattleboro,
Vt,  His  acquirements  as  a  scholar  and  linguist
were  considerable.  He  became  vice-president  of
the  Vermont  historical  society  in  1863,  and  presi
dent  of  the  Vermont  state  teachers'  association  in
1865.  He  was  active  until  his  death  in  the  anti-
masonic  movement,  and  was  the  candidate  for
president  of  the  American  party  in  1880.  He  con
tributed  largely  to  current  literature,  published  a
volume  entitled  "Good  Behavior."  intended  as  a
text-book  for  schools,  which  was  adopted  in  western
cities  (Brattleboro,  Vt.,  1880) ;  and  a  "  History  of
Madagascar  "  (New  York,  1884) :  and  the  "  Fables  of
Florian '' (1888) ;  and  translated  from  the  French
Lucien  de  la  Hodde's  "  Cradle  of  Rebellions  "  (1864).
See  his  Memoir  by  Cecil  H.  C.  Howard  (Brattle
boro,  Vt.,  1887).

PHELPS,  Amos  Augustus,  clergyman,  b.  in
Farmington.  Conn.,  in  1805 ;  d.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,
12  Sept.,  1847.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale'in  1826,
and  at  the  divinity-school  there  in  1830,  was  pastor
of  Congregational  churches  in  Hopkinton  and  Bos
ton,  Mass.,  in  1831-'4,  became  agent  of  the  Massa
chusetts  anti-slavery  society  at  the  latter  date,  and
was  pastor  of  the  Free  church,  and  subsequently  of
the  Maverick  church,  Boston,  in  1839-'45.  He  also
edited  the  "  Emancipation,"  and  was  secretary  of
the  American  anti-slavery  society  for  several  years.
He  published  "  Lectures  on  Slavery  and  its  Rem
edy  "  (Boston,  1834);  "Book  of "  the  Sabbath"
(1841);  "Letters  to  Dr.  Bacon  and  to  Dr.  Stowe  "
(1842);  and  numerous  pamphlets  on  slavery.

PHELPS,  Anson  Greene,  merchant,  b.  in  Sims-
bury,  Conn..  12  March,  1781 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
30  Nov..  1853.  He  learned  the  trade  of  a  saddler,
and  established  himself  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  with  a
branch  business  in  Charleston,  S.  C.  In  1815  he
became  a  dealer  in  tin  plate  and  heavy  metals  in
New  York  city.  Having  accumulated  a  large  for
tune,  partly  by  investments  in  real  estate,  he  de-


752


PIIELPS


PHELPS


voted  himself  to  benevolent  enterprises,  and  was
president  of  the  New  York  blind  asylum,  the
American  board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  mis
sions,  and  the  New  York  branch  of  the  Coloniza
tion  society.  He  bequeathed  $371,000  to  charitable
institutions,  and  placed  in  the  hands  of  his  only
son  a  fund  of  $100,000,  the  interest  of  which  was
to  be  distributed  in  charity.  In  addition  to  large
legacies  to  his  twenty-four  grandchildren,  he  in
trusted  $0.000  to  each  to  be  used  in  charity.

PHELPS,  Austin,  clergyman,  b.  in  West
Brookfield,  Mass.,  7  Jan.,  1820.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1837,  studied
at  Andover  and  Union  theological  seminaries,  was
pastor  of  Pine  street  Congregational  church  in
Boston  in  1842-'8,  and  professor  of  sacred  rhetoric
in  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1848-'79.  He
was  elected  its  president  in  1809,  and  since  1879  has
been  professor  emeritus.  Amherst  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1856.  His  publications  include
"The  Still  Hour"  (Boston,  Edinburgh,  and  Lon
don,  1858);  "The  New  Birth "  (1867) ;  "The  Soli
tude  of  Christ"  (1808) ;  "Studies  of  the  Old  Testa
ment  "(1878);  "The  Theory  of  Preaching "  (New
York.  1881) ;  "  Men  and  Books  "  (1882) ;  "  My  Port
folio  "  (1882) ;  "  English  Style  in  Public  Discourse  "
(1883) ;  "  My  Study,  and  Other  Essays  "  (1880) :  and
"  My  Note-Book,  or  Fragmentary  Studies  in  The
ology  "  (in  preparation).  He  also  published  va
rious  sermons  and  addresses  from  1848  till  18G8,
among  which  are  "  Election  Sermon  to  the  Govern
ment  of  Massachusetts"  (Boston,  18G1),  and  edited
"  Hymns  and  Choirs"  with  Prof.  Edwards  A.  Park
and  Rev.  David  Furber  (New  York,  1859),  and
"  Sabbath  II ynm-Book "  with  Prof.  Park  and
Dr.  Lowell  Mason  (1859).— His  wife,  Elizabeth
Stuart,  author,  b.  in  Andover,  Mass.,  13  Aug.,
1815 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  30  Nov.,  1852,  was  the
eldest  daughter  of  Prof.  Moses  Stuart,  of  Andover,
and  early  attained  popularity  by  her  sketches  of
New  England  life,  in  a  series  of  tales  that  were
published  under  the  pen-name  of  "  II.  Trusta,"  an
anagram  of  her  maiden  name.  In  1842  she  married
Mr.  Phelps.  She  possessed  much  imaginative  tal
ent,  and  gave  promise  of  a  successful  literary
career,  which  was  terminated  by  her  early  death.
Her  publications  include  "The  Kitty  Brown  Se
ries"  (Philadelphia,  1850);  "  Sunny  Side,"  a  story
descriptive  of  life  in  a  country  parsonage,  which
had  previously  been  rejected  by  several  publishers,
but  reached  a  sale  of  100,000  copies  in  one  year
(Andover,  1851;  republished  in  Edinburgh):  "A
Peep  at  Number  Five"  (1851);  and  the  "Angel
over  the  Right  Shoulder"  (1851).  After  her  death
appeared  "  The  Tell-Tale  "  (1852) :  "  Little  Mary  "
(Boston,  1853);  and  "The  Last  Sheaf  from  Sunny
Side,"  with  a  memorial  of  the  author  by  her  hus
band  (1853). — Their  daughter,  Elizabeth  Stuart,
author,  b.  in  Andover,  Mass.,  13  Aug.,  1844,  began
to  write  for  the  press  at  thirteen  years  of  age.
Much  of  her  life  has  been  devoted  to  benevolent
work  in  her  native  town,  to  the  advancement  of
women,  and  to  temperance  and  kindred  reforms.
She  delivered  a  course  of  lectures  before  the  stu
dents  of  Boston  university  in  1876.  Her  publica
tions  include  "Ellen's  Idol"  (Boston,  18G4);  "Up
Hill  "  (1865) ;  "  The  Tiny  Series  "  (4  vols.,  1866-'9) ;
"The  Gypsy  Series"  (4  vols.,  1866-'9) ;  "Mercy
Gliddon's  Work"  (1866);  "I  Don't  Know  How"
(1867) ;  "  The  Gates  Ajar,"  which  reached  a  twenti
eth  edition  within  the  year  of  its  publication  (1868):
"  Men,  Women,  and  G'hosts  "  (1809) ;  "  Hedged  In  "
(1870);  "The  Silent  Partner "(1870);  "TheTrotty
Book  "(1870);  "Trotty's  Wedding  Tour  "  (1873)";
"  What  to  Wear"  (1873) ;  " The  Good  Aim  Series "


(1874);  "Poetic  Studies,"  poems  (1875);  "The
Story  of  Avis  "  (1877) ;  "  My  Cousin  and  1 "  (1879) ;
"Old  Maids' Paradise"  (1879);  "Sealed  Orders"
(1879);  "Friends,  a  Duet"  (1881);  "Beyond  the
Gates"  (1883);  "  Dr.  Zay"  (1884);  "The  Gates  Be
tween  "  (1887):  and  "Jack  the  Fisherman  "  (1887).

PHELPS,  John,  merchant,  b.  in  Worcester,
Mass.,  in  1824;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  24  April,
1886.  He  removed  to  New  Orleans  in  his  youth
and  engaged  in  business,  in  which  he  was  success
ful.  He  served  in  the  Confederate  army  during
the  civil  war,  subsequently  established  the  cotton
house  of  John  Phelps  and  Co.,  and  took  an  active
part  in  the  political  and  commercial  life  of  New
Orleans.  He  was  four  times  president  of  the  city
cotton  exchange,  president  and  director  of  numer
ous  banking  houses  and  insurance  companies,  and
of  the  "  Picayune  "  and  the  "  Times  Democrat  "
newspaper  companies.

PHELPS,  Oliver,  merchant,  b.  in  Windsor,
Conn.,  in  1749  ;  d.  in  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  21  Feb.,
1809.  He  was  educated  to  become  a  merchant,
spent  his  early  years  in  Suffield,  Conn.,  and  sub
sequently  accumulated  a  fortune  in  Granville,
Mass.  During  the  Revolution  he  served  in  the
commissary  department.  In  1787,  with  Nathan
iel  Gorham,  he  purchased  from  the  state  of  Massa
chusetts  a  tract  of  2,200,000  acres  in  New  York
state,  which  is  now  comprised  in  the  counties  of
Ontario  and  Steuben.  This  was  part  of  a  region
of  about  6,000,000  acres  that  New  York  ceded  to
Massachusetts  at  the  Hartford  convention  of  1780.
The  purchasers  were  to  pay  for  the  land  in  "  con
solidated  securities"  of  that  time,  but  a  rise  in
their  price  prevented  a  complete  fulfilment  of  the
agreement,  and  Mr.  Phelps  gave  up  a  part  of  the
land.  He  opened  a  land  office  in  Canandaigua,
N.  Y.,  the  next  year,  which  is  said  to  have  been
the  first  in  this  country,  and  invented  a  system  of
townships  and  ranges  that,  with  modifications,
has  since  been  generally  adopted  in  surveying
U.  S.  government  lands.  In  1795,  with  Will
iam  Hart  and  several  others,  he  bought  of  Con
necticut  the  tract  of  land  in  Ohio  that  was
known  as  the  "  Western  reserve,"  which  comprised
3.300,000  acres.  He  afterward  returned  to  Canan
daigua,  was  a  member  of  congress  in  1803-'5,  and
was  a  judge  of  the  circuit  court.  He  was  active  in
the  projection  of  the  Erie  canal  and  the  Welland
canal,  and  built  steamboats  on  Cayuga  lake.

PHELPS,  Royal,  merchant,  b.  in  Sempronius,
N.  Y.,  30  March,  1809 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  30
June,  1884.  He  received  a  common-school  educa
tion,  and  early  in  life  went  to  St.  Croix,  W.  I.,
where  he  entered  the  office  of  a  merchant.  He  be
gan  business, on  his  own  account  in  1840,  estab
lished  houses  in  Puerto  Cabello  and  Laguayra,  and
in  1847  settled  in  New  York  city  as  one  of  the  firm
of  Maitland,  Phelps  and  Co.,  where  he  acquired  a
large  fortune.  Although  a  life-long  Democrat,  he
was  active  in  support  of  the  National  cause  at  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war.  He  was  a  member  of
the  New  York  legislature  in  1802-'3,  vice-president
of  the  chamber  of  commerce  from  1855  till  his
resignation  in  1859,  and  president  of  the  New  York
society  for  the  protection  of  game  in  1867-'77.  He
contributed  largely  by  his  influence  and  money  to
the  erection  of  the  statue  of  Washington  that
stands  in  front  of  the  sub-treasury  building  in  Wall
street.  His  only  daughter  became  the  wife  of
John  Lee  Carroll",  of  Maryland.

PHELPS,  Samuel  Sliethar,  jurist,  b.  in  Litch-
field,  Conn.,  13  May,  1793;  d.  in  Middlebury,  Vt.,
25  March,  1855.  His  grandfather,  Edward,  a  de
scendant  of  William  Phelps,  the  colonist,  was  a


PHELPS


PHELPS


753


representative  to  the  general  court  of  Connecticut
in  1744-'5,  and  a  large  landholder.  His  father.
John,  was  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution  and  a  wealthy
citizen  of  Litchfield.  The  son  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1811,  studied  law  in  Litchfield,  and  in
1812  settled  in  Middlebury,  Vt.,  and  began  the
practice  of  his  profession.  During  the  war  with
Great  Britain  he  warmly  espoused  the  cause  of  the
government,  was  drafted  to  serve  on  the  Canadian
frontier,  and  subsequently  became  a  paymaster.
He  resumed  practice  in  18i4,  was  in  the  legislature
in  1821-'32,  by  which  body  he  was  elected  to  the
supreme  court  in  the  latter  year,  and  held  office
until  he  was  chosen  to  the  LT.  S.  senate  as  a  Demo
crat  in  1838,  serving  by  re-election  in  1839-'51,  and
by  appointment  in  1853-'4  to  succeed  William  Up-
ham,  deceased.  He  opposed  the  abolition  move
ments  in  his  state,  favored  slavery  in  able  speeches
on  the  Clayton  compromise  and  on  the  anti-slavery
resolutions  of  Vermont,  and  when  he  was  a  mem
ber  of  the  congressional  committee  of  1850  that
was  appointed  to  discuss  the  slavery  question,  dis
sented  from  the  report  that  was  presented  by
Henry  Clay.  At  the  end  of  his  senatorial  career
he  returned  to  practice,  and  continued  to  hold  the
first  rank  at  the  bar  until  his  death.  He  published
an  ''Address  on  the  Council  of  Censors"  (Middle-
bury,  Vt.,  1827);  "Speech  on  the  Tariff  Bill"
(Washington,  D.  C.,  1844);  and  "Speech  on  the
Oregon  Question"  (1848).  His  published  judicial
decisions,  in  the  Vermont  reports,  are  much  es
teemed.  —  His  son,  Edward  John,  lawyer,  b.  in
Middlebury,  Vt.,  11  July,  1822,  was  graduated  at
Middlebury  college  in  1840,  studied  law  with  Hora
tio  Seymour  after  spending  a  year  at  Yale  law-

school,  and  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  at
Middlebury  in  1843.
He  began  practice
there,  but  in  1845
removed  to  Bur
lington,  Vt.  From
30  Sept..  1851,  till
the  close  of  Presi
dent  Fillmore's  ad
ministration  he  was
the  2d  comptroller
of  the  treasury.  He
was  a  delegate  to
the  Vermont  con-
VO-^.  ^  o  stitutional  conven-

-  \YvOJ\rva  tion  of  1870.  In
1877  he  presided
over  the  ceremonies
for  the  centennial  celebration  of  the  battle  of  Ben-
nington.  In  1880  he  delivered  before  the  students
of  the  medical  department  of  the  University  of
Vermont  a  course  of  lectures  on  medical  jurispru
dence  that  were  published  in  book-form.  He  was
president  of  the  American  bar  association  in  1880,
and  in  the  same  year  he  was  the  unsuccessful  can
didate  of  the  Democratic  party  for  governor  of
Vermont.  In  1881  he  became  professor  of  law  at
Yale,  which  chair  he  still  (1888)  holds,  and  in  1882
he  lectured  to  the  law  students  of  Boston  univer
sity  on  constitutional  law.  He  was  appointed  by
President  Cleveland,  in  April,  1885,  minister  to
Great  Britain.  Middlebury  college  conferred  on
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1870.  Among  Prof.
Phelps's  published  addresses  is  one  that  he  made
before  the  American  bar  association  on  "  Chief-
Justice  Marshall  and  the  Constitutional  Law  of  his
Time  "  (Philadelphia,  1879).  In  1888  he  contributed
to  the  "  Nineteenth  Century  "  a  series  of  articles  on
"  The  Constitution  of  the  United  States."


\


PHELPS,  Sylvanns  Dryden,  clergyman,  b.  in
Suffield,  Conn.,  15  May,  1816.  He  was  graduated
at  Brown  in  1844,  and  at  the  Yale  theological
seminary  in  1847.  In  1846  he  became  pastor  of
the  1st  "Baptist  church  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  in
which  relation  he  remained  for  twenty-eight  years.
Since  1876  he  has  been  editor  of  trie  "  Christian
Secretary  "  at  Hartford,  Conn.  In  1854  he  received
from  Madison  university  the  honorary  degree  of
D.  D.  He  has  published  several  works :  "  Eloquence
of  Nature,  and  other  Poems"  (Hartford,  1842);
"Sunlight  and  Hearthlight,"  poems  (New  York,
1855):  "The  Holy  Land"  (1863;  republished  as
'•  Bible  Lands,"  Chicago,  1869) ;  "  The  Poet's  Song
for  the  Heart  and  House  "  (1869) ;  and  "  Sermons
in  the  Four  Quarters  of  the  Globe"  (1886).

PHELPS,  Thomas  Stowell.  naval  officer.  b..in
Buckfield,  Me.,  2  Nov.,  1822.  He  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1846,  became  lieu
tenant  in  1855,  served  in  the  Indian  war  in  Wash
ington  territory  in  that  year  and  in  1856,  and  in
the  Paraguay  expedition  in  1858-'9.  At  the  be
ginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  attached  to  the
expedition  that  was  sent  to  the  relief  of  Fort  Sum-
ter,  and  in  June,  1861,  was  selected  to  co-operate
with  the  army  and  navy  in  preparing  a  survey  of
Potomac  river.  He  was  transferred  in  September
to  the  steamer  "  Corwin  "  for  secret  service,  ex
amined  five  of  the  inlets  of  North  Carolina,  sur
veyed  and  buoyed  Hatteras  inlet  for  the  introduc
tion  of  expeditions  into  the  interior  waters  of  that
state,  skirmished  with  Confederate  gun-boats  in
Pamlico  sound,  and  engaged  the  gim-boat  "Curlew  "
in  Hatteras  inlet  on  14  Nov.  He  was  in  three  en
gagements  with  Yorktown  and  Gloucester  point
batteries,  caused  the  destruction  of  two  of  the
enemy's  vessels,  and  thwarted  that  of  White  House
bridge  in  April  and  May,  1862.  At  the  battle  of
West  Point  he  prevented  the  conjunction  of  a  large
force  of  Confederates  with  the  main  army.  He
became  lieutenant-commander  in  July,  1862,  was
subsequently  engaged  chiefly  in  surveying  and
examining  dangers  in  the  way  of  blockades  and
\  transports,  and  commanded  the  "Juniata"  in  the
Fort  Fisher  fights  in  1865.  He  was  commissioned
commander  in  that  year,  captain  in  1871,  commo
dore  in  1879,  and  rear-admiral  in  1884,  and  retired
in  1885.  He  has  published  "  Reminiscences  of
Washington  Territory  "  (New  York.  1882).

PHELPS,  William,  colonist,  b.  in  Tewkesbury,
England,  19  Aug..  1599;  d.  in  Windsor,  Conn.,  14
July,  1672.  He  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1630,
and  founded  the  town  of  Windsor  in  1635.  He
was  a  respected  and  important  member  of  the
colony,  a  justice  of  the  first  court  that  was  held
in  Connecticut,  foreman  of  the  first  grand  jury,
and  a  magistrate  for  many  years.  He  was  also  a
devout  and  rigid  Puritan,  and  active  in  the  affairs
of  the  church.  Dr.  Henry  R.  Stiles  says  of  him  :  "  He
helped  to  lay  broad  and  deep  the  foundations  of
the  Republic." — His  descendant  of  the  sixth  gener
ation,  Noah,  patriot,  b.  in  Simsbury.  Conn..  22  Jan.,
1740 ;  d.  there,  4  March,  1809,  was  a  landholder,
and  captain  of  militia  previous  to  the  Revolution.
He  early  engaged  in  the  patriot  cause,  and  with
Gen.  Samuel  H.  Parsons  (q.  v.)  projected,  and  sub
sequently  participated  in,  the  secret  expedition  to
capture  Fort  Ticonderoga  in  April,  1775.  When
the  volunteers  composing  the  expedition  had
reached  Lake  Champlain,  Capt.  Phelps  crossed  it
in  a  boat,  and  entered  the  fort  as  a  spy.  He  as
certained  the  construction  and  strength  of  the
defences  and  number  of  the  garrison,  and  left  the
next  day  in  an  open  boat,  under  full  fire  of  the
guns,  but  without  awakening  suspicion.  By  this


754


PIIELPS


PHELPS


service  the  Americans  were  enabled  to  make  the
attack.  lie  was  commissioned  captain  in  1777  and
colonel  in  1779.  The  next  year  he  was  employed  in
the  important  service  of  transferring  cannon  from
Salisbury,  Conn.,  to  Boston,  Mass.,  for  the  use  of  the
ship  "  Defiance."  After  the  war  he  acted  for  many
years  in  the  legislature,  and  was  brigadier-general
of  Connecticut  militia. — His  son,  Kl  islia.  congress
man,  b.  in  Simsbury,  Conn.,  7  Nov.,  1779;  d.
there,  18  April,  1847,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1800,  studied  at  Litchfield  law-school,  and  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  of  Hartford  county  in  1803.  He
served  in  both  branches  of  the  legislature,  and  was
speaker  of  the  lower  house  In  1831  and  again  in
1829.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat
in  1818,  served  one  term,  and  was  again  a  member
of  that  body  in  1825-'9.  He  was  state  comptroller
in  1830-'4,  and  a  commissioner  to  revise  and  codify
the  state  laws  in  1835. — Elisha's  son,  John  Smith,
statesman,  b.  in  Simsbury,  Conn.,  22  Dec.,  1814  ;  d.
in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  20  Nov.,  1886,  was  graduated
at  Trinity  in  1832,  studied  law  under  his  father,
practised  a  short  time  in  his  native  state,  and  in  1837
emigrated  to  Missouri,  near  Springfield,  Greene
county.  He  served  in  the  legislature  in  1840,  the
next  year  was  appointed  brigade  inspector  of  mili
tia,  and  in  1844  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo
crat,  serving  continuously  till  1863.  He  was  chair
man  of  the  committee  of  ways  and  means  for  seven
terms,  and  was  a  member  of  the  select  committee
of  thirty-three  on  the  rebellious  states.  During  his
congressional  career  he  achieved  a  national  reputa
tion  for  ability  in  debate,  sagacity,  and  prudence,
and  exercised  a  pacific  influence  on  contending
factions.  He  was  appointed  colonel  of  U.  S.
volunteers  in  1861,  and  brigadier-general  of  vol
unteers  in  July,  1862,  the  same  year  serving  as
military  governor  of  Arkansas.  He  was  a  dele
gate  to  the  National  union  convention  in  1866,  and
the  next  year  a  commissioner  to  settle  the  claims
of  Indiana.  He  was  governor  of  Missouri  in
1876-'82,  declined  to  serve  on  the  tariff  commis
sion,  and  did  not  again  accept  any  public  office. —
Noah's  grandson,  Noah  Amherst,  lawyer,  b.  in
Simsbury,  Conn.,  16  Oct.,  1788;  d.  there,  26  Aug.,
1872,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1808,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1811.  He  was  a
member  of  both  houses  of  the  legislature  for  several
terms,  and  secretary  of  the  state  of  Connecticut
in  1843-'4.  He  published  "  History  of  Simsbury,
Granby,  and  Canton,  Conn.,  from  1642  to  1645 "
(Hartford,  1845) ;  and  "  History  of  the  Copper  Mines
and  Newgate  Prison  at  Granby  "  (1845). — Another
son  of  the  first  Noah,  (*ny  Kowland,  capitalist,  b.
in  Simsbury,  Conn.,  in  April,  1802 ;  d.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  18  March,  1869,  was  graduated  at  the
medical  department  of  Yale  in  1825,  and  began
practice  in  New  York  city,  but  retired  on  account
of  the  failure  of  his  health.  In  1846  he  founded
the  Connecticut  mutual  life-insurance  company,
and  he  was  its  president  until  his  death.  He  origi
nated  the  return-dividend  system,  in  contradistinc
tion  to  the  reversionary  plan,  and  was  the  author
of  that  plan  which  permits  the  policy-holder  to  an
ticipate  the  presumed  surplus  by  an  increased  in
surance  from  the  beginning. — Another  son  of  the
first  Noah,  George  Dwight,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Simsbury,  Conn.,  in  1803  ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  31
Aug.,  1872,  accumulated  a  large  fortune  in  busi
ness  in  New  York  city,  and  was  active  in  benevo
lent  enterprises,  contributing  large  sums  annually
to  religious  and  charitable  institutions.  He  was
the  first  president  of  the  New  York  young  men's
society,  which  was  founded  in  1831,  and  was  the  pre
cursor  of  the  Young  men's  Christian  association.


PHELPS,  William  Franklin,  educator,  b.  in
Auburn,  N.  Y.,  15  Feb.,  1822.  He  was  graduated
at  Union  college  in  1852,  elected  principal  of  the
state  normal  school  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  in  1855,  the
next  year  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  Farnum  pre
paratory  school  in  Beverly,  N.  J.,  and  held  botli
offices  until  .1864,  when  he  became  president  of  the
first  state  normal  school  in  Winona,  Minn.  He
held  this  office  till  1876,  was  then  president  of  the
Wisconsin  normal  school  for  two  years,  returned
to  Minnesota  in  1879,  and  was  superintendent
of  public  schools  there  in  1879-'81  and  1883-'5.
He  was  president  of  the  American  normal  school
association  from  1856  till  I860,  of  the  National
educational  convention,  and  vice-president  of  the
first  international  conference  of  educators  in  1876.
In  1878  he  received  a  silver  medal  from  the  Paris
exposition  as  an  educational  collaborator  and  au
thor.  He  edited  the  "  Chicago  Educational  Week-
lv  "  in  1867-'8,  and  has  published  "  The  Teachers'
Hand-Book"  (New  York,  1875);  five  brochures  for
the  Chautauqua  circle,  entitled  "  What  is  Educa
tion  1 "  "  Socrates,"  "  Horace  Mann,"  "  Pestalozzi
and  Froebel,"  and  "John  Sturm";  and  reports
of  the  New  Jersey  and  Minnesota  normal  schools.

PHELPS,  William  Walter,  congressman,  b.
in  New  York  city,  24  Aug.,  1839.  The  first  of  his
ancestors  in  this  country  was  William  Phelps,  a
brother  of  the  John  Phelps  that  was  Oliver  Crom
well's  private  secretary.  He  came  to  this  country
in  1630,  and  settled  near  Simsbury,  Conn.  The
descendants  long  remained  there,  and  one  of  them,
William  Walter's  great-grandfather,  represented
the  town  for  thirty  consecutive  terms  in  the  Con
necticut  assembly.  The  grandson,  John  J.  Phelps,
was  the  first  to  leave  Simsbury  for  New  York,
where  he  made  a  fortune  in  business,  organized
and  became  president  of  the  Delaware,  Lacka-
wanna,  and  Western  railroad,  and  left  the  bulk  of
his  property  to  his  only  son,  William  Walter.  The
latter  was  early  sent  to  Yale,  and,  in  spite  of  an
affection  of  the  eyes,  which  took  him  out  of  col
lege  for  a  year,  and  for  another  year  prevented
him  from  reading,  he  won  many  honors  and  stood
second  in  his  class  at  his  graduation  in  1860.  In
the  Columbia  law-school  he  secured  the  valedictory
in  1863.  Entering  active  practice,  he  became
counsel  for  the  Rock  Island  and  the  Delaware,
Lackawanna,  and  Western  railroads,  the  United
States  trust  company,  the  City  bank,  and  other
corporations,  before  he  was  thirty  years  old.  Gov.
Reuben  E.  Feriton  offered  him  a  judgeship,  which
he  declined,  and  in  1869  the  death  of  his  father
compelled  him  to  retire  from  practice  and  give  his
time  to  the  management  of  the  estate  and  the
trusts  connected  with  it.  Retaining  an  active  in
terest  in  his  college,  he  led  in  the  "  Young  Yale  "
movement,  which  resulted  in  giving  the  alumni  a
share  in  the  government  of  the  institution.  He
was  at  once  elected  to  the  board  of  trustees  by  a
heavy  vote,  and  by  successive  elections  has  been
kept  there  ever  since.  He  had  always  taken  a  keen
interest  in  politics,  and  was  an  enthusiastic  Re
publican  during  the  civil  war.  He  had  been  the
successful  counsel  for  his  sister's  father-in-law,
William  E.  Dodge,  in  his  noted  contest  for  a  seat
in  the  house  of  representatives,  and  in  1872  he  was
himself  elected  to  the  house  from  the  New  Jersey
district  where  his  country-place  was  situated.  He
took  high  rank  as  a  debater  almost  at  once,  and
became  noted  as  one  of  the  few  men  to  whom  the
house  would  always  listen.  He  discussed,  in  his
first  term,  questions  of  banking  and  currency,  the
franking  privilege,  the  Pacific  mail  subsidy,  and
the  government  of  the  southern  states.  The  house


PHELPS


PHILIP


755


sent  him,  with  Clarkson  X.  Potter  and  Gov.  Charles
Poster,  to  New  Orleans  to  investigate  the  outbreak
of  the  White  league  against  the  Louisiana  legisla
ture,  which  had  led  Gen.  Sheridan  to  denounce  the
league  as  "  banditti."  Both  parties  finally  agreed
to  abide  by  the  committee's  decision,  and  the  legis
lature  was  organized  in  accordance  with  their  re
port.  From  the  outset  of  his  congressional  career
Mr.  Phelps  showed  independence,  and  on  one  party
measure,  the  so-called  Civil  rights  bill,  which,  as  a
lawyer,  he  declared  unconstitutional  (as  the  courts
subsequently  held),  he  voted  against  the  Republi
cans.  This  vote  cost  him  his  re-election.  He  was
defeated  by  seven  votes  in  a  district  that  he  had
previously  carried  by  2,715.  He  had  become
warmly  attached  to  James  G.  Elaine,  then  speaker
of  the  house,  and  was  his  ardent  supporter  in  the
presidential  conventions  of  1876,  1880,  and  1884.
In  the  last  two  National  conventions  he  was  a
delegate-at-large  from  New  Jersey.  In  1881  Presi
dent  Garfield  sent  him  as  U.  S.  minister  to  Aus
tria,  where  his  familiarity  with  the  language  and
customs  of  the  country,  his  liberal  mode  of  life,
and  his  intense  Americanism  made  him  a  valuable
representative.  On  the  change  of  administration
he  at  once  tendered  his  resignation,  and  finally  re
tired  in  August,  1882.  He  was  immediately  elected
to  congress  again  from  his  old  district,  and  has
continued  to  serve  through  the  48th,  49th,  and  50th
congresses,  always  running  hundreds,  and  some
times  thousands,  ahead  of  his  ticket.  His  assign
ment  on  committees  required  him  to  give  much
attention  to  foreign  affairs,  but  he  has  also  taken
special  interest  in  discussions  on  the  tariff,  the
merchant  marine,  and  the  congressional  library.
Among  his  more  notable  speeches,  separately  pub
lished,  are  those  on  the  Franking  Privilege,  24
Feb:,  1874;  Sound  Currency,  1  April,  1874;  the
Civil  Rights  Bill,  4  Feb.,  1875 ;  Fitz-John  Porter's
Case,  1  Feb.,  1884;  the  Laskar  Resolutions.  19
March,  1884;  an  oration  before  Gen.  Grant  and
his  cabinet  at  a  Grand  army  reunion  in  Paterson,
N.  J.,  on  "  The  Dangers  of  War,"  and  one  at  Mount
Holly,  N.  J.,  on  Decoration  day,  1886,  on  "  The
Dangers  of  Peace " ;  a  tariff  address  before  the
Agricultural  society  of  New  Jersey,  5  Feb.,  1884,
and  one  on  Congress  before  the  New  England  so
ciety,  New  York,  22  Dec.,  1886.  He  is  a  regent  of
the  Smithsonian  institution  and  a  fellow  of  the
corporation  of  Yale  college,  was  vice-president  of
the  Yale  alumni  association,  president  of  the  Co
lumbia  law-school  alumni  association,  and  a  found
er  of  the  Union  league  and  University  clubs.

PHELPS,  William  Wines,  Mormon  elder,  b.
in  Hanover,  Morris  co.,  N.  J.,  17  Feb.,  1792;  d.  in
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  7  March,  1872.  He  was  self-
educated,  but  acquired  a  large  amount  of  miscel
laneous  information,  and  became  a  good  oriental
scholar.  He  edited  the  "  Ontario  Phenix "  in
Canandaigua,  N.Y.,  in  1820,  and,  removing  to  Mis
souri,  established  the  first  morning  paper  at  Inde
pendence,  Mo.,  in  1832.  He  adopted  the  Mormon
religion,  emigrated  to  Utah,  #nd  became  an  active
member  of  that  sect.  He  was  in  the  Utah  legisla
ture  in  1850-'7,  speaker  of  the  house  for  several
terms,  and  a  justice  of  the  peace.  He  became  "  As-
tromomer,  astrologist,  and  almanac-maker"  for
his  sect,  and  was  the  author  of  the  forty  signs  of
the  "  Deseret  Alphabet."  He  also  wrote  some  of  the
most  popular  hymns  in  the  Mormon  hymn-book.

PHILBRICK,  John  Dudley,  educator,  b.  in
Deerfield,  N.  H.,  27  May.  1818;  d.  in  Dunvers,
Mass.,  2  Feb.,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at  Dart
mouth  in  1842,  began  to  teach  in  Roxbury  Latin-
school,  and  two  years  later  went  to  the  English


high-school  in  Boston,  where  he  introduced  new
and  original  methods  of  instruction.  In  1847  he
was  asked  to  form  a  school  on  his  own  plans,  and
the  result  was  the  Quincy  grammar-school,  which
became  the  basis  of  a  new  system  in  Boston.  Prof.
Philbrick  became  principal  of  the  Connecticut
normal  school  in  1852,  state  superintendent  of
schools  in  1853,  and  from  1857  till  his  resignation
in  1874,  and  again  in  1876-'8,  was  superintendent
of  schools  in  Boston.  He  was  a  member  of  many
educational  bodies,  presided  over  the  Massachusetts
and  Connecticut  teachers'  association,  the  Ameri
can  institute  of  instruction,  and  the  National  edu
cation  association,  and  was  for  ten  years  a  member
of  the  Massachusetts  board  of  education.  He  was
commissioner  from  Massachusetts  to  the  inter
national  educational  exhibitions  at  Vienna  in  1873,
Philadelphia  in  1876,  and  Paris  in  1878,  and  in  the
last  year  was  made  a  chevalier  of  the  Legion  of
honor.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Bates  college  in  1872  and  that  of  D.  C.  L.  from  the
University  of  St.  Andrews,  Scotland,  in  1879.
Prof.  Philbrick  edited  the  "  Connecticut  Common-
School  Journal "  in  1854-'6,  and  the  ''Massachu
setts  Teacher,"  was  a  popular  lecturer,  and  con
tributed  largely  on  educational  subjects  to  periodi
cals.  Among  his  published  lectures  are  a  series  on
'•  School  Government "  (1848)  and  one  on  "  Charac
teristics  of  the  True  Teacher  "  (1850),  both  delivered
before  the  American  institute  of  instruction,  and
he  was  also  the  author  of  several  text-books.

PHILES,  George  Philip,  bibliographer,  b.  in
Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  15  April,  1828.  Pie  was  educated  at
Ithaca  academy  and  the  classical  institute  of  Dr.
August  Maasberg,  Gottingen,  and  has  resided  in
New  York  city  since  1854,  engaged  as  a  bookseller
and  publisher.  Dartmouth  gave  him  the  degree
of  M.  A.  in  1858.  Mr.  Philes  is  a  fine  linguist  and
a  high  authority  on  American  bibliography.  He
has  contributed  to  literary  journals  under  the
pen-name  of  "  Paulus  Silentiarius,"  edited  "  The
Philobiblion"  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1862-'3),  and  as
sisted  in  preparing  the  "Bibliotheca  Americana
Vetustissima,"  compiled  by  Henry  Harrisse  (1866).
He  has  also  issued  "  The  Bhagvat-Geeta,  or  Dia
logues  of  Kreeshna  and  Arjoon  "  (1867) ;  a  reprint
in  black  letter  of  the  "  Proverbes,  or  Adagies  trans
lated  from  Erasmus,"  by  Rycharde  Tauerner,  Lon
don,  1550  (1867);  "How  to  Read  a  Book  in  the
Best  Way  "  (1873) ;  "  Bibliotheca  Curiosa :  Cata
logue  of  the  Library  of  Andrew  J.  Odell."  (2  vols.,
printed  privately.  1878-'9) :  and  "  Monograph  on  the
'  First  English  Bible '  printed  in  the  United  States
of  America,"  with  fac-similes,  of  which  twenty-five
copies  were  printed  for  private  distribution  (1887).

PHILIP,  Indian  chief,  d.  near  Mount  Hope,
R.  I.,  12  Aug.,  1676.  His  original  name  was  Meta-
comet,  and  he  is  frequently  spoken  of  as  King
Philip  and  Pometacom.  His  father  was  Massasoit
(q.  r.),  and  his  domain  extended  from  Narragansett
bay  to  Massachusetts.  Several  years  before  his
death  Massasoit  took  two  of  his  sons,  Wamsutta
and  Metacomet  to  Plymouth,  and  asked  that  Eng
lish  names  be  given  them.  Thereafter  one  became
known  as  Alexander  and  the  other  as  Philip.  In
1661.  Alexander,  the  eldest,  who  succeeded  his
father  in  authority,  was  led  to  Plymouth  as  a
prisoner,  on  suspicion  of  having  hostile  designs,
and  on  the  way  suddenly  sickened  and  died  in  a
few  hours.  His  tribe  suspected  treachery,  and
maintained  that  he  had  been  poisoned.  In  1662
Metacomet,  or  Philip,  became  the  chief  of  his
tribe,  which  was  known  as  the  Wampanoags,  or
Pokanokets.  His  record  shows  him  to  have  been
brave,  sagacious,  enterprising,  and  not  without


756


PHILIP


PHILIP


traits  of  friendship  and  generosity.  At  the  outset
the  sachem  realized  the  decline  of  his  race.  He
saw  how  the  colonists  had  shrewdly  possessed
themselves  of  most  of  the  desirable  lands,  thereby
destroying  the  ancient  hunting-grounds  of  the  In
dians.  Game  was
less  plentiful,  and
the  yield  of  their
fisheries  had  be
come  diminished
by  the  superior
and  exhaustive
methods  of  the
white  man.  Be
sides  the  pestilen
tial  swamps,  the
remaining  retreats
for  the  Indians
were  little  more
than  the  present
peninsulas  of  Bris
tol  and  Tiverton,
"  most  suitable  and

convenient  for  them,"  where  they  could  be  ob
served  and  easily  controlled.  Already  partial  civili
zation  rendered  them  dependent  on  their  English
neighbors.  Muskets  and  ammunition,  blankets,  and
liquor  had  become  necessities.  When  Philip  as
sumed  the  leadership  he  formally  renewed  the  trea
ties  of  his  father,  and  for  several  years  faithfully
kept  them,  and,  although  many  of  his  tribe  were  be
coming  restless  and  discontented,  the  sachem  him
self  was  one  of  the  last  to  entertain  open  hostility.
The  principal  village  of  the  Wampanoags  was  at
Mount  Hope,  a  conical  hill  300  feet  in  height,
not  far  from  the  present  town  of  Bristol,  R.  I.
As  early  as  1665  Philip  had  gone  to  Nant  ticket,
Mass.,  to  slay  an  Indian  who  profaned  the  name
of  Massasoit,  a  retaliation  in  accordance  with  their
national  custom.  During  1670  frequent  overt  acts
and  trespasses  were  indulged  in  by  both  natives
and  foreigners.  By  this  time  the  Indians  felt  that
they  had  suffered  insupportable  injuries,  and  se
cretly  planned  a  defensive  alliance  of  all  the  New
England  tribes  against  the  encroachments  of  the
whites.  The  leaders  of  various  tribes,  number
ing  from  8,000  to  10,000  warriors,  gave  their  ad
hesion  to  this  purpose.  Meanwhile  John  Eliot,  the
apostle,  had  made  his  way  into  the  wilderness  to
the  red  men  to  preach  the  gospel.  When  Philip
lifted  the  tomahawk  there  were  more  than  400
converts,  or  so-called  "  praying  Indians,"  scattered
among  the  various  tribes,  who  held  to  the  interest
of  the  whites,  and  were,  more  or  less,  ready  to  sacri
fice  their  own  people.  Philip  and  his  Wampano
ags  withstood  all  missionary  efforts,  and  boldly
and  openly  iterated  their  firm  belief  in  the  religion
of  their  fathers.  In  1671  the  Wampanoags  were
suspected  of  secret  plottings  against  the  whites,  and,
with  Philip  at  their  head,  their  principal  men  were
summoned  by  the  Boston  colonists  to  appear  be
fore  them  in  Taunton,  Mass.  After  some  hesita
tion  Philip  attended,  with  about  seventy  armed  war
riors  in  his  retinue.  In  his  explanation  he  said  that
the  Wampanoags  were  only  arming  defensively
against  the  Narragansetts,  and  with  four  others  he
had  signed  an  article  of  submission,  wherein  they
agreed,  as  a  token  of  permanent  peace,  that  his
tribe  should  deliver  up  their  muskets  and  ammu
nition,  and  pay  a  sum  of  money  to  defray  the  ex
penses  caused  by  their  conduct.  In  1673  one  of  the
"  praying  Indians,"  known  as  John  Sausamon,  who
had  been  educated  among  the  whites  for  a  teacher,
committed  a  misdemeanor,  and  fled  to  Philip  for
protection.  He  was  well  received,  and  eventually


became  a  kind  of  secretary  to  him.  After  a  time
the  colonists  persuaded  Sausamon  to  return  to
them,  that  they  might  learn  from  him  something
concerning  the  plans  and  purposes  of  the  Indians.
When  he  was  safely  in  their  midst,  Sausamon  said
that  the  surrounding  tribes,  with  Philip  as  their
leader,  had  made  preparations  for  war;  he  also  re
ported  their  movements,  and  repeated  many  decla
rations  that  Philip  had  made  to  his  people.  For
this  betrayal  Sausamon  was  waylaid  by  the  Wam
panoags  and  slain.  Three  Indians,  suspected  of  the
deed,  were  formally  tried  by  a  jury  of  six  persons,
half  of  whom  were  friendly  Indians,  and  convicted
and  hanged.  Up  to  this  time  Philip  had  been  pas
sive,  hesitating,  and  cautious.  But  the  tribes  had
become  aroused,  and  events  were  precipitated  before
the  chief's  plans  had  come  to  maturity.  In  1675
Philip  began  his  war  preparations  by  sending  the
women  and  children  of  his  people  from  Mount
Hope  to  the  Narragansetts  for  protection,  lie
then  warned  away  several  of  the  settlers  to  whom
he  had  become  attached,  and  bade  his  followers
swear  eternal  hostility  to  the  white  race.  The  In
dians  struck  their  first  blow  at  Swansea,  about
thirty-five  miles  south  of  Plymouth,  on  24  June,
1675.  The  attack  was  made  on  a  fast-day,  when
the  villagers  returned  from  public  worship.  About
ten  or  twelve  persons  were  killed  and  wounded.
The  colonists  acted  promptly,  volunteers  from
Massachusetts  united  with  the  men  of  Plymouth,
and  on  29  June  the  Wampanoags,  with  Philip  at
their  head,  fled  before  superior  numbers  to  the
encampment  of  their  allies,  the  Nipmucks,  in  the
interior  of  Massachusetts.  The  armed  colonists,
under  Gov.  Josiah  Winslow,  then  entered  the  terri
tory  of  the  Narragansetts,  and  extorted  a  treaty
from  Canonchet,  their  chieftain.  Terror  now
spread  throughout  the  entire  frontier,  all  men
went  armed,  and  women  and  boys  were  provided
with  weapons  for  the  defence  of  their  homes.  The
Indian  mode  of  warfare  throughout  was  one  of
ambush,  stealth,  and  surprises;  they  never  faced
the  colonists  in  the  open  field.  No  quarter  was
given,  none  was  asked.  Fire,  exposure,  and  star
vation  added  their  horrors  to  this  mode  of  warfare.
Meanwhile,  Philip,  with  about  1,500  warriors,
wandered  over  the  land  to  arouse  the  savages  to  a
general  war  of  extermination.  Then  he  made  his
way  to  the  valley  of  the  Connecticut,  spreading
destruction  from  Springfield,  Mass.,  north  to  the
Vermont  line.  Brookfield  was  fired,  Deerfield
burnt,  and  Hadley  surprised,  but  at  the  last  place
the  Indians  were  severely  checked  and  repelled  by
the  villagers  under  the  leadership  of  Col.  William
Goffe,  the  regicide  (q.  v.).  It  had  come  to  the
knowledge  of  the  colonists  that  the  Narragansetts
gave  shelter  to  the  Wampanoags  and  their  fami
lies.  The  settlers  considered  this  a  breach  of
faith,  and,  moreover,  they  had  hope  of  capturing
Philip,  who  was  reported  to  be  among  the  Narra
gansetts.  It  was  therefore  resolved  to  fall  upon
the  tribe  suddenly  and  put  them  to  the  sword.
For  this  purpose'  1,000  well-armed,  picked  men,
under  Gov.  Winslow,  were  guided  by  a  renegade
Indian  to  the  exposed  parts  of  the  fort  of  the
Narragansetts,  and  made  familiar  with  its  entrance
and  passages  for  escape.  In  December,  1675,  the
colonists  marched  through  deep  snows,  and  on  the
19th,  during  a  tempestuous  day,  surprised  the  In
dians.  Their  fort  was  on  an  elevation  of  three  or
four  acres,  surrounded  by  a  swamp,  studded  with
brambles  and  dense  underbrush,  situated  in  the
present  township  of  Kingston,  R.  I. ;  3,000  Indians,
largely  made  up  of  women  and  children,  were  sur
prised,  their  palisades  and  straw-covered  wigwams


PHILIP


PHILIPS


757


fired,  and  many  were  driven  forth  by  the  flames  to
be  either  burnt,  suffocated,  frozen,  butchered,  or
drowned,  500  wigwams  were  destroyed,  600  war
riors  killed,  1,000  women  and  children  massacred,
and  the  entire  winter  provision  of  the  tribe  re
duced  to  ashes.  Canonchet  escaped,  but  was  de
feated,  captured,  and  put  to  death  in  the  follow
ing  summer.  During  the  winter  of  1675-'6  Philip
vainly  endeavored  to  enlist  the  Mohegans  and
Mohawks  for  his  purposes,  but  he  succeeded  in
winning  over  only  some  minor  tribes  eastward  of
Massachusetts.  With  the  return  of  spring  in  1676
came  retaliation  on  the  part  of  the  Indians.  Wey-
mouth.  Groton,  Medfield,  Lancaster,  and  Marl-
borough,  Mass.,  and  Warwick  and  Providence,
R.  I.,  were  attacked  and  laid  in  ashes.  Up  to  the
month  of  July  the  Indians  vigorously  pushed  their
attacks  with  great  disaster  to  the  colonists,  and
only  little  reward  for  themselves.  Their  numbers
were  much  diminished.  When  Philip's  cause  was
evidently  becoming  a  losing  one,  some  of  the  neigh
boring  tribes  fell  away ;  others  that  had  remained
neutral  turned  their  influence  on  the  English
side.  Dissension  arose,  some  bands  surrendered.
to  avoid  starvation,  and  others  wended  their  way
to  the  distance,  intermingling  with  other  tribes  to
escape  recognition  and  punishment.  The  govern
ment  set  a  price  of  thirty  shillings  per  head  for
"  every  Indian  killed  in  battle,"  and  many  captured
Indian  women  and  children  were  sold  into  slavery
in  South  America  and  the  West  Indies.  Toward
the  last  Capt.  Benjamin  Church  (q.  ?•.),  the  noted
Indian  fighter,  headed  an  expedition  to  seek  Philip
and  destroy  the  remainder  of  the  Wampanoags.
Philip  was  hunted  from  place  to  place.  Several
peace  overtures  were  made  him,  all  of  which  he
spurned.  On  one  occasion  he  smote  an  Indian
that  came  to  him  with  a  proposal  for  submission.
During  one  of  Capt.  Church's  pursuits,  Philip
narrowly  escaped  capture,  and  was  forced  to  leave
his  squaw  and  nine-year-old  son  in  the  keeping  of
his  enemies.  In  the  usual  manner  they  were  both
sold  as  slaves  in  the  Bermuda  islands.  After  a
long  absence  the  sachem  and  some  of  his. followers
took  refuge  in  a  swamp  near  Mount  Hope.  But
one  of  their  band,  named  Alderman,  proved  treach
erous,  and  fora  consideration  exposed  their  hiding-
place.  On  12  Aug.,  1676,  the  renegade  Indian
guided  a  large  party  of  armed  men  at  midnight  to
the  camp  of  the  Wampanoags.  The  attack  was
made  promptly  while  the  Indians  were  asleep.
After  the  first  shot  or  two  Philip  was  aroused,
and  sprang  to  his  feet,  gun  in  hand,  but  on  attempt
ing  to  escape  he  was  recognized  by  an  Indian  ally
of  the  whites  and  shot  dead  as  he  stumbled  and  fell
in  the  mire.  His  body  was  dragged  forward,  and
Church  cut  off  his  head,  which  was  borne  on  the
point  of  a  spear  to  Plymouth,  where  it  remained
for  twenty  years  exposed  on  a  gibbet.  According
to  the  colonial  laws,  as  a  traitor,  his  body  was
drawn  and  quartered  on  a  day  that  was  appointed
for  public  thanksgiving.  Philip's  death  ended  the
war.  Of  the  two  once  powerful  nations  there  re
mained  only  about  50  Wampanoags  and  100  Narra-
gansetts.  Eunice  Cottrill,  who  died  on  the  Pequod
Indian  reservation.  North  Stonington,  Conn.,  7  Jan..
1888.  at  the  age  of  115  years,  was  a  great-grandchild
of  King  Philip.  See  'Benjamin  Church's  "  Enter
taining  History  of  King  Philip's  War  "  (1716 ;  with
additions  by  Samuel  G.  Drake,  Boston,  1825),  and
"  Philip  of  Pokanoket,"  in  Irving's  "  Sketch-Book."
The  incidents  of  King  Philip's  war  have  also  been
made  the  subject  of  an  historical  romance  by
Gideon  H.  Hollister,  entitled  "  Mount  Hope  "  (New
York,  1851).


PHILIPPES DE KERHALLET, Charles

Marie  (fe-leep),  French  navigator,  b.  in  Rennes,
17  Sept.,  1809;  d.  in  Paris,  16  Feb.,  1863.  He
received  his  education  in  the  naval  school  of  An-
gouleme,  became  a  midshipman  in  1825,  and  was
promoted  captain  in  1849.  He  served  in  South
America,  commanded  the  stations  of  Newfound
land  and  Cayenne,  made  soundings  in  the  Gulf
of  Mexico,  and  prepared  valuable  charts.  His
]  works  include  '"Instructions  pour  remonter  la  cote
du  Bresil  depuis  San  Luiz  de  Maranhao  jusqu'au
Para"  (Paris,  1841);  "Description  nautique  de  la
cote  du  Mexique  "  (1849) :  "  Description  nautique
de  la  cote  de  1'isthme  de  Panama  "  (1850) :  "  Con
siderations  generates  sur  FOcean  Atlantique  "
(1852) ;  "  Considerations  generates  sur  1'Ocean  Pa-
cifique  "  (1853) ;  and  "La  navigation  dans  la  mer
des  Antilles  et  le  golfe  du  Mexique  "  (1859).

PHILIPPOTEAUX,  Paul,  artist,  b.  in  Paris,
France,  27  Jan.,  1846.  He  was  educated  at  the
College  Henri  IV.  and  at  the  Ecole  des  beaux  arts
in  Paris,  also  studying  art  in  the  studios  of  his  fa
ther,  Felix  Philippoteaux,  Leon  Cogniet,  and  Alex
ander  Cabanal.  Mr.  Philippoteaux  made  numerous
sketches  for  Guizot's  "  History  of  France  "  and  for
the  works  of  Alphonse  Daudet,  Alexandre  Dumas,
and  Jules  Verne.  He  was  associated  with  his  fa
ther  in  the  production  of  the  cyclorama  of  the
"  Siege  of  Paris,"  originally  exhibited  in  Paris,  and
in  1883  he  produced  "  The  Battle  of  Gettysburg,"
which  was  shown  in  Chicago,  and  was  the  first  cy
clorama  of  the  civil  war  that  was  made.  This  was
one  of  the  earliest  paintings  of  this  description  to
be  made,  and  was  produced  by  means  of  photog
raphy.  The  locality  to  be  represented  is  first  vis
ited  and  from  an  elevated  structure  sweeping  the
entire  horizon  a  series  of  photographs  are  taken,
giving  a  continuous  view  of  the  place.  These  are
then  adjusted  by  pasting  together  the  ends  of  the
photographs,  and  the  panorama  becomes  a  cyclo
rama,  affording  an  accurate  guide  for  the  enlarge
ment  on  the  grand  scale  contemplated  for  the
painting.  After  it  is  mounted,  in  the  foreground
of  the  picture  real  grass,  shrubs,  figures,  and  other
appliances  are  skilfully  blended  with  the  middle
distance,  so  that  it  is  impossible  with  the  unaided
eye  to  determine  where  one  ends  and  the  other
begins.  He  has  made  copies  of  this  painting  for
exhibition  in  Boston,  Philadelphia,  and  New  York,
and  also  executed  the  cycloramas  of  "  Tel-el-Kebir  "
for  London,  "Plevna"  for  St.  Petersburg,  and
"  The  Falls  of  Niagara "  for  London.  Besides
making  many  other  paintings  of  historical  sub
jects,  he  was  commissioned  by  the  French  govern
ment  in  1872  to  produce  a  "  Resurrection  of  Christ,"
and  he  completed  in  1888  thirty  large  paintings
that  represent  scenes  in  the  life  of  Gen.  Grant,  and
are  on  exhibition  in  Boston.  At  present  he  is  en
gaged  on  a  small  painting  of  the  "Cavalry  Charge
of  Sheridan  "  at  Five  Forks.  This  painting  will  be
followed  by  others  illustrating  the  deeds  of  famous
generals.  His  other  paintings  include  "  Retour  d'un
pardon  "  (1864) :  "  \  annenses ''  (1865) ;  "  Marche  en
Bretagne  "  (1865);  "Scene  d'invasion"  (1866) — all
of  which  were  exhibited  at  the  Paris  salon.

PHILIPS,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  near  Hagers-
town,  Mel.,  14  June,  1823.  He  was  graduated  at
Marshall  college,  Mercersburg.  Pa.,  in  1847.  studied
theology  in  the  Seminary  of  the  Reformed  church
in  that  town,  and  was  ordained  in  1849,  becoming
in  the  same  year  pastor  at  Burkettsville.  Md.  He
has  since  held  various  charges  in  Ohio,  Pennsylva
nia,  and  Maryland.  In  1862  he  became  a  professor
in  Dickinson  college,  and  in  1866  he  accepted  a
chair  in  Muhlenberg  college,  Allentown,  Pa.  He


758


PHILIPSE


PHILLIPPS


has  published  "  Gethsemane  and  the  Cross  "  (Boones-
borough,  Md.,  1851):  "The  Christian  Home"
(Springfield,  Mass.,  1861);  and  "The  Voice  of
Blood  "  (Philadelphia,  1863),  and  has  contributed
to  various  periodicals.

PHILIPSE,  Frederick,  proprietor,  b.in  Fries-
land,  Holland,  in  1626 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  23
Dec.,  1702.  He  was  of  noble  birth,  but  came  to
New  Amsterdam  without  money  or  friends  about
1640.  He  worked  at  the  carpenter's  trade  for  sev
eral  years,  aided  in  building  the  Old  Dutch  church,
and  is  said  to  have  made  the  pulpit  with  his  own
hands.  He  finally  established  himself  in  trade,
and  from  1662  began  to  accumulate  what  subse
quently  became  vast  wealth.  Having  married  the


'M%


rich  widow  of  Peter  Rudolphus  De  Vries,  by  whom
he  acquired  large  estates,  he  engaged  in  the  East
and  \\  est  Indian  trade,  and  imported  slaves  from
Africa.  After  the  death  of  his  first  wife  he  married
Catherine,  daughter  of  Oloff  S.  Van  Cortland,  in
1690,  who  was  also  the  heir  to  a  large  fortune.
Philipse  secured  to  himself,  by  purchase  from  the
Indians  and  grants  from  the  government,  all  the
"  hunting-grounds  "  between  Spuyten  Duyvil  and
Croton  river.  In  1693  a  part  of  this  estate  was
formally  erected  into  a  manor,  by  royal  charter,
under  the  style  and  title  of  the  "  Manor  of  Philipse-
borough,"  with  the  privileges  of  lordship.  It  em
braced  the  present  town  of  Yonkers  and  150  square
miles  of  land.  In  1682  he  built  the  manor-house,
a  stately  edifice  for  its  day,  with  spacious  rooms,
and  a  broad  staircase  that  had  been  imported  from
Holland,  as  seen  in  the  accompanying  illustration.
The  house  was  situated  in  the  midst  of  fine  trees,
which  were  from  foreign  graftings.  It  was  altered
and  enlarged  by  his  grandson,  purchased  by  the
corporation  of  Yonkers  in  1867,  and  is  now  (1888)
the  town-hall.  His  other  patent  of  Fredericks-
borough,  or  Sleepy  Hollow,  comprised  240  square
miles,  and  in  1683  he  built  there  Castle  Philipse,  a
stone  fortification  for  protection  against  the  In
dians.  In  1699  he  also  erected  at  his  own  expense,
opposite  Castle  Philipse,  a  substantial  church,
which  is  now  the  oldest  religious  edifice  in  the
state  of  New  York.  He  was  a  member  of  the
governor's  council  for  more  than  twenty  years,  and
on  terms  of  friendship  with  all  the  royal  governors
from  Sir  Edmund  Andros  to  Lord  Richard  Bello-
mont.  For  more  than  half  a  century  he  was  inti
mately  associated  with  every  event  of  note  in  city
or  province ;  but.  though  he  was  styled  the  "  Dutch
millionaire,"  he  incurred  comparatively  little  politi
cal  enmity,  "  never  meddling  in  controversies,  but,
laying  his  hand  upon  his  purse,  waited  to  see  which
party  would  win." — His  grandson,  Frederick,  b.
in  New  York  in  1690;  d.  there  in  1751,  spent  his
early  life  in  Europe,  where  he  was  carefully  edu
cated,  and  on  his  return  settled  on  his  inherited
estates,  which  he  ruled  like  a  feudal  sovereign.  He
occupied  the  bench  of  the  eourt-leet,  and  the  court-


baron  at  Philipseborough,  administered  justice  and
sometimes  capital  punishment,represented  Philipse
borough  in  the  assembly  for  many  years,  and  for  a
long  time  was  baron  and  second  judge  of  the
exchequer.  He  also  greatly  altered  and  improved
the  manor-house.  He  was  attached  to  the  Estab
lished  church  of  England,  and  through  the  pro
visions  of  his  will  his  family  built  St.  John's
church  at  Yonkers,  with  a  parsonage. — The  second
Frederick's  son,  Frederick,  last  lord  of  the  manor,
b.  in  New  York  in  1746;  d.  in  England  in  1785,
was  graduated  at  King's  college  (now  Columbia)  in
1773,  and  was  subsequently  a  member  of  the
assembly  and  a  captain  of  dragoons  in  the  British
army.  He  lived  in  a  style  of  magnificence  that  ex
ceeded  that  of  any  of  his  ancestors.  His  wife,  an
imperious  woman  of  fashion,  was  in  the  habit  of
driving  four  black  horses,  with  her  own  hands,
upon  the  roads  of  Westchester.  He  tried  to  main
tain  neutrality  in  politics,  but  early  in  the  Revolu
tion  was  suspected  of  allegiance  to  the  crown,  and
was  proscribed  and  banished,  the  manor-house  be
ing  confiscated.  The  British  government  allowed
him  £62,075  for  compensation.  He  was  an  ardent
churchman,  and  gave  liberally  to  charity.  His
sister,  Mary,  married  Col.  Roger  Morris  (q.  v.\  and
another  sister,  Susanna,  became  the  wife  of  Col.
Beverly  Robinson.

PHILLIPPO,  James  M.,  West  Indian  author.
He  was  an  English  Baptist  missionary,  who  for
twenty  years  was  a  resident  of  Spanish  Town,
Jamaica,  W.  I.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Jamaica :  its
Past  and  Present  State  "  (London,  1843),  and  "  The
United  States  and  Cuba"  (New  York,  1857).

PHILLIPPS,  Adelaide,  singer,  b.  in  Stratford-
on-Avon,  England,  26  Oct.,  1833 ;  d.  in  Carlsbad,
Germany,  3  Oct.,  1882.  She  came  to  the  United
States  with  her  family  at  the  age  of  seven.  Her
parents  placed  her  on  the  stage  at  an  early  age,
and  she  made  her  first  appearance  in  January,
1842,  at  the  Tremont  theatre,  Boston.  The  follow
ing  year  she  obtained  an  engagement  at  the  Boston
museum,  where  she  remained  about  eight  years.
When  Jenny  Lind  appeared  in  Boston  in  1850,
Adelaide  sang  for  her,  and  was  advised  to  go  to
Europe.  It  was  largely  owing  to  the  Swedish
singer's  generosity  and  aid  that  Miss  Phillipps's
father  was  enabled  to  take  her  abroad.  They  ar
rived  in  London  in  March,  1852,  and  Adelaide  be
came  the  pupil  of  Manuel  Garcia.  In  1853  she  went
with  her  father  to
Italy  to  continue
her  studies,  and
made  her  debut  the
same  year  at  Bres
cia,  as  Arsace  in
"Semiramide."  She
sang  also  in  Milan
and  other  cities,
and  then  in  1855  re
turned  to  the  Unit
ed  States.  She
made  an  engage
ment  to  appear  in
Italian  opera  in
Philadelphia  and
New  York  under
Max  Maretzek,  and
later  went  with  him  to  Havana,  Cuba.  In  1860  she
made  her  first  appearance  in  oratorio  before  the  Han
del  and  Haydn  society,  Boston,  in  the  "  Messiah."
The  following  year  she  went  abroad  again,  and  ap
peared  in  Paris  as  Azucena  in  "  II  Trovatore."  After
a  professional  tour  in  Europe  she  returned  to  this
country.  In  1864  she  went  again  to  Havana,  and


PHILLIPS


PHILLIPS


759


from  that  time  until  her  death  she  appeared  in
opera,  oratorio,  and  concerts  in  most  of  the  states
of  the  Union.  The  Adelaide  Phillipps  opera  com
pany  was  organized  in  1876,  and  in  1879  she  joined
the  Ideal  opera  company,  remaining  with  the  latter
until  1881,  when  she  made  her  last  appearance  on
the  stage  in  Cincinnati.  Failing  health  compelled
her  to  rest,  and  she  went  to  Europe  in  the  hope  of
recovery,  but  died  suddenly  at  Carlsbad.  Her
stage  name  in  Europe  was  Signorina  Fillippi.  Miss
Phillipps's  voice  was  a  contralto,  with  a  compass
of  two  and  one  half  octaves.  The  characters  in
which  she  excelled  were  Rosina,  Leonora,  and
Azucena.  See  "  Adelaide  Phillipps,  a  Record,"  by
Mrs.  Robert  C.  Waterston  (Boston,  1883).

PHILLIPS,  Barnet,  journalist,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  9  Nov.,  1828.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1847,  studied  in
France  and  Germany,  and  became  a  journalist.
Since  1872  he  has  been  connected  with  the  Xew
York  "  Times "  in  a  literary  capacity.  During
1878-'86  he  was  secretary  of  the  American  fish-
cultural  association,  and  in  1882  he  was  appointed
honorary  agent  of  the  U.  S.  national  museum,
which  place  he  still  holds.  Besides  numerous  ar
ticles  on  fish-culture  and  archaslogy,  he  has  pub
lished  "The  Struggle,"  a  novel  (New  York,  1878),
and  "  Burning  their  Ships  "  (1879).

PHILLIPS,  George,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rainham,
Norfolk,  England,  in  1593  ;  d.  in  Watertown,  Mass.,
1  July,  1644.  He  was  a  student  at  the  University
of  Cambridge  in  1613  and  1617,  and  settled  at  Box-
ted,  Essex  co.,  England,  but  became  a  non-conform
ist,  and  came  to  New  England  in  June,  1630.  He
was  the  first  minister  of  Watertown,  Mass.,  from
30  July,  1830,  till  his  death.  He  was  a  learned
scholar  and  an  able  disputant,  and  published  a
work  on  "  Infant  Baptism  "  (1645).

PHILLIPS,  Henry  31.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadel
phia,  Pa.,  30  June,  1811:  d.  there,  3  Aug.,  1884.
His  father  was  a  lawyer  in  Philadelphia,  and  the
son,  after  completing  his  course  at  the  high-school
of  the  Franklin  institute,  studied  for  the  same  pro
fession  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1831.  In
1856  he  was  elected  to  congress  from  Pennsylvania,
as  a  Democrat,  and  served  one  term.  Mr.  Phillips
was  chosen  a  trustee  of  Jefferson  medical  college  in
1862,  in  1867  appointed  a  member  of  the  board
of  park  commissioners,  of  which,  in  1881,  he  became
president,  and  in  1870  was  made  a  member  of  the
commission  for  the  erection  of  municipal  buildings
for  Philadelphia.  He  was  chosen  a  director  of  the
Philadelphia  academy  of  music  in  1870,  and  its
president  in  1872. — His  nephew.  Henry,  author,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  6  Sept.,  1838.  He  was  educated
at  universities  at  home  and  abroad,  and  admitted
to  the  Philadelphia  bar  in  1859,  but,  owing  to  deli
cate  health,  was  never  able  to  follow  his  profession
actively.  His  work  has  been  mainly  in  archa?ology,
philology,  and  numismatics.  He  ranks  among  the
best  authorities  on  these  subjects  in  the  United
States,  and  is  widely  known  in  Europe,  where  two
gold  medals  have  been  conferred  on  him  for  his
writings.  In  1862  he  became  treasurer,  and  in
1868  secretary,  of  the  numismatic  and  antiquarian
society  of  Philadelphia,  and  since  1880  he  has  been
secretary  of  the  American  philosophical  society,
and  since  1885  its  librarian.  He  is  also  a  member
of  many  learned  societies  at  home  and  abroad,  and
in  some  cases  is  the  only  American  that  has  been
thus  honored.  His  works  on  the  paper  currency  of
the  American  colonies  and  on  American  continen
tal  money  were  the  first  on  those  subjects,  and  the
latter  volume  has  been  cited  in  the  opinion  of  the
U.  S.  supreme  court  in  a  decision  on  the  legal-


tender  cases.  Mr.  Phillips  has  published,  besides
many  papers,  "  History  of  American  Colonial  Paper
Currency  "  (Albany,  1865) ;  "  History  of  American
Continental  Paper  Money  "  (1866) ;  "  Pleasures  of
Numismatic  Science  "  (Philadelphia,  1867) ;  "  Poems
from  the  Spanish  and  German  "  (1878) ;  "  Faust "
from  the  German  of  Chamisso  (1881);  and  four
volumes  of  translations  from  the  Spanish,  Hun
garian,  and  German  (1884-'7).

PHILLIPS.  James,  educator,  b.  in  Nevendon,
Essex,  England,  22  April,  1792 ;  d.  in  Chapel  Hill,
N.  C.,  16  March,  1867.  He  was  the  son  of  Richard
Phillips,  a  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England.
The  son  came  to  the  United  States  in  1818,  taught
for  a  time  in  Harlem,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1826  became
professor  of  mathematics  in  the  University  of
North  Carolina,  where  he  remained  till  his  death.
He  was  licensed  as  a  preacher  of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  1833,  ordained  in  April,  1835,  and  preached
regularly  at  the  New  Hope  church,  a  few  miles  from
the  university,  till  his  death.  He  projected  a  com
plete  course  of  mathematical  studies,  and  prepared
treatises  on  algebra,  geometry,  trigonometry,  and
kindred  subjects.

PHILLIPS,  John,  first  mayor  of  Boston,  b.  in
Boston.  Mass.,  26  Nov.,  1770;'d.  there,  23  May,
1823.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1788,  and
then  studied  law.  In  1800  he  was  made  public
prosecutor,  and  in  1803  was  chosen  representative
to  the  general  court.  He  was  sent  to  the  Massa
chusetts  senate  in  1804,  and  continued  member  of
that  body  until  his  death,  serving  as  presiding  officer
in  1813-'23.  In  1820  he  was  a  member  of  the  con
vention  that  met  to  consider  the  revision  of  the
state  constitution,  and  he  took  an  active  part  in
the  proceedings  of  that  body.  Mr.  Phillips  was
also  active  in  the  agitation  tending  toward  the
adoption  of  a  city  government  in  Boston,  and  was
chairman  of  the  committee  of  twelve  that  drew  up
and  reported  on  a  city  charter  for  the  town  in
1822.  In  the  choice  for  mayor  that  followed,  Har
rison  Gray  Otis  and  Josiah  Quincy  were  the  chief
candidates  for  the  office,  but,  as  neither  was  able
to  secure  an  election,  their  friends  agreed  on  Mr.
Phillips,  who  was  elected  on  16  April,  1822.  At
the  close  of  his  term  of  office  the  precarious  con
dition  of  his  health  led  him  to  decline  a  re-election.
In  1812  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  corporation
of  Harvard,  and  he  was  also  a  fellow  of  the  Ameri
can  academy  of  arts  and  sciences.  He  was  invited  in
1794  to  deliver  the  annual  Fourth  of  July  oration
before  the  people  of  Boston,  and  his  address  is  said  to
have  borne  "  the  finest  marks  of  intellectual  vigor."
— His  son,  Wendell,  orator,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
29  Nov.,  1811 ;  d.  there,  2  Feb.,  1884,  entered  the
Boston  Latin-school  in  1822,  and  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1831,  in  the  same  class  with  the  histo
rian  J.  Lothrop  Motley.  As  a  student  he  showed
no  particular  interest  in  reforms:  indeed,  he  bore
the  reputation  of  having  defeated  the  first  attempt
to  form  a  temperance  society  at  Harvard.  Hand
some  in  person,  cultivated  in  manners,  and  of  a
kindly  and  generous  disposition,  he  was  popular
among  his  fellow-students,  and  was  noted  for  his
fine  elocution  and  his  skill  in  debate.  His  heart
had  responded  to  Webster's  fiery  denunciation  at
Plymouth  in  1820  of  that  ''work  of  hell,  foul  and
dark,"  the  slave-trade.  "  If  the  pulpit  be  silent
whenever  or  wherever  there  may  be  a  sinner  bloody
with  this  guilt  within  the  hearing  of  its  voice,  the
pulpit  is  false  to  its  trust."  He  had  taken  a  boy's
part  in  honoring  Lafayette,  and  in  the  midst  of
such  associations  he  was  unconsciously  fitted  for
his  career.  In  college  his  favorite  study  was  his
tory.  He  gave  a  year  to  the  story  of  the  English


760


PHILLIPS


PHILLIPS


revolution  of  1630,  reading  everything  concerning
it  that  he  could  find.  With  equal  care  he  studied
the  period  of  George  III.,  and  Dutch  history  also
so  far  as  English  literature  enabled  him  to  do  so.

His  parents  were  of  the  Evangelical  faith,  and  in
one  of  the  revivals  of  religion  that  followed  the

settlement  of  Dr.
Lyman  Beecher  in
Boston  he  became  a
convert,  and  he  did
not  at  any  subse
quent  time  depart
from  the  faith  of
his  fathers.  While
lie  denounced  the
churches  for  their
complicity  with  sla-
very,  he  made  no  war
upon  their  creeds.
A  fellow-student  re
members  well  his
earnest  religious
ness  in  college,  and
his  "devoutness  dur
ing  morning  and
evening  prayers  which  so  many  others  attended  only
to  save  their  credit  with  the  government."  Though
orthodox  himself,  he  welcomed  those  of  other  faiths,
and  even  of  no  faith,  to  the  anti-slavery  platform,
resisting  every  attempt  to  divide  the  host  upon
sectarian  or  theological  grounds.  He  entered  the
Harvard  law-school  for  a  term  of  three  years,  and
in  1834  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  lie  was  well
equipped  for  his  profession  in  every  respect  save
one,  viz.,  that  he  appears  to  have  had  no  special
love  for  it  and  small  ambition  for  success  therein.
"If,"  he  said  to  a  friend,  "clients  do  not  come,  I
will  throw  myself  heart  and  soul  into  some  good
cause  and  devote  my  life  to  it."  The  clients  would
doubtless  have  come  in  no  long  time  if  he  had
chosen  to  wait  for  them,  but  the  "  good  cause  "  pre
sented  its  claims  first,  and  was  so  fortunate  as  to
win  the  devotion  of  his  life.  "  The  Liberator,"
founded  by  William  Lloyd  Garrison  in  1831.  had
already  forced  the  slavery  question  upon  public  at
tention  and  created  an  agitation  that  the  leaders
of  society  were  vainly  endeavoring  to  suppress.  It
has  been  said,  probably  with  truth,  that  the  first
person  to  interest  Mr.  Phillips  in  this  subject  was
the  lady — Miss  Anne  Terry  Greene — who  afterward
became  his  wife  and,  as  he  himself  has  said,  "  his
counsel,  his  guide,  his  inspiration,"  during  his  whole
subsequent  life.  Of  all  the  young  men  of  Boston
at  that  period,  there  was  hardly  one  whose  social
relations,  education,  and  personal  character  better
fitted  him  for  success  as  an  aspirant  for  such  public
honors  as  Massachusetts  was  accustomed  to  bestow
upon  the  most  gifted  of  her  sons.  But  if  ambitions
or  aspirations  of  this  sort  were  ever  indulged,  he
had  the  courage  and  the  moral  power  to  resist  their
appeals  and  devote  himself  to  what  he  felt  to  be  a
righteous  though  popularly  odious  cause.  The  poet
James  Russell  Lowell  has  embalmed  the  memory
of  his  early  self-abnegation  in  a  sonnet,  of  which
these  lines  form  a  part :
"  He  stood  upon  the  world's  broad  threshold ;  wide

The  din  of  battle  and  of  slaughter  rose ;
He  saw  God  stand  upon  the  weaker  side
That  sunk  in  seeming  loss  before  its  foes.

Therefore  he  went

And  joined  him  to  the  weaker  part,
Fanatic  named,  and  fool,  yet  well  content

So  he  could  be  nearer  to  God's  heart,
And  feel  its  solemn  pulses  sending  blood
Through  all  the  wide-spread  veins  of  endless  good."


Looking  from  his  office-window  on  21  Oct.,.
1835,  he  saw  the  crowd  of  "gentlemen  of  property
and  standing  "  gathered  in  Washington  and  State
streets  to  break  up  a  meeting  of  anti-slavery  la
dies  and  "  snake  out  that  infamous  foreign  scoun
drel.  Thompson,"  and  "bring  him  to  the  tar-kettle
before  dark  " — the  same  Thompson  of  whom  Lord
Brougham  said  in  the  house  of  lords  at  the  time
of  the  passage  of  the  British  emancipation  act :
"  I  rise  to  take  the  crown  of  this  most  glorious
victory  from  every  other  head  and  place  it  upon
his.  He  has  done  more  than  any  other  man  to
achieve  it  "  ;  and  of  whom  John  Bright  said  :  "  1
have  always  considered  him  the  liberator  of  the
slaves  in  the  English  colonies:  for,  without  his
commanding  eloquence,  made  irresistible  by  the
blessedness  of  his  cause,  I  do  not  think  all  the
other  agencies  then  at  work  would  have  procured
their  freedom."  The  mob,  disappointed  in  its  ex
pectation  of  getting  possession  of  the  eloquent
Englishman,  " snaked  out"  Garrison  instead,  and
Phillips  saw  him  dragged  through  the  streets,  his
person  well-nigh  denuded  of  clothing,  and  a  rope
around  -his  waist  ready  to  strangle  him  withal,
from  which  fate  he  was  rescued  only  by  a  desperate
ruse  of  the  mayor,  who  locked  him  up  in  the  jail
for  safety.  This  spectacle  deeply  moved  the  young
lawyer,  who  from  that  hour  was  an  avowed"  Abo
litionist,  though  he  was  not  widely  known  as  such
until  the  martyrdom  of  Elijah  P.  Lovejoy  (q.  ?•.)  in
1837  brought  him  into  sudden  prominence  and  re
vealed  him  to  the  country  as  an  orator  of  the
rarest  gifts.  The  men  then  at  the  head  of  affairs
in  Boston  were  not  disposed  to  make  any  open
protest  against  this  outrage  upon  the.  freedom  of
the  press;  but  William  Ellery  Channing,  the  emi
nent  preacher  and  writer,  was  resolved  that  the
freedom-loving  people  of  the  city  should  have  an
opportunity  to  express  their  sentiments  in  an  hour
so  fraught  with  danger  to  the  cause  of  American
liberty,  and  through  his  persistent  efforts  prepara
tions  were  made  for  a  public  meeting,  which  assem
bled  in  Faneuil  hall  on  8  Dec.,  1837.  It  was  the
custom  to  hold  such  meetings  in  the  evening,  but
there  were  threats  of  a  mob,  and  this  one  on  that
account  was  appointed  for  a  daylight  hour.

The  hall  was  well  filled,  Jonathan  Phillips  was
called  to  the  chair,  Dr.  Channing  made  an  im
pressive  address,  and  resolutions  written  by  him,
fitly  characterizing  the  outrage  at  Alton,  were
introduced.  George  S.  Ilillard,  a  popular  young
lawyer,  followed  in  a  serious  and  well-considered
address.  Thus  far  everything  had  gone  smoothly  ;
but  now  uprose  James  T.  Austin,  attorney-general
of  the  state,  a  member  of  Dr.  Channing's  congre
gation,  but  known  to  be  bitterly  opposed  to  his
anti-slavery  course.  He  eulogized  the  Alton  mur
derers,  comparing  them  with  the  patriots  of  the
Revolution,  and  declared  that  Lovejoy  had  "  died  as
the  fool  dieth."  Mr.  Phillips  was  present,  but  with
no  expectation  of  speaking.  There  were  those  in
the  hall,  however,  who  thought  him  the  man  best
fitted  to  reply  to  Austin,  and  some  of  these
urged  the  managers  to  call  upon  him,  which  they
consented  to  do.  As  he  stepped  upon  the  plat
form,  his  manly  beauty,  dignity,  and  perfect  self-
possession  won  instant  admiration.  His  opening
sentences,  uttered  calmly  but  with  deep  feeling,
revealed  his  power  and  raised  expectation  to  the
highest  pitch.  "  When."  said  he,  "  I  heard  the
gentleman  [Mr.  Austin]  lay  down  principles  which
placed  the  rioters,  incendiaries,  and  murderers  of
Alton  side  by  side  with  Otis  and  Hancock,  with
Quincy  and  Adams,  I  thought  those  pictured  lips
[pointing  to  the  portraits  in  the  hall]  would  have


PHILLIPS


PHILLIPS


761


broken  into  voice  to  rebuke  the  recreant  American,  !
the  slanderer  of  the  dead. Sir,  for  the  sentiments  ]
he  has  uttered  on  soil  consecrated  by  the  prayers  j
of  Puritans  and  the  blood  of patriots,  the  earth
should  have  yawned  and  swallowed  him  up."

These  stinging  words  were  greeted  with  applause,
which  showed  that  the  young  orator  had  but  ex
pressed  the  conviction  and  the  feeling  of  the  vast
majority  of  the  assembly,  and  that  it  was  not  in
the  power  of  the  dissidents  to  defeat  the  purpose
for  which  it  had  been  convened.  Freedom  of  speech
was  vindicated  and  mobticracy  and  assassination
were  rebuked  in  Faneuil  hall,  while  the  hated
Abolitionists  rejoiced  that  they  had  found  a  cham
pion  fitted  to  maintain  their  cause  in  any  pres
ence  or  emergency.  From  that  hour  to  the  end
of  the  anti-slavery  conflict  the  name  of  Wendell
Phillips  was  everywhere,  and  among  all  classes,
the  accepted  synonym  of  the  highest  type  of
American  eloquence.  In  no  half-way  fashion  did
he  espouse  the  anti-slavery  cause.  He  accepted
without  reservation  the  doctrines  that  Garrison
had  formulated — viz. :  slavery  under  all  circum
stances  a  sin ;  immediate  emancipation  a  funda
mental  right  and  duty ;  colonization  a  delusion
and  a  snare:  the  blood-guiltiness  of  the  church
in  seeking  apologies  for  slavery  in  the  Bible,  and
the  spurioiisness  of  the  statesmanship  that  sought  ;
to  suppress  agitation  and  held  that  liberty  and
slavery  could  be  at  peace  under  one  and  the  same  ,
government.  He  did  the  work  of  a  lecturing
agent,  obeying  every  call  so  far  as  his  strength
permitted, "without  any  pecuniary  reward.  When
he  could  command  fifty  or  one  hundred  dollars
for  a  lecture  on  any  other  subject,  he  would
speak  on  slavery  for  nothing  if  the  people  con
sented  to  hear  him.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  esti
mate  the  value  to  the  anti-slavery  cause  of  ser
vices  so  freely  rendered  by  a  man  of  such  gifts  and  ;
attainments,  in  the  years  when  that  cause  was  j
struggling  under  a  weight  of  odium  which  not  even
his  eloquence  sufficed  to  overcome.  As  a  speaker
he  was  above  all  others  the  popular  favorite,  and
his  tact  in  gaining  a  hearing  in  spite  of  mob  tur
bulence  was  extraordinary.  His  courage  lifted
him  above  fear  of  personal  violence,  while  his  wit
illuminated  his  argument  as  the  lightning  illu
mines  the  heavens.  The  Abolitionists  were  proud
of  a  defender  who  could  disarm  if  he  could  not
wholly  conquer  popular  hostility,  who  might  be  safe
ly  pitted  against  any  antagonist,  and  whose  charac
ter  could  in  no. way  be  impeached.  In  every  emer
gency  of  the  cause  he  led  the  charge  against  its
enemies,  and  never  did  he  surrender  a  principle  or
consent  to  a  compromise.  His  fidelity,  no  less  than
his  eloquence,  endeared  him  to  his  associates,
while  his  winning  manners  charmed  all  who  met
him  in  social  life.  The  strongest  opponents  of
the  anti-slavery  cause  felt  the  spell  of  his  power
and  respected  him  for  his  shining  example  of  in
tegrity  and  devotion.

In  the  divisions  among  the  Abolitionists,  which
took  place  in  183[)-'40,  he  stood  with  Garrison  in
favor  of  recognizing  the  equal  rights  of  women  as
members  of  the  anti-slavery  societies,  in  stern  op
position to the organization  by  Abolitionists,  as
such,  of  a  political  party,  and  in  resistance  to  the
attempt  to  discredit  and  proscribe  men  upon  the
anti-slavery  platform  on  account  of  their  religious  j
belief. In  1840  he  represented  the  Massachusetts
Abolitionists  in  the  World's  anti-slavery  conven
tion  in  London,  where  he  pleaded  in  vain  for  the
admission  of  the  woman  delegates  sent  from  this  !
country. He  took  a  prominent  part  in  discussing  j
the  provisions  of  the  constitution  of  the  United  j


States  relating  to  slavery,  and  after  mature  reflec
tion  came  with  Garrison  to  the  conclusion  that
what  were  popularly  called  the  "compromises"  of
that  instrument  were  immoral  and  in  no  way
binding  upon  the  conscience ;  and  in  1843-'4  he
was  conspicuous  among  those  who  led  the  anti-
slavery  societies  in  openly  declaring  this  doctrine
as  thenceforth  fundamental  in  their  agitation.
This  was  done,  not  upon  the  ground  of  non-resist
ance,  or  on  account  of  any  objection  to  government
by  force,  but  solely  because  it  was  held  to  be  im
moral  to  wield  the  power  of  civil  government  in
any  manner  or  degree  for  the  support  of  slavery.
There  was  no  objection  to  political  action,  as  such,
but  only  to  such  political  action  as  made  voters
and  officers  responsible  for  executing  the  provisions
that  made  the  national  government  the  defender
of  slavery.  Of  course,  those  who  took  this  ground
were  constrained  to  forego  the  ballot  until  the
constitution  could  be  amended,  but  there  remained
to  them  the  moral  power  by  which  prophets  and
apostles  "  subdued  kingdoms  and  wrought  right
eousness" — the  power  of  truth,  of  an  unfettered
press,  and  a  free  platform.  And  these  instrumen
talities  they  employed  unflinchingly  to  expose  the
character  of  slavery,  to  show  that  the  national
government  was  its  main  support,  and  to  expose
the  sin  and  folly,  as  they  thought,  of  maintaining
a  Union  so  hampered  and  defiled.  They  accepted
this  as  their  clearly  revealed  duty,  in  spite  of  the
odium  thereby  involved ;  and  they  went  on  in  this
course  until  the  secession  of  the  slave  states  brought
them  relief  by  investing  the  president  with  power
to  emancipate  the  slaves,  under  the  rules  of  war.

Thenceforth  Mr.  Phillips  devoted  himself  to  the
task  of  persuading  the  people  of  the  loyal  states
that  they  were  honorably  released  from  every  obli
gation,  implied  or  supposed,  to  respect  the  "  com
promises  "  of  the  constitution,  and  that  it  was  their
right  and  duty  to  emancipate  the  slaves  as  a  meas
ure  of  war,  and  as  a  means  of  forming  a  regener
ated  and  disenthralled  Union.  In  this  he  was  sus
tained  not  only  by  the  whole  body  of  Abolitionists
of  whatever  school,  but  by  a  great  multitude  of
people  who  had  long  stood"  aloof  from  their  cause,
and  the  effort  was  crowned  with  success  in  the
president's  proclamation  of  1  Jan.,  1863.  From
that  moment  the  civil  war  became  an  anti-sla
very  war  as  well  as  a  war  for  national  unity,  and
thousands  of  Abolitionists  who  had  followed  the
lead  of  Phillips  hastened  to  enter  the  ranks.

In  all  these  conflicts  Phillips  stood  shoulder  to
shoulder  with  Garrison,  and  was  followed  by  a
body  of  people,  not  indeed  very  numerous,  but  of
wide  moral  influence.  In  1864  Mr.  Phillips  op
posed,  while  Garrison  favored,  the  re-election  of
President  Lincoln.  In  the  spring  of  1865,  when
Garrison  advocated  the  dissolution  of  the  American
anti-slavery  society,  on  the  ground  that,  slavery
being  abolished,  there  was  no  further  need  of  such
an  association,  Mr.  Phillips  successfully  opposed
him,  contending  that  it  should  not  disband  until
the  negro  had  gained  the  ballot.  This  division  led
to  some  unpleasant  controversy  of  no  long  continu
ance.  Mr.  Phillips  became  president  of  the  soci
ety  in  place  of  Mr.  Garrison,  and  it  was  continued
under  his  direction  until  1870.

In  the  popular  discussion  of  the  measures  for
reconstructing  the  Union  he  took  a  prominent
part,  mainly  for  the  purpose  of  guarding  the  rights
of  the  negro  population,  to  wyhom  he  thus  greatly
endeared  himself.  He  had  previously  won  their
gratitude  by  his  zealous  efforts  in  behalf  of  fugi
tive  slaves,  and  to  abolish  distinctions  of  color  in
schools,  in  public  conveyances,  and  in  places  of


762


PHILLIPS


PHILLIPS


popular  resort.  He  was  at  all  times  an  earnest  cham
pion  of  temperance,  and  in  later  years  the  advocate
of  prohibition.  lie  was  also  foremost  among  those
claiming  the  ballot  for  woman.  He  advocated  the
rights  of  the  Indians,  and  labored  to  reform  the
penal  institutions  of  the  country  after  the  slavery
question  was  settled.  He  espoused  the  cause  of  the
labor  reformers,  and  in  1870  accepted  from  them
and  from  the  Prohibitionists  a  nomination  as  can
didate  for  governor.  He  advocated  what  has  been
called  the  "  greenback  "  theory  of  finance.  "  The
wages  system,"  he  said,  "  demoralizes  alike  the
hirer  and  the  hired,  cheats  both,  and  enslaves  the
workingman,"  while  "  the  present  system  of  finance
robs  labor,  gorges  capital,  makes  the  rich  richer
and  the  poor  poorer,  and  turns  a  republic  into  an
aristocracy  of  capital."  He  lent  his  aid  to  the
agitation  for  the  redress  of  the  wrongs  of  Ireland.
In  1881  he  delivered  an  address  at  the  centennial
annivei-sary  of  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  of  Harvard
college,  which  was  pronounced,  on  very  high  au
thority,  "  an  oration  of  great  power  and  beauty,
full  of  strong  thoughts  and  happy  illustrations,
not  unworthy  of  any  university  platform  or  aca
demic  scholar,"  though  containing  some  senti
ments  from  which  a  portion  of  his  audience
strongly  dissented.  As  an  avowed  critic  of  public
men  and  measures,  speaking  year  after  year,  almost
always  extemporaneously,  and  often  amidst  scenes
of  the  greatest  excitement,  nothing  less  than  a
miracle  could  have  prevented  him  from  sometimes
falling  into  mistakes  and  doing  injustice  to  oppo
nents  ;  but  it  is  believed  that  there  is  nothing
in  his  record  to  cast  a  shadow  upon  his  reputation
as  one  who  consecrated  great  gifts  and  attainments
to  the  welfare  of  his  country.  His  last  public  ad
dress  was  delivered  on  26  Dec.,  1883,  at  the  unveil
ing  of  Miss  Whitney's  statue  of  Harriet  Martineau,
at  the  Old  South  church,  in  Boston.  A  little  more
than  a  month  after  this  the  great  orator  passed
from  earth.  The  event  was  followed  by  a  memo
rial  meeting  in  Faneuil  hall,  and  by  appropriate
action  on  the  part  of  the  legislature  and  the  city
government.  After  the  funeral  the  remains  were
taken  from  the  church  to  Faneuil  hall,  whither
they  were  followed  by  a  vast  multitude.  Mr.  Phil
lips  published  "  The  Constitution  a  Pro-Slavery
Contract "  (Boston,  1840)  and  "  Review  of  Webster's
7th  of  March  Speech  "  (1850).  A  collection  of  his
speeches,  letters,  and  lectures,  revised  by  himself,
was  published  in  1863  in  Boston.  Among  his  lec
tures  on  other  than  anti-slavery  topics  were  "  The
Lost  Arts,"  "  Toussaint  1'Ouverture,"  and  "  Daniel
O'Connell."  His  life  has  been  written  by  George
Lowell  Austin  (Boston,  1888).

PHILLIPS,  Morris,  journalist,  b.  in  London
England,  9  May,  1834.  After  receiving  a  liberal
education  in  New  York  he  entered  a  law-office,
then  accepted  a  post  in  a  mercantile  firm  in  Cleve
land,  but  returned  again  to  law  in  Buffalo.  In
1854  he  became  secretary  of  George  P.  Morris,
editor  of  the  "  Home  Journal,"  with  which  paper
he  has  been  connected  ever  since,  occupying  every
post  from  proof-reader  to  editor-in-chief.  On  Gen.
Morris's  death,  in  1864,  he  became  co-editor  with
Nathaniel  P.  Willis,  and  on  the  latter's  demise  in
1866,  sole  proprietor,  associating  with  himself  in
1867  George  Perry.  Mr.  Phillips  introduced  soci
ety  journalism  in  this  country.

PHILLIPS,  Philip,  singer,  b.  in  Chautauqua
county,  N.  Y.,  13  Aug.,  1834.  He  developed  a  talent
for  music  at  an  early  age.  and  later  studied  under
Lowell  Mason.  In  1853  he  began  to  conduct  sing
ing-schools  in  Alleghany,  N.  Y.,  and  in  the  neigh
boring  towns  and  cities.  He  united  with  the


Methodist  church  with  his  wife  in  1860 ;  before
that  time  he  had  been  a  Baptist.  In  the  same  year
he  brought  out  his  first  musical  publication,  "  Early
Blossoms."  of  which  he  sold  20,000  copies.  The
next  year  he  opened  a  music-store  in  Cincinnati,
where  he  published  "  Musical  Leaves  "  (Cincinnati,
1862  ;  revised  ed.,  1867),  which  had  a  sale  of  700,000
copies.  During  the  civil  war  he  gave  powerful  aid
to  the  Christian  commission  by  his  services  of  song
in  different  parts  of  the  country.  In  1866  he  came
to  New  York,  and  two  years  later  he  visited  Eng
land,  where  he  held  services  in  all  parts  of  the
country.  He  also  prepared,  for  the  British  Sun
day-school  union,  "  The  American  Sacred  Songster  "
(London,  1868),  of  which  1,100,000  copies  were
sold.  Several  years  later  he  made  a  tour  of  the
world,  holding  praise  services  in  the  Sandwich
islands,  Australia,  New  Zealand,  Palestine,  Egypt,
and  India,  and  in  the  cities  of  Europe.  He  has
published  a  large  number  of  song  collections,  in
cluding  "Spring  Blossoms"  (Cincinnati,  1865);
"  Singing  Pilgrim  "  (New  York,  1866) ;  "  Day-School
Singer  "  (Cincinnati,  1869) ;  "  Gospel  Singer  "  (Bos
ton,  1874);  "Song  Sermons"  (New  York,  1877),
and  others,  and  also  "  Song  Pilgrimage  around  and
throughout  the  World,  with  an  Introduction  by
John  II.  Vincent,  and  a  Biographical  Sketch  by  A.
Clark"  (Chicago,  1880).

PHILLIPS,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  17  Feb.,  1690 ;  d.  in  Andover,  Mass.,  5  June,
1771.  He  was  the  grandson  of  the  Rev.  Samuel
Phillips,  of  Rowley,  and  eldest  child  of  Samuel,  a
goldsmith  of  Salem.  lie  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1708,  subsequently  taught  at  Chebacco,  then
studied  theology,  and  was  ordained  minister  of  the
south  parish  of  Andover  in  October,  1711,  which
relationship  lasted  during  his  lifetime.  He  pub
lished  an  "  Elegy"  (1718),  and  numerous  religious
treatises  and  occasional  sermons  (1727-'67). — His
son,  .loll ii.  benefactor, b.  in  Andover, Mass., 6  Dec.,
1719;  d.  in  Exeter,  N.  H..  21  April,  1795,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1735,  studied  theology,
and  preached  for  a  time.  He  subsequently  became
a  merchant  at  Exeter,  N.  H.,  and  was  for  several
years  a  member  of  the  New  Hampshire  council.
He  endowed  a  professorship  in  Dartmouth,  and
contributed  liberally  to  Princeton.  With  his
brother  Samuel  he  founded  Phillips  Andover
academy,  21  April,  1778,  giving  to  it  $31,000,  be
sides  a  third  interest  in  his  estate,  and  in  1781  he
founded  Phillips  Exeter  academy,  and  endowed  it
with  $134,000.— John's  nephew!  Samuel,  Jr.,  b.
in  North  Andover,  Mass.,  7  Feb.,  1751 ;  d.  there,  10
Feb.,  1802,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1771,  was
a  member  of  the  Provincial  congress,  and  of  the
Constitutional  convention  of  1779,  for  twenty  years
a  state  senator,  and  for  fifteen  years  its  president.
He  was  a  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in
1781-'98,  a  commissioner  of  the  state  in  Shays's  in
surrection,  and  was  lieutenant-governor  at  the
time  of  his  death.  He  was  also  much  engaged  in
agriculture,  manufactures,  and  mercantile  pursuits.
He  planned  and  organized  Phillips  Andover  acade
my,  the  first  incorporated  academy  in  the  state
and  one  of  the  first  in  the  country,  gave  it  some
lands,  and  procured  endowments  for  it  from  his
father,  uncles,  and  cousin.  At  his  death  he  left  a
fund  to  the  town  of  Andover,  the  income  of  which
was  to  be  applied  to  the  cause  of  education.  He
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  American  academy
of  arts  and  sciences  at  Boston.  See  "  Memoir  of
Hon.  Samuel  Phillips  "  by  John  L.  Taylor  (Boston,
1856). — His  wife,  Phoebe  Foxcraft,  d.  in  Andover
in  1818,  assisted  in  founding  Andover  theological
seminary  after  her  husband's  death.


PHILLIPS


PHILLIPS


763


PHILLIPS,  Stephen  Clarendon,  philanthro
pist,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  1  Nov.,  1801 ;  d.  on  St.
Lawrence  river,  26  June,  1857.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1819,  and  began  the  study  of  law,
but  soon  discontinued  it  to  engage  in  business  in
Salem.  He  was  in  the  lower  house  of  the  legisla
ture  in  1824-'30,  was  elected  to  the  state  senate  in
the  latter  year,  and  in  1832-'3  was  again  a  member
of  the  legislature.  He  was  then  chosen  to  congress
as  a  Whig  to  fill  a  vacancy,  and  served  during
three  terms — from  1  Dec.,  1834,  until  his  resignation
in  1838 — when  he  became  mayor  of  Salem,  which
place  he  then  held  until  March,  1842.  On  his  re
tirement  from  this  office  he  devoted  the  whole  of
his  salary  as  mayor  to  the  public  schools  of  Salem.
He  was  the  Free-soil  candidate  for  governor  of
Massachusetts  in  1848-'9,  and  a  presidential  elector
in  1840.  Mr.  Phillips  discharged  several  state  and
private  trusts,  and  was  many  years  a  member  of  the
state  board  of  education.  Retiring  from  public
life  in  1849,  he  engaged  extensively  in  the  lumber
business  in  Canada,  and  met  his  death  by  the  burn
ing  of  the  steamer  "  Montreal  "  while  coming  down
the  St.  Lawrence  river  from  Quebec.  Mr.  Phillips
was  president  of  the  Boston  Sunday-school  society,
and  author  of  "  The  Sunday-School  Service  Book,"
in  several  parts  (Boston).

PHILLIPS,  Willard,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bridge-
water,  Mass.,  19  Dec..  1784;  d.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  9  Sept.,  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  Har
vard  in  1810,  and  remained  connected  with  the
university  until  1815  as  a  tutor  first  in  Latin,  and
then  in  arithmetic  and  natural  philosophy.  Mean
while  he  studied  law  with  William  Sullivan,  and
after  admission  to  the  bar  in  Boston,  soon  became
eminent  in  his  profession.  In  1825-'6  he  was  a
member  of  the  legislature,  and  in  1839  he  was
made  judge  of  probate  for  Suffolk  county,  which
office  he  held  until  1847.  Besides  the  discharge  of
his  duties  as  judge,  he  was  employed  in  1837-'41
under  a  legislative  commission  to  himself  and
others  in  reducing  the  laws  of  crimes  and  punish
ments  to  a  systematic  code,  and,  although  the  re-
Eort  was  never  adopted  in  Massachusetts,  the  work
as  had  a  material  influence  on  legislation  and  the
administration  of  criminal  law.  In  1845  he  retired
from  legal  practice,  and  from  1843  until  his  death
he  was  president  of  the  Xew  England  mutual  life
insurance  company.  Mr.  Phillips  became  a  con
tributor  to  the  •'  General  Repository  and  Review  "
in  1812,  and  had  oversight  of  the  '•  North  Ameri
can  Review  "  during  the  second  year  of  its  exist
ence,  continuing  as  one  of  its  contributors  until
1834.  For  several  years  he  also  had  editorial  con
trol  of  the  "  American  Jurist."  In  1812  he  issued
''An  Appeal  to  the  Public  Spirit  of  the  Federalists
and  the  Good  Sense  of  the  Democrats,"  designed  to
promote  the  war  spirit  in  New  England,  and  with
Edward  Pickering  he  edited  the  first  and  second
American  editions  of  Collyer's  "  Law  of  Partner
ship  "  (Boston,  1834-'9),  and  the  first  eight  volumes
of  Pickering's  "Reports"  (1824).  His  own  works
are  "  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Insurance "  (1823) :
"  Manual  of  Political  Economy  "  (1828) ;  "  The  Law
of  Patents  for  Inventions,  including  the  Remedies
and  Legal  Proceedings  in  Relation  to  Patent
Rights"  (1837);  "The  Inventor's  Guide"  (1837);
and  "  Protection  and  Free-Trade  "  (1850).

PHILLIPS,  William,  British  soldier,  b.  in
1731;  d.  in  Petersburg,  Ya.,  13  May,  1781.  He
entered  the  Royal  military  academy  at  Woolwich.
1  Aug.,  1746,  as  a  gentleman  cadet,  and  became
quartermaster  of  the  1st  battalion  of  artillery,  1
April,  1750;  2d  lieutenant,  1  March,  1755;  "1st
lieutenant,  1  April,  1756,  and  captain,  12  May  of


the  same  year.  He  commanded  the  three  compa
nies  of  the  royal  artillery  that  were  present  at  the
battle  of  Minden,  1  Aug.,  1759,  where  he  won
great  distinction.  He  also  gained  credit  for  gal
lantry  at  Warberg,  30  July,  1760,  by  the  rapidity
with  which  he  brought  the  artillery  into  action
and  the  efficiency  with  which  he  handled  it.  He
was  made  lieutenant-colonel,  25  May  1772,  lieuten
ant-go  vei'nor  of  Windsor  in  1768,  colonel  in  the
regular  army,  25  May,  1772,  and  a  major-general,
in  America  only,  1  Jan.,  1776.  He  was  member  of
parliament  for  the  years  1774-'80.  Receiving  an
appointment  under  Gen.  Burgoyne,  he  embarked
with  that  general  on  the  frigate  "  Blonde "  for
Quebec,  where  he  arrived  in  May,  1776.  and  held
the  command  at  St.  John's  from  July  till  Decem
ber,  1776,  when  he  was  transferred  to  Montreal  as
second  in  command  to  Burgoyne  in  1777.  He  bore
an  active  part,  and  his  skill  and  energy  as  an  artil
lery  officer,  in  placing,  in  spite  of  tremendous
natural  obstacles,  a  battery  on  the  top  of  Sugar-
Loaf  hill,  and  thus  commanding  Ticonderoga,
forced  a  bloodless  evacuation  of  that  post  by  Gen.
St.  Clair.  In  the  two  battles  of  Saratoga,  two
months  later,  he  bore  a  conspicuous  part,  and  upon
Burgoyne's  return  to  England  in  1778,  the  com
mand  of  the  "  convention  troops,"  then  stationed
in  Virginia,  devolved  upon  him.  In  November,
1779,  he  was  allowed  to  go  to  New  York,  and  re
sided  there  on  parole  until  his  exchange.  He  re
ceived  his  last  promotion,  that  of  lieutenant-colonel
in  the  regular  army,  on  6  July,  1780,  and  the  same
year  was  exchanged  for  Gen.  Benjamin  Lincoln,
then  recently  captured  at  Charleston.  On  20
March,  1781,  he  sailed  from  New  York  for  Virginia
with  2,000  men,  and,  effecting  a  junction  at  Ports
mouth  with  Gen.  Benedict  Arnold,  at  once  assumed
the  command  of  the  combined  force  that  was  des
tined  for  the  invasion  of  that  colony.  The  two
generals  had  advanced  from  Portsmouth  to  Peters
burg,  when  Phillips  was  suddenly  stricken  with
typhoid  fever,  and  in  three  days  expired.  Various
reports  were  circulated  respecting  his  death,  some
attributing  it  to  its  right  cause,  and  others  to  poi
son  administered  by  Arnold,  on  whom,  by  this
event,  the  command  again  devolved.  Gen.  Corn-
wallis,  arriving  at  this  juncture,  assumed  the  com
mand.  The  character  of  Gen.  Phillips,  from  an
American  standpoint,  was  not  flattering.  He  was
accused  by  his  enemies  of  great  haughtiness  and
irritability.  The  British  estimate  of  him  is  very
high.  Capt.  Duncan,  in  his  "  History  of  the  Royal
Artillery,"  calls  him  "as  brave  and  honorable  a
soldier  as  ever  served  in  the  regiment.  He  was  be
loved  by  all  who  served  with  him,  and  was  a  model
for  artillerymen  to  imitate  in  gallantry,  ability,  and
progress."  He  is  buried  in  the  old  Brandford
church-yard  at  Petersburg,  Va.  See  Lieut.  James
M.  Hadden's  "Journal,"  edited  by  Gen.  Horatio
Rogers  (Albany,  1884).

PHILLIPS,  William,  benefactor,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  10  April,  1750 ;  d.  there,  26  May,  1827.  He
engaged  in  business  with  his  father,  of  the  same
name,  who  was  a  benefactor  of  Andover  theological
seminary,  and  acquired  a  fortune.  During  the
Revolutionary  war  he  was  an  ardent  patriot,  and
subsequent  to  1800  he  was  frequently  a  member  of
the  legislature,  also  lieutenant-governor  in  1812-'23.
At  his  death  he  bequeathed  large  sums  of  money
to  Phillips  academy,  to  Andover  theological  semi
nary,  and  other  institutions.

PHILLIPS,  William  Wirt,  clergyman,  b.  in
Florida,  N.  Y.,  23  Sept.,  1796;  d.  in  New  York
city.  20  March,  1865.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
in  1813,  and  studied  for  the  ministry  in  the  Asso-


PHIN


PIItEBUS


ciate  Koformed  theological  seminary  in  New  York
city,  and  then  in  the  Theological  seminary  of  the
Reformed  Dutch  church  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.
He  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Pearl  street  Presby
terian  church  in  New  York  city  in  1818,  and  re
mained  there  until  1826,  when  he  was  transferred
to  the  congregation  that  was  then  worshipping  in
Wall  street.  lie  continued  with  this  church  after
its  removal  to  Fifth  avenue,  and  was  its  pastor  un
til  his  death.  In  1826  he  received  the  degree  of
S.  T.  D.  from  Columbia,  and  he  was  a  trustee  botli
of  Princeton  and  the  University  of  the  city  of  New
York.  He  became  a  director  in  1823,  and  a  trustee
in  1829  of  the  theological  seminary  in  Princeton,
and  was  president  of  the  board  of  directors  in
1861-'5.  On  its  organixation  in  1887  he  was  made
chairman  of  the  executive  committee  of  the  board
of  foreign  missions,  and  during  the  last  years  of
his  life  he  was  its  president.  He  was  often  a  mem
ber  of  the  general  assembly,  and  in  1883  its  mod
erator.  Dr.  Phillips  likewise  held  other  trustee
ships  to  important  institutions,  including  the  Leake
and  Watts  orphan  asylum  and  the  Sailors'  Snug
Harbor.  Chiefly  through  the  liberality  of  his
friend,  James  Lenox,  the  Phillips  memorial  church
was  erected  in  Madison  avenue,  New  York.

PHIN,  John,  publisher,  b.  in  Melrose,  Scotland,
9  Sept.,  1882.  He  was  educated  in  Edinburgh  as
a  civil  engineer,  and  in  1831  came  to  the  United
States.  In  1804  he  was  culled  to  the  chair  of
chemistry  in  the  People's  college  at  Havana,  N.  Y.,
and  in  1866  was  professor  of  agriculture  in  Penn
sylvania  agricultural  college.  Subsequently  he
came  to  New  York,  where  he  has  edited  and  pub
lished  various  technical  journals,  such  as  the
"Manufacturer  and  Builder,"  "Technologist,''
"  American  Journal  of  Microscopy,"  and  "  The
Young  Scientist."  He  has  published  "  Open  Ail-
Grape  Culture  "  (New  York,  1862) ;  "  Chemical
History  of  the  Creation"  (1872);  "Practical
Treatise  on  Lightning-Iiods "  (1872);  and  "How
to  Use  the  Microscope  "  (1875),  of  which  six  edi
tions  have  been  called  for.

PHIPS,  or  PHIPPS,  Sir  William,  governor  of
Massachusetts,  b.  in  Pemmaquid,  now  Bristol,  Me.,
2  Feb.,  1651 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  18  Feb.,
1695.  He  was  the  son  of  a  gunsmith  in  humble
circumstances,  and
was  one  of  a  family
of  twenty -six  chil
dren,  of  whom  twen
ty-one  were  boys.  At
first  he  was  a  shep
herd,  but  when  he
reached  the  age  of
eighteen  he  bound
himself  to  a  ship-car
penter,  and  on  the
expiration  of  his  time
went  to  Boston,  where
he  learned  to  read
and  write.  He  then
built  himself  a  vessel
and  engaged  in  com
merce,  also  seeking
for  treasures  that  had
been  lost  in  wrecked
vessels.  In  1864  he
went  to  England  to  procure  means  to  recover  valu
ables  from  a  wrecked  Spanish  ship  near  the  Baha
mas.  The  first  search,  in  a  vessel  that  was  furnished
by  the  government,  proved  unsuccessful,  but  in
1687  a  second  attempt  was  made  under  the  patron
age  of  the  Duke  of  Albemarle,  when  he  recovered
bullion,  coin,  and  plate  that  amounted  to  £800,000


sterling.  Such  was  his  honesty,  and  so  liberal  was
he  to  the  seamen,  that  his  own  share  amounted  only
to  £16,000.  His  success  gained  for  him  the  honor
of  knighthood,  and  James  II.  appointed  him  sheriff
of  New  England  ;  but  he  found  it  impossible,  to  dis
charge  the  duties  of  his  office  while  Sir  Edmund
Andros  was  governor.  In  1690  he  commanded  an
expedition  against  Port  Royal,  which  he  captured,
and  later  in  the  same  year,  when  the  English  colo
nists  formed  the  intention  of  capturing  Canada  from
the  French,  he  had  command  of  the  naval  forces,
consisting  of  thirty-four  vessels  manned  by  1,500
sailors,  and  carrying  1.800  militia  under  the  com
mand  of  Maj.  John  Walley.  These  forces  appeared
before  Quebec  on  5  Oct.,  1790.  and  demanded  the
surrender  of  that  city,  in  the  name  of  King  William
III.,  from  the  Count  de  Frontenac,  then  governor
of  Canada.  The  latter  replied  :  "  I  do  not  acknowl
edge  King  William,  and  I  well  know  that  the
Prince  of  Orange  is  an  usurper,  who  has  violated
the  most  sacred  rights  of  blood  and  religion.  I
will  answer  your  master  by  the  mouth  of  my  can-
After  a  siege  of  several  davs  the  fire  from


the  French  batteries  proved  so  injurious  to  the
English  fleet  that  the  enterprise  was  abandoned.
Subsequently  nine  of  Phips's  vessels  were  wrecked
during  a  storm,  and  he  returned  to  Boston,  consid
erably  distressed  at  his  defeat.  He  then  visited
England  for  the  purpose  of  inducing  the  govern
ment  to  send  another  expedition  to  Canada,  and
while  there,  through  the  influence  of  Increase
Mather,  agent  of  the  colony  in  England,  he  was  ap
pointed  in  1692  captain-general  and  governor-in-
chief  of  Massachusetts.  In  1690  he  had  professed
repentance  for  his  sins,  and  was  admitted  to  mem
bership  in  the  North  church,  of  which  Cotton
Mather  was  pastor.  He  arrived  in  Boston  on  14
May,  1692,  and  soon  put  a  stop  to  the  prosecutions
for  witchcraft  by  organizing  a  special  court  of
oyer  and  terminer,  or  commission  of  seven  magis
trates,  for  the  consideration  of  their  cases.  In
August,  1692.  he  sailed  with  about  450  men  to
Pemmaquid.  where  he  built  a  fort.  In  1694,  in  a  dis
pute  with  the  collector  of  the  port,  an  official  from
England,  he  was  so  carried  away  by  the  passion  of
the  moment  as  to  have  recourse  to  blows  to  settle
the  controversy.  He  also  came  into  difficulty  with
the  captain  of  an  English  war  vessel,  whose  head
he  is  said  to  have  broken  with  his  cane.  In  1694
he  was  summoned  to  England  to  answer  complaints
that  had  been  brought  against  him.  He  received
assurances  of  his  restoration  to  his  place,  but  died
suddenly  of  malignant  fever.  He  was  regarded  as
a  man  of  uncommon  enterprise  and  industry,  of  an
excellent  disposition,  and  of  perfect  honesty  and
integrity.  See  "  Life  of  Sir  William  Phips,"  by
Francis  Bowen,  in  Sparks's  "  American  Biography  "
(Boston,  1834-'7). — His  nephew,  Spencer,  b. 'in
Rowley,  Mass.,  6  June,  1685;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
4  April,  1757,  was  the  son  of  Dr.  David  Bennet,  of
Rowley,  and,  on  being  adopted  by  Sir  William
Phips,  took  by  statute  the  latter  name.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1708.  and  became  a  coun
cillor  in  1722.  From  1731  till  1757  he  was  lieuten
ant-governor,  administering  the  government  in
1749-'53,  and  again  in  1756-'70.

PH(EBUS,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Somer
set  county,  Md.,  in  August,  1754:  d.  in  New  York
city,  9  Nov.,  1831.  He  early  united  with  the
Methodist  church,  and  in  1753  was  admitted  on
trial  into  the  travelling  ministry,  with  an  appoint
ment  to  the  Frederick  circuit.  In  1784  he  was  ap
pointed  to  East  Jersey,  and  was  a  member  of  the
Christmas  conference  of  that  year,  when  the  church
was  organized  under  the  superintendence  of


PHCEXIX


PHYSICK


765


Thomas  Coke  and  Francis  Asbury.  Thereafter  he
had  various  circuits  in  Xew  Jersey,  Xew  York,  and
Long  Island,  but  in  1798  he  located  in  New  York
city  and  engaged  in  the  practice  of  medicine,  still
preaching  on  Sunday.  In  1806  he  was  readmitted
to  the  New  York  conference  and  stationed  in  Al
bany,  whence  in  1808  he  was  sent  to  Charleston,
S.  C.,  but  returned  to  New  York  city  in  1811.  He
then  filled  several  stations  in  New  York  and  its
vicinity,  except  during  1816,  when  he  was  in  Al
bany.  In  1821  he  was  returned  as  a  supernumerary,
and  in  1824  placed  on  the  list  of  retired  clergy.
He  at  one  time  published  a  magazine,  and  wrote  a
defence  of  Methodist  ordination  and  the  4i  Memoirs
of  Bishop  Whatcoat."

PHCEXIX,  Stephen  Whitney,  benefactor,  b.
in  New  York  city,  25  May,  1839  :  'd.  there,  3  Nov.,
1881.  He  was  the  son  of  J.  Phillips  Phcenix,  con
gressman  from  New  York,  and  his  maternal  grand
father  was  Stephen  Whitney,  from  both  of  whom  he
inherited  a  large  fortune.  He  was  graduated  at
Columbia  in  1859,  and  at  the  law-school  in  1863.
Subsequently  he  studied  and  travelled  abroad,  and
on  his  return  devoted  himself  largely  to  antiqua
rian  and  genealogical  research.  He  defrayed  the
expense  of  copying  for  preservation  the  epitaphs
on  the  tombstones  in  Trinity  church-yard,  Xew
York  city,  and  gave  attention  to  neglected  portraits
of  old  New  Yorkers,  many  of  which  he  caused  to
be  engraved.  Mr.  Phoenix  was  also  a  diligent  col
lector  of  everything  relating  to  New  Amsterdam,
as  well  as  old  XTew  York,  and  upward  of  3.000
drawings  and  prints  that  he  had  collected  are  in
Columbia  college.  The  records  of  births,  bap
tisms,  marriages,  and  deaths  of  the  Reformed
Dutch  and  the  1st  and  2d  Presbyterian  churches
in  Xew  York  were  copied  at  his  expense  and  are
being  printed  in  the  "  Xew  York  Genealogical  and
Biographical  Record."  By  his  will  he  left  his  her
barium  to  the  American  museum  of  natural  history
in  Xew  York  ;  his  books  relating  to  heraldry  and
genealogy  to  the  Xew  York  historical  society,  to
gether  with  a  legacy  of  $15.000,  the  income  of  which
is  to  be  invested  in  books  on  kindred  subjects  ;
his  curiosities,  works  of  art,  pictures,  and  coins,  to
the  Metropolitan  museum  of  art :  and  his  general
library  of  books,  to  be  known  as  "  The  Phoenix
Collection."  to  Columbia,  with  $500,000  for  techni
cal  use.  eventually,  in  the  School  of  mines.  His
published  books  include  "  The  Descendants  of  John
Phoenix "  (Xew  York,  1867)  and  "  The  Whitney
Family  of  Connecticut  and  its  Affiliations"  (3
vols.,  1878),  and  he  left  in  manuscript  4i  The  Fam
ily  of  Alexander  Phoenix."

"PHYSICK,  Philip  Syng:,  surgeon,  b.  in  Phila
delphia,  Pa.,  7  July,  1768;  d.  there.  15  Dec.,  1837.
He  was  the  son  of  Edmund  Physick,  keeper  of  the
great  seal  in  the  colonial  government,  who,  after
the  Revolutionary  war,  became  agent  of  the  Penn
family,  having  charge  of  its  estates.  Philip  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1785,  then  began  the  study  of  medicine  under  Dr.
Adam  Kuhn.  and  continued  it  in  London  under
Dr.  John  Hunter,  becoming,  on  1  Jan.,  1790,  house
surgeon  of  St.  George's  hospital.  In  1791  he  re
ceived  his  license  from  the  Royal  college  of  sur
geons  in  London,  and  was  invited  by  Dr.  Hunter
to  assist  him  in  his  professional  practice,  but  after
a  few  months  went  to  the  University  of  Edinburgh,
where  he  received  his  degree  in  1792.  He  returned
to  the  United  States,  and  in  September.  1793,  be
gan  to  practise  in  Philadelphia.  During  the  yellow-
fever  epidemic  in  Philadelphia  in  1793  he  was  ap
pointed  an  attending  physician  at  the  yellow-fever
hospital  at  Bush  Hill.  Throughout  the  epidemic


he  remained  at  his  post,  being  himself  attacked
with  fever,  and  also  making  dissections  of  those
that  died  of  the  disease.  The  zeal,  energy,  and
total  disregard  of  personal  danger  that  he  showed
were  so  recognized  that  in  1794  he  was  elected
one  of  the  surgeons
at  the  Pennsylvania
hospital,  and  also
later  a  prescribing
physician  in  the
Philadelphia  alms-
house  dispensary.
The  yellow  fever
was  again  prevalent
in  1797,  and  there
were  1.100  fatal
cases,  including  those
of  seven  physicians.
Dr.  Physick  suf
fered  a  second  attack
at  this  time,  and  was
bled  to  the  amount
of  176  ounces.  Dur
ing  the  epidemic  of
1798  he  was  resident
physician  at  the
city  hospital  at  Bush  Hill.  His  post-mortem  ex
aminations  were  continued,  and  his  researches
tended  to  establish  the  gastric  character  of  the
fever  and  the  origin  of  the  black  vomit,  which  he
traced  to  the  inflamed  vessels  of  the  stomach  and
intestines.  His  labors  at  this  time  received  recog
nition  from  the  managers  of  the  hospital,  who  pre
sented  him  with  a  service  of  plate.  In  1800  he
began  a  series  of  lectures  on  surgery  in  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and
in  1805  he  was  given  the  independent  chair  of  sur
gery  in  the  university,  which  he  held  for  thirteen
years.  Dr.  Physick  was  appointed  surgeon  extra
ordinary,  and  also  one  of  the  physicians  of  the  alms-
house  infirmary  in  1801,  and  he  discharged  the
duties  of  the  former  office  in  connection  with  those
at  the  Pennsylvania  hospital  until  1816.  He  was
transferred  in  1819  from  the  chair  of  surgery  to
that  of  anatomy,  which  he  filled  until  1831.  This
change,  which  was  urged  upon  him  by  the  faculty,
was  unfortunate,  for  as  a  surgeon  he  had  few  if  any
equals,  while  as  an  anatomist  he  was  not  specially
distinguished.  In  1821  he  was  elected  consulting
surgeon  to  the  Institute  for  the  blind,  in  1822  presi
dent  of  the  Phrenological  society  of  Philadelphia,
and  in  1824  president  of  the  Philadelphia  medical
society.  Besides  holding  membership  in  many
other  scientific  societies  at  home,  in  1825  he  was
elected  a  member  of  the  French  academy  of  medi
cine,  being,  it  is  said,  the  first  American  to  receive
that  honor,  and  in  1836  he  was  made  an  honorary
fellow  of  the  Royal  medical  and  chirnrgical  society
of  London.  Toward  the  end  of  his  life  he  gradu
ally  relinquished  the  performing  of  capital  opera
tions,  but  he  continued  his  medical  practice  until
the  end.  One  of  the  most  brilliant  successes  of
his  life  was  accomplished  in  1831,  several  years
after  he  had  declined  to  perform  extensive  surgical
operations.  It  was  that  of  enterotomy  on  Chief-
Justice  Marshall.  The  result  was  the  removal  of
over  1.000  calculi,  and  a  prompt  and  perfect  cure.
Dr.  Physick  introduced  numerous  valuable  instru
ments  and  improved  modifications  of  others,  and
he  applied  novel  methods  of  treatment  which  have
since  become  prevalent,  notably  that  of  washing
out  the  stomach  in  cases  of  poisoning  by  means  of
water  or  a  suitable  solvent  until  the  excess  of  the
poison  was  removed.  He  was  called  the  "  father
of  American  surgery."


766


PIAR


PIATT


PIAR,  Manuel  Carlos  (pe'-ar),  Venezuelan  sol
dier,  b.  in  Curacoa,  W.  I.,  in  1782;  d.  in  Angos
tura,  16  Oct.,  1817.  He  was  the  son  of  poor
artisans,  received  only  a  limited  education,  and
engaged  in  trade  with  the  neighboring  coast  of
Venezuela.  There  he  made  the  acquaintance  of
Francisco  Miranda  (q.  v.)  and  other  revolutionists,
and  in  1810  he  entered  the  patriot  army  as  sub
lieutenant.  He  took  part  in  Marino's  expedition
from  Chacachacare  in  January,  1813,  defended
Maturin  in  May  of  that  year,  and  took  part  in  the
campaign  of  1813-'14.  He  participated  in  the
mutiny  of  Ribas  against  Bolivar  and  Marino,  4
Sept.,  1814,  and  in  December  was  forced  by  Span
ish  successes  to  emigrate.  In  May,  1816,  he  took
part  in  the  expedition  of  Bolivar  from  Hayti,
and  was  promoted  major-general.  In  June  he  in
vaded  Maturin,  and  joining  Gregor  McGregor,  he
won  the  battle  of  Juncal  on  27  Sept.  While.  Piar
was  investing  Angostura,  Gov.  Latorre  suddenly
marched  to  the  interior  to  wrest  the  rich  stores  of
the  missions  from  the  Independents.  But  Piar,
who  had  anticipated  this  movement  and  prepared
horses  for  remount  in  the  pass  of  Caroni,  threw  his
army  by  forced  marches  between  Upata  and  La
torre,  and  totally  defeated  the  latter's  army  on  11
April,  1817,  at  San  Felix.  Latorre  reached  his
flotilla  at  Las  Tablas  with  only  seventeen  men.
Piar  was  promoted  general-in-chief,  and  on  2  May
met  and  recognized  the  authority  of  Bolivar,  but
only  apparently,  as  he  desired  supreme  command.
He  afterward  recognized  the  authority  of  the  con
gress  of  Cariaco,  which  opposed  Bolivar,  and,  after
obtaining  leave  of  absence,  made  efforts  to  arouse
a  general  revolt.  He  was  arrested  in  Aragua  on
27  Sept.,  and  condemned  to  death  by  a  court-mar
tial.  Bolivar  reluctantly  confirmed  the  sentence.

PIATT,  Jacob  Wykoff,  lawyer,  b.  in  Kentucky,
29  March,  1801 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  29  May,
1857.  He  attained  note  at  the  bar  in  Cincinnati,
and  was  the  originator  of  the  paid  fire  depart
ment,  now  in  general  use.  He  became  so  unpopu
lar  to  the  bulk  of  the  community  in  his  vigorous
and  solitary  opposition  for  years  to  the  volunteer
system  that  it  was  found  necessary  for  the  police
to  guard  him  to  and  from  the  council  chamber,
where  he  continually  spoke  against  it.  He  was  at
one  time  mobbed,  and  burned  in  effigy  before  his
own  door  by  the  volunteer  firemen  and  their  sup
porters.  When  the  Latta  steam  fire-engine  was
invented  in  Cincinnati,  a  committee  was  appointed
by  the  city  council,  with  Mr.  Piatt  as  chairman,  to
devise  means  for  its  use.  He  insisted  on  placing
Miles  Greenwood  (q.  v.),  a  prominent  mechanic  and
founder,  who  had  long  been  at  the  head  of  the  vol
unteer  fire  department,  in  charge  of  the  new  ma
chine,  for  the  sake,  no  doubt,  of  producing  har
mony  in  the  then  divided  state  of  public  opinion.
Mr.  Greenwood  accepted  the  office,  and,  through
his  personal  popularity  and  practical  knowledge  of
mechanics,  made  the  machine  a  success,  thus  ac
quiring  the  reputation  of  originating  the  paid  de
partment.  But  to  Mr.  Piatt  is  due  the  credit  of
having  generated  the  system  by  years  of  advocacy,
in  the  face  of  violent  opposition,  as  a  member  of  the
city  council. — His  brother,  Donn,  journalist,  b.  in
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  29  June,  1819,  was  educated  at  the
Athena3um  (now  St.  Xavier  college),  but  left  sud
denly  in  consequence  of  a  personal  encounter  with
the  professor  of  mathematics.  He  then  studied
law,  and  in  1851  was  appointed  judge  of  the  court
of  common  pleas  of  Hamilton  county.  At  the  end
of  his  term  he  was  made  secretary  of  legation  at
Paris,  under  John  Y.  Mason,  during  Pierce's  ad
ministration.  When  the  minister  was  attacked


with  apoplexy,  Piatt  served  as  charge  d'affaires  for
nearly  a  year.  On  his  return  home  he  engaged
actively  in  the  presidential  canvass  in  behalf  of
John  C.  Fremont.  During  part  of  the  civil  war
he  was  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Robert  C.  Schenck.
Having  been  sent  to  observe  the  situation  at  Win
chester  previous  to  Lee's  invasion  of  Pennsylvania,
he,on  his  own  motion,  ordered  Gen.  Robert.  H.  Milroy
to  evacuate  the  town  and  fall  backon  Harper's  Ferry.
The  order  was  countermanded  by  Gen.  Halleck,  and
three  days  afterward  Milroy,  surrounded  by  the
Confederate  advance,  was  forced  to  cut  his  way
out,  with  a  loss  of  2,300  prisoners.  When  Gen.
William  Birney  was  sent  to  Maryland  to  recruit
colored  regiments,  he  was  chief  of  staff,  with  the
rank  of  colonel.  After  the  war  he  became  Wash
ington  correspondent  of  the  Cincinnati  "  Commer
cial."  He  subsequently  founded  and  edited  the
Washington  "  Capital "  for  two  years,  making  it  so
odious  to  many  Republican  officials  that,  during
the  presidential  controversy  of  1876,  he  was  in
dicted  for  conspiring  to  disturb  the  peace  of  the
country.  Since  then  he  has  devoted  himself  to
farming  and  literature  at  his  residence,  Mac-o-
chee,  Ohio.  In  all  his  writings  he  is  apt  to  take
a  peculiar  and  generally  unpopular  view  of  his
subjects.  He  has  published  a  sharply  critical  work,
"  Memoirs  of  the  Men  who  saved  the  Union "
(Chicago,  1887). — His  wife,  Louise  Kirby,  author,
b.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  25  Nov.,  1826 :  d.  2  Oct.,
1864,  possessed  rare  intelligence  and  culture,  and
became  widely  known  for  her  graceful,  spirited,
pointed  newspaper  correspondence.  She  accom
panied  her  husband  to  Europe  when  he  was  ap
pointed  secretary  of  legation,  and  contributed  let
ters  to  the  "  Home  Journal,"  which  were  afterward
published  in  book-form  as  "  Bell  Smith  Abroad  "
(New  York,  1855). — Donn's  brother,  A  brain  San
ders,  fanner,  b.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  2  May,  1821,
was  educated  at  the  Athenauim  and  at  the  Kinmont
academy  in  his  native  city,  after  which  he  engaged
in  agricultural  pursuits  in  the  Macacheek  valley,
which  occupation  he  has  followed  with  but  few  in
terruptions.  In  1846  he  devoted  some  time  to  the
study  of  law,  and  edited  the  "  Macacheek  Press,"
a  journal  that  he  established.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  was  active  in  raising  volunteers
for  the  National  service,  and  was  commissioned
colonel  of  the  13th  Ohio  regiment.  At  the  expira
tion  of  his  three  months'  service  he  raised  at  his
own  expense  the  first  zouave  regiment  of  Ohio,  of
which  he  became  colonel.  After  the  first  regiment
had  been  raised,  applications  to  join  continued  to
be  received,  and  he  began  the  organization  of  the
second,  with  the  intention  of  forming  a  brigade,
but  before  it  was  completed  he  was  ordered  to  the
front  and  made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on
28  Feb..  1862.  In  April,  1863,  he  resigned  his  com
mission,  and  subsequently  returned  to  his  farm.
Gen.  Piatt  has  given  attention  to  politics.  On  the
close  of  the  war  he  became  affiliated  with  the  Na
tional  greenback  labor  party,  and  he  has  been  its
candidate  for  the  offices  of  lieutenant-governor  and
governor.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Patrons  of  Hus
bandry,  and  served  that  organization  for  two  years
as  its  state  lecturer.  Gen.  Piatt  is  also  known
by  his  poetry,  which  has  appeared  in  his  own  jour
nal  and  in  the  Cincinnati  "  Commercial."

PIATT,  John  Hooper,  merchant,  b.  in  Boone
county,  Ky.,  15  Aug.,  1781 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,
11  Feb.,  1822.  He  went  to  Cincinnati  when  young,
and  accumulated  a  large  fortune  there,  being  the
first  banker  west  of  the  Alleghany  mountains.
When  the  war  of  1812  occurred  he  contracted  with
the  government  to  furnish  the  northwestern  army


PIATT


PICKEN


767


with  provisions.  Congress  having  failed  to  make
the  necessary  appropriations  to  carry  out  the  con
tract,  and  the  price  of  provisions  having  increased
on  account  of  the  war,  he  went  to  Washington  for
the  purpose  of  vacating  his  agreement.  But,  on  re
ceiving  verbal  assurances  from  the  secretary  of
war  that  the  difference  in  rate  would  be  made  up
to  him,  he  continued  to  embark  his  own  means  in
the  venture.  The  army  under  Gen.  Harrison  was
well  supplied,  but  after  the  establishment  of  peace
the  government  repudiated  the  verbal  contract,
and  he  was  thrown  into  prison  for  debt  at  the
capital,  and  died  there.  Sixty  years  later  the  su
preme  court  of  the  United  States  ordered  judg
ment  in  behalf  of  his  heirs  for  the  full  amount
claimed,  but  the  interest  has  never  been  paid.

PIATT,  John  James,  poet,  b.  in  James's  Mills
(now  Milton),  Ind.,  1  March,  1835.  He  was  sent
at  the  age  of  fourteen  to  learn  the  printing  busi
ness  in  the  office  of  the  Ohio  "State  Journal,"
and  subsequently  studied  in  Capital  university
and  Kenyon  college,  but  was  not  graduated.  In
1859  he  became  associated  with  George  D.  Prentice,
and  at  the  same  time  a  contributor  to  the  Louisville
•'Journal."  He  was  appointed  clerk  in  the  U.  S.
treasury  department  at  Washington  in  1861,  and
remained  there  for  six  years,  when  he  returned  to
Cincinnati  and  was  successively  connected  with
the  "  Chronicle  "  and  "  Commercial "  of  that  city.
In  1870  he  was  made  enrolling  clerk  of  the  U.  S.
house  of  representatives  in  Washington,  and  iu
1871  he  became  its  librarian.  Mr.  Piatt  was  ap
pointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Cork  (Queenstown),  Ireland,
in  1882,  which  office  he  now  (1888)  holds.  His  first
poetical  contributions  were  made  to  the  Louisville
"Journal  "  in  1857,  and  in  1859  he  became  a  con
tributor  to  the  "Atlantic  Monthly."  His  publica
tions  in  book  -  form  include  "  Poems  of  Two
Friends,"  with  William  D.  Howells  (Columbus,
1860);  "The  Nests  at  Washington,  and  other
Poems,"  with  Mrs.  Piatt  (New  York,  1864) :  "  Poems
in  Sunshine  and  Firelight "  (Cincinnati,  1866) ;
"  Western  Windows,  and  other  Poems  "  (New  York,
1869);  "Landmarks,  and  other  Poems"  (1871);
"  Poems  of  George  D.  Prentice,"  edited  with  a  bio
graphical  sketch  (Cincinnati,  1875) ;  "  Poems  of
House  and  Home"  (Boston,  1878);  "The  Union  of
American  Poetry  and  Art"  (Cincinnati,  1880-'!) ;
"  The  Children  Out-of-Doors :  a  Book  of  Verses  by
Two  in  One  House,"  with  Mrs.  Piatt  (Edinburgh,
1884);  "Idyls  and  Lyrics  of  the  Ohio  Valley"
(London,  1884;  Boston,  1888);  and  "  At  the  Holy
Well:  a  Handful  of  New  Verses "  (Dublin,  1887).
— His  wife,  Sarah  Morgan  Bryan,  b.  in  Lex
ington,  Ky.,  11  Aug.,  1836,  is  the'  granddaughter
of  Morgan  Bryan,  an  early  settler  in  Kentucky.
She  was  graduated  at  Henry  female  college  in
Newcastle,  Ky.,  in  1854,  and  married  Mr.  Piatt  in
1861.  Her  early  poems  appeared  in  the  Louisville
"  Journal "  and  the  "  New  York  Ledger,"  and
gained  for  her  recognition  from  Fitz-Greene
Halleck  and  George  D.  Prentice.  In  addition  to
the  works  previously  mentioned  with  her  husband,
she  has  published  "  A  Woman's  Poems  "  (Boston,
1871) ;  "A  Voyage  to  the  Fortunate  Isles,  and  other
Poems"  (1874);  "That  New  World,  and  other
Poems"  (1876);  "Poems  in  Company  with  Chil
dren"  (1877);  "Dramatic  Persons  and  Moods"
(1879);  "An  Irish  Garland"  (Edinburgh,  1884);
"  Selected  Poems  "  (London,  1885) ;  "  In  Primrose
Time  "  (1886) :  and  "  Child's- World  Ballads  "  (1887).

PICARD,  George  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Berea,
Ohio,  3  Aug.,  1850.  He  was  graduated  at  Baldwin
university,  Berea,  in  1869,  and  at  the  College  of
medicine  and  surgery,  Cincinnati,  in  1877.  He


now  (1888)  practises  his  profession  in  New  York
city.  Dr.  Picard  is  the  author  of  the  novels  "  A
Matter  of  Taste  "(New  York,  1884);  "A  Mission
Flower"  (1885) ;  and  "Old  Boniface"  (1886).

PICHARDO  Y  TAPIA,  Esteban  (pee-char  -do),
Cuban  author,  b.  in  Santiago  de  los  Caballeros,
Santo  Domingo,  in  December,  1799 ;  d.  in  Havana,
Cuba,  in  1879.  His  parents  emigrated  in  1801  to
Puerto  Principe,  Cuba.  The  son  studied  there
and  at  Havana,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1821.  In  the  following  year  he  published  in  Puerto
Principe  "  Miscelanea  Poetica,"  but  he  soon  aban
doned  poetry,  and  in  1824  published  at  Havana,
where  he  had  fixed  his  residence,  his  "  Notas  crono-
logicas  sobre  Cuba."  He  made  in  1825  and  follow
ing  years  a  tour  through  the  European  continent
and  the  United  States,  and  on  his  return  published
his  "Itinerario  general  de  la  Isla  de  Cuba  "(Ha
vana,  1830).  The  first  edition  of  his  "  Diccionario
provincial  de  voces  Cubanas"  was  published  in
1836,  and  it  has  passed  through  several  editions
and  been  revised  and  considerably  enlarged.  His
"  Geografia  General  de  la  Isla  de  Cuba,"  the  best
and  most  complete  book  on  the  subject,  was  pub
lished  in  1854.  His  other  works  include  a  novel,
"  El  Fatalista "  (1865) ;  "  Caminos  de  la  Isla "  (3
vols.,  1865) ;  and  "  Gran  Carta  geo-topografica  de
Cuba,"  on  which  he  spent  about  forty  years  tra
versing  the  island  in  all  directions  (1874).  A  "  Me-
rnoria  Justificativa  "  accompanies  this  great  chart.

PICK,  Bernhard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Kempen,
Prussia,  19  Dec.,  1842.  He  completed  his  theo
logical  course  in  Union  theological  seminary,  New
York  city,  in  1868.  In  that  year  he  was  ordained
to  the  ministry  in  the  Presbyterian  church,  but
in  1884  he  was  received  by  the  Lutheran  minis-
terium  of  Pennsylvania  as  a  member  of  that  de
nomination.  He  has  been  successively  pastor  of
congregations  at  New  York  in  1868,  North  Buffalo,
N.  Y.,  in  1869,  Syracuse  in  1870-'4,  Rochester  in
1874-'81,  and  at  Alleghany,  Pa.,  since  1881.  He
is  a  fine  Hebrew  and  rabbinical  scholar,  and  con
tributed  many  articles  to  McClintock  and  Strong's
"  Cyclopaedia  of  Biblical,  Theological,  and  Ecclesias
tical  Literature  "  and  to  the  Schaff-Herzog  "  En
cyclopaedia  of  Religious  Knowledge."  He  is  also
a  frequent  contributor  to  various  theological  re
views,  both  in  this  country  and  in  Europe,  and
among  his  works  are  "  Luther  as  a  Hymnist  "  (Phila
delphia,  1875);  "Juedisches  Volksleben  zur  Zeit
Jesus"  (Rochester,  N.  Y.,  1880);  "Luther's  'Ein'
feste  Burg '  in  Nineteen  Languages  "  (1880 ;  2d  ed.,
in  twenty-one  languages,  Chicago,  1883) ;  "  Index
to  '  Lange's  Commentary  on  the  Old  Testament '  "
(New  York,  1882);  "Jewish  Artisan  Life  in  the
Time  of  Jesus,"  from  the  German  of  Franz  De-
litzsch  (1883) ;  "  Historical  Sketch  of  the  Jews  since
the  Destruction  of  Jerusalem  "  (1887) ;  "  Life  of
Christ  according  to  Extra  -  Canonical  Sources  "
(1887) ;  "  Index  to  the  Ante-Nicene  Fathers  "  (1887) ;
and  "  The  Talmud :  what  it  is  and  what  it  says
about  Jesus  and  the  Christians  "  (1887).

PICKEN,  Joanna  Belfrage,  poet,  b.  in  Edin
burgh,  Scotland,  8  May,  1798;  d.  in  Montreal,
Canada,  24  March,  1849.  She  was  the  daughter  of
Ebenezer  Picken,  called  the  "  Poet  of  Paisley,"  and
Robina,  sister  of-  the  Rev.  Dr.  Henry  Belfrage,  the
author  and  philanthropist,  and  was  early  left  an
orphan.  In  1828  she  contributed  poems  to  Glasgow
papers,  and  in  1842  emigrated  to  Canada  and  settled
in  Montreal,  where  she  taught  music  and  wrote  for
periodicals  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Alpha."  Her
poems,  which  were  never  published  in  book-form,
number  about  forty-five,  and  include  "  An  Auld
Friend  wi'  a  New  Face  "and  "  The  Death  Watch."


768


PICKENS


PICKENS


— Her  brother,  Andrew  Belfrage,  poet,  b.  in
Edinburgh,  5  Nov.,  1802;  d.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  1
July,  1849,  became  involved  in  Sir  Gregor  Mac-
gregor's  colonization  schemes,  and  afterward  was
engaged  with  a  mahogany  merchant  in  the  West
Indies,  but  returned  to  his  native  country.  In  1880
he  came  to  the  United  States,  and  afterward  settled
in  Montreal,  where  he  became  known  as  an  artist
and  taught  painting  and  drawing.  Mr.  Picken
contributed  to  newspapers  and  magazines  of  Mon
treal  until  his  death.  His  principal  poem  is  "  The
Bedouins"  in  three  cantos,  and  his  best  tale  is
thought  to  be  "  The  Plague  Ship."  Several  of  his
poems  have  been  erroneously  ascribed  to  Andrew
Picken,  of  Paisley,  who  was  the  author  of  occasional
verses  and  several  popular  novels.  See  "  The  Poets
and  Poetry  of  Scotland,"  by  Gen.  James  Grant  Wil
son  (New  York,  1870).

PICKENS,  Andrew,  soldier,  b.  in  Paxton,
Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  19  Sept.,  1739;  d.  in  Pendleton
district,  S.  C.,  17  Aug.,  1817.  His  parents,  who
were  of  Huguenot  descent,  removed  in  1752  to  the
Waxhaw  settlement,
S.  C.  The  son  served
as  a  volunteer  in  Col.
James  Grant's  expedi
tion  against  the  Chero-
kces  in  April,  1761,  af
ter  which  he  removed
to  the  Long  Cane  set
tlement.  At  the  be
ginning  of  the  Revo
lution  he  was  made  a
captain  of  militia,  and
rose  rapidly  to  the  rank
of  brigadier  -  general.
He  kept  the  field  at
the  head  of  a  partisan
corps  after  the  state
had  been  overrun  by
the  British,  and  in
February,  1779,  with
400  men,  he  defeated

a  party  of  700  under  Col.  Boyd,  at  Kettle  creek,
and  his  horse  was  killed  under  him  while  he  was
covering  the  retreat  at  the  battle  of  Stono,  20
June,  1779.  In  that  year  he  inflicted  a  severe
defeat  on  the  Cherokees  at  Tomassee.  At  the
battle  of  Cowpens,  17  Jan.,  1781,  he  commanded
the  militia,  which  he  rallied,  and  brought  a  second
time  into  action  after  the  ranks  had  been  broken
and  compelled  to  retreat,  for  which  service  congress
gave  him  a  sword.  He  next  invested  the  British
forts  at  Augusta,  Ga.,  which  surrendered  after  a
two  weeks'  siege.  After  participating  in  the  un
successful  campaign  of  Ninety -Six  under  Gen.
Nathanael  Greene,  he  followed  the  retreating  enemy
toward  the  coast,  ami  participated  in  the  battle  of
Eutaw  Springs,  where  he  led  a  brigade  of  Carolina
militia,  and  was  struck  by  a  bullet  which,  but  for
the  buckle  of  his  sword-belt,  would  have  inflicted
a  mortal  wound.  Owing  to  a  successful  expedition
against,  the  Cherokees  in  1782,  he  obtained  a  large
cession  of  territory  that  is  now  in  the  state  of
Georgia,  and  settled  in  Hopewell.on  Keowee  river.
From  the  close  of  the  war  until  1794  he  was  a
member  of  the  South  Carolina  legislature,  and  he
was  also  elected  to  congress,  serving  from  2  Dec.,
1793,  till  3  March,  1795.  He  was  a  member  of  the
State  constitutional  convention,  was  made  major-


general  of  militia  in  1795,  and  served  in  the  legis
lature  again  in  1801  and  1812.  He  was  a  commis
sioner  in  many  treaties  with  the  southern  Indians,
and  by  that  of  Hopewell  obtained  from  the  Chero
kees  the  part  of  South  Carolina  that  is  now  Pen
dleton  and  Greenville.  In  17(55  he  married  Rebecca
Calhoun,  aunt  of  John  C.  Calhoun,  and  the  wedding
was  an  epoch  in  the  social  history  of  the  district  in
which  the  bride,  who  was  a  noted  beauty,  resided.
Gen.  Pickens  was  remarkable  for  his  simplicity,
decision,  and  prudence,  and  scrupulous  perform
ance  of  duty. — His  grandson,  Francis  Wilkinson,
statesman,  b.  in  Togadoo,  St.  Paul's  parish,  S.  C.,
7  April,  1805;  d.  in  Edgefield,  S.  C.,  25  Jan.,  18G9,
was  educated  at  South  Carolina  college,  was  ad
mitted  to  the  bar  in  1829,  and  began  practice  in
Edgefield  district.  In  1832  he  was  elected  to  the
legislature  by  the  Nullification  party  of  his  district,
and  soon  attracted  notice  as  a  debater.  At  the  age
of  twenty-five  he  was  an  active  member  of  the  judi
ciary  committee,  and  of  that  on  foreign  relations.
As  chairman  of  a  sub-committee  in  1833  he  made  a
report  to  the  effect  that  sovereignty  and  allegiance
were  indivisible,  and  that  congress,  as  the  agent
and  mere  creature  of  the  states  severally,  had  no
claim  to  allegiance  and  could  exercise  no  sover
eignty.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Nullifier,
serving  from  8  Dec.,  1834,  till  3  March,  1843.  In
183(5  he  made  an  elaborate  speech,  denying  the
right  of  congress  to  abolish  slavery  in  the  District,
of  Columbia  without  the  consent  of  Maryland  and
Virginia.  In  1844  he  was  elected  to  the  South
Carolina  senate  from  Edgefield.  Here  he  voted
with  the  majority  against  the  "  Bluffton  move
ment,"  a  secession  demonstration  then  in  progress
in  the  state.  After  several  years  of  private  life  lie
was  elected  a  delegate  to  the  Nashville  southern
convention  in  1850-'!,  and  in  185(5  he  was  a  dele
gate  to  the  National  Democratic  convention  in  Cin
cinnati.  From  1858  till  1800  he  was  U.  S.  minister
to  Russia,  and  on  his  return  in  the  latter  year  was
elected  governor  of  South  Carolina.  He  was  con
spicuous  with  the  secession  movement,  demanded
of  Maj.  Robert  Anderson  the  surrender  of  Fort
Sumter,  gave  the  order  to  fire  upon  the  "  Star  of
the  West,"  and  rendered  all  the  aid  in  his  power
to  the  Confederate  cause.  He  retired  from  office
in  1802.  Gov.  Pickens  was  a  wealthy  planter,  gave
much  attention  to  scientific  agriculture,  and  en
joyed  a  reputation  in  the  southern  states  as  an
orator  before  colleges  and  literary  societies.

PICKENS,  Israel,  governor  of  Alabama,  b.  in
Mecklenburg  county  (now  Cabarrus),  N.  C..  30  Jan.,
1780;  d.  near  Matanzas,  Cuba,  W.  I.,  24  April,  1827.
His  father,  Samuel  Pickens,  served  in  the  Revolu
tionary  army,  and  was  a  cousin  of  Gen.  Andrew
Pickens.  The  son  was  educated  at  Jefferson  in
1802,  studied  law.  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
served  in  the  North  Carolina  legislature  in  1809.
He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving
from  4  Nov.,  1811,  till  3  March,  1817.  and  in  that
year  was  appointed  register  of  the  land  office  of
Mississippi  territory,  which  included  the  present
state  of  Alabama,  "in  1821  he  was  made  governor
of  Alabama,  holding  this  office  until  1825,  when  he
was  appointed  U.  S.  senator,  serving  from  10  April,
1820,  till  21  Dec.  of  that  year.  He  was  then  ap
pointed  U.  S.  judge  for  Alabama,  but  declined,
owing  to  impaired  health,  which  he  sought  to
restore  in  the  West  Indies.


END OF VOLUME IV.
